                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FORWARD AND SPOT EXCHANGE RATES IN A MULTI-CURRENCY WORLD

                                       Tarek A. Hassan
                                        Rui C. Mano

                                      Working Paper 20294
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20294


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           July 2014, Revised October 2018




We are grateful to Pol Antras, Craig Burnside, John Cochrane, Xavier Gabaix, Jeremy Graveline,
Ralph Koijen, Hanno Lustig, Matteo Maggiori, Lukas Menkhoff, Toby Moskowitz, Ralph Ossa,
Andreas Schrimpf, Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, Andrea Vedolin, and Adrien Verdelhan. We also
thank seminar participants at the University of Chicago, CITE Chicago, the Chicago Junior
Finance Conference, KU Leuven, University of Sydney, New York Federal Reserve, University
of Zurich, SED annual meetings, and the NBER Summer Institute for useful comments. All
mistakes remain our own. Tarek Hassan is grateful for financial support from the Fama-Miller
Center for Research in Finance at the University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Tarek A. Hassan and Rui C. Mano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Forward and Spot Exchange Rates in a Multi-currency World
Tarek A. Hassan and Rui C. Mano
NBER Working Paper No. 20294
July 2014, Revised October 2018
JEL No. F31,G12,G15

                                          ABSTRACT

Separate literatures study violations of uncovered interest parity (UIP) using regression-based and
portfolio-based methods. We propose a decomposition of these violations into a cross-currency, a
between-time-and-currency, and a cross-time component that allows us to analytically relate
regression-based and portfolio-based facts, and to estimate the joint restrictions they place on
models of currency returns. Subject to standard assumptions on investors’ information sets, we
find that the forward premium puzzle (FPP) and the “dollar trade” anomaly are intimately linked:
both are driven almost exclusively by the cross-time component. By contrast, the “carry trade”
anomaly is driven largely by cross-sectional violations of UIP. The simplest model the data do
not reject features a cross-sectional asymmetry that makes some currencies pay permanently
higher expected returns than others, and larger time series variation in expected returns on the US
dollar than on other currencies. Importantly, conventional estimates of the FPP are not directly
informative about expected returns, because they do not correct for uncertainty about future mean
interest rates. Once we correct for this uncertainty, we never reject the null that investors expect
high-interest-rate currencies to depreciate, not appreciate.


Tarek A. Hassan
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
thassan@bu.edu

Rui C. Mano
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
Open Economy Division
700 19th Street NW
Washington, D.C. 20431
rmano@imf.org
    The forward premium puzzle and the carry trade anomaly are two major stylized facts in
international economics reflecting failures of uncovered interest parity. The forward premium
puzzle is a fact about a regression coefficient, whereas the carry trade anomaly describes a
profitable trading strategy. In this paper, we introduce a series of decompositions that allows
us to show analytically how regression- and portfolio-based facts relate to each other, to test
whether they are empirically distinct, and to estimate the joint restrictions they place on
models of currency returns and exchange rates.
   The forward premium puzzle arises in a bilateral regression of currency returns on forward
premia (Fama, 1984):
                         rxi,t+1 = αi + β if pp (fit − sit ) + εi,t+1 ,                    (1)

where fit is the log one-period forward rate of currency i, sit is the log spot rate, and rxi,t+1 =
fit − si,t+1 is the log excess return on currency i between time t and t + 1. Under covered
interest parity, the forward premium, fit − sit , is equal to the interest differential between the
two currencies, so that we can think of the currency return simply as the interest differential
plus the rate of appreciation of the foreign currency. Although estimates of β if pp tend to be
noisy, the literature finds β fi pp > 0 for most currencies. A pooled specification that constrains
all β if pp to be identical across currencies yields point estimates significantly larger than zero and
often larger than one. 1 This fact, the forward premium puzzle (FPP), has drawn a lot of interest
from theorists because it suggests that “high-interest-rate currencies appreciate.” In a rational
model, β if pp > 1 requires that the risk premium on a currency must be negatively correlated
with its expected rate of depreciation and be so volatile that it plays a role in determining
expected changes in bilateral exchange rates. 2 These implications are often collectively referred
to as the “Fama conditions” (Backus, Foresi, and Telmer, 2001).
    The carry trade anomaly arises when sorting currencies into portfolios. It refers to the
fact that lending in currencies that have high interest rates while borrowing in currencies that
have low interest rates is a profitable trading strategy. The same is true for the somewhat less
well-known “dollar trade” anomaly, a profitable trading strategy whereby investors go long all
foreign currencies when the world average interest rate is high relative to the US interest rate,
and short all foreign currencies when it is low.
    The literature has often loosely connected these anomalies, for example, by attributing the
   1
     The same relationship is often estimated using the change in the spot exchange rate as the dependent
variable, in which case, the coefficient estimate is 1 − β if pp . An equivalent way of stating the FPP is thus that
1 − β fi pp < 1.
   2
     Throughout the paper, we follow the convention in the literature and refer to conditional expected returns
as “risk premia.” However, this terminology need not be taken literally. Our analysis is silent on whether
currency returns are driven by risk premia, institutional frictions, or other limits to arbitrage. See Burnside
et al. (2011) and Lustig et al. (2011) for a discussion.




                                                         1
carry trade anomaly to the FPP. 3 In this paper, we propose a decomposition that produces
an exact mapping between the three anomalies. We decompose the unconditional covariance
of expected currency returns (“risk premia”) with forward premia into a cross-currency, a
between-time-and-currency, and a cross-time component. Subject to a standard assumption
on what investors know at the time of portfolio formation, each of the three components can
be written either as the expected return to a linear trading strategy or as a function of a slope
coefficient from a regression, similar to (1), that relates variation in expected currency returns
to variation in forward premia in the corresponding dimension. These regression coefficients in
turn have a clear economic interpretation: in a rational model, they correspond to the elasticity
of currency risk premia with respect to forward premia in each of the three dimensions. We
can thus write the systematic variation driving the carry trade, the dollar trade, as well as a
number of other yet un-named trading strategies, as regression coefficients, test their statistical
significance, and link them to parameters in a generic model of currency returns. Similarly,
we can show that the FPP corresponds to a specific (also as-yet unnamed) trading strategy
that involves going long a currency when its interest rates exceeds its own long-run mean and
going short otherwise.
    We first show analytically that the expected return on the carry trade is the sum of the
cross-currency and the between-time-and-currency component of the unconditional covariance
of currency returns with forward premia, whereas the FPP consists of the sum of the between-
time-and-currency and the cross-time components. The expected return on the dollar trade
equals the cross-time component. All three anomalies thus load on different dimensions of the
failure of uncovered interest parity (UIP).
    Using a wide range of plausible assumptions on investors’ information sets, we then estimate
the elasticity of risk premia with respect to forward premia in each of the three dimensions.
Our results show that 44%-100% of the systematic variation driving the carry trade is in the
cross section (the cross-currency variation in αi in (1)) rather than the time series: Currencies
that have persistently higher forward premia (interest rates) pay significantly higher expected
returns than currencies with persistently lower forward premia. Some of our specifications also
show statistically significant variation in the cross-time dimension: expected returns on the
US dollar appear to fluctuate with its average forward premium against all other currencies
in the sample. This cross-time variation accounts for 100% of the dollar trade anomaly and it
also explains 64%-100% of the variation that generates the FPP. By contrast, the contribution
of the the between-time-and-currency component to all three anomalies is small. We usually
cannot reject the null that currency risk premia are inelastic with respect to variation in
forward premia in the between-time-and-currency dimension.
  3
   Some examples include Brunnermeier et al. (2009), Verdelhan (2010), Ilut (2012), and Bacchetta and
Van Wincoop (2010).


                                                 2
    These results imply that the FPP, that is, the fact that β fi pp > 0, has no statistically
significant effect on the returns to the carry trade. In this sense, the carry trade and the FPP
may require distinct theoretical explanations: explaining the carry trade primarily requires
explaining permanent or highly persistent differences in interest rates across currencies that are
partially, but not fully, reversed by predictable movements in exchange rates. (High-interest-
rate currencies depreciate, but not enough to reverse the higher returns resulting from the
interest rate differential.) By contrast, explaining the FPP primarily requires explaining the
dollar trade anomaly, that is, why the US dollar on average does not depreciate proportionately
when its interest rate is high relative to all other currencies in the world.
    The reason we find only a weak link between expected returns on the carry trade and
the FPP is that the FPP itself is less informative about expected returns and risk premia
than some of the previous literature may have suggested: regressions like ( 1) teach us about
the elasticity of realized, but not necessarily the elasticity of expected returns. When using
portfolios to estimate expected returns on trading strategies, we naturally require that all
information used in the formation of the portfolio is available ex ante. Similarly, when we use
regressions to estimate the elasticity of behavior (demanding a risk premium) with respect to
some right-hand-side variable, this variable must be known at time t. By contrast, regressions
with currency fixed effects (the αi in (1)) do not correct for the fact that the sample mean of
each currency’s forward premium is unknown to investors ex ante, and are thus appropriately
interpreted as estimating the elasticity of realized, but not expected, returns.
    This distinction is important. We show analytically that the elasticity of realized returns
reflected in the FPP is always larger than the elasticity of expected returns if investors do not
have perfect foresight about the future mean interest rates absorbed in the αi . In particular,
we find that the pooled version of (1) that constrains all β if pp to be equal across currencies and
uses currency fixed effects (αi ) produces coefficients larger than one primarily because future
interest rates are hard to predict, and not because investors expect high interest rate currencies
to appreciate. For example, in our standard specification, the weighted average of β if pp is 1.81
(s.e.=0.53), whereas our preferred estimate for the elasticity of expected returns is only half
that number (0.86, s.e.=0.34). This distinction has important theoretical implications because
an elasticity of expected returns smaller than one does not require a systematic association
between variation in risk premia and expected depreciations and thus potentially eliminates
a long-standing puzzle in the literature on the FPP and the “Fama conditions:” investors
generally expect currencies with high interest rates to depreciate and not appreciate.
    Having estimated the elasticity of risk premia with respect to forward premia in each of
our dimensions, we then use the variance-covariance matrix of our estimates to identify the
restrictions these different violations of UIP jointly place on models of currency returns. We
find that the simplest model that our regression-based analysis does not reject features positive

                                                 3
elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-currency and cross-time
dimensions, but not necessarily in the between-time-and-currency dimension. In addition, we
cannot reject the hypothesis that all three elasticities are smaller than one, such that the model
need not generate a correlation between expected changes in exchange rates and risk premia
in any of the three dimensions.
    Another interesting implication of this analysis is that the model with the best fit to the
data features a higher elasticity of risk premia in the cross-time dimension than in the between-
time-and-currency dimension, suggesting that the stochastic properties of the US dollar (the
base currency in our analysis) may be systematically different from that of the average currency
in our sample. We generalize our decomposition to show how results would differ had we chosen
a different base currency, and find that the elasticity of the risk premium on the US dollar
indeed appears large relative to that of other currencies: The US dollar appears to be one of
a small number of currencies that pays significantly higher expected returns when its interest
rate is high relative to its own currency-specific average and to the world average interest rate
at the time. Based on this decomposition, we derive a simple test of the hypothesis that the
elasticity of the risk premium on the US dollar is identical to that of an average country in
our sample. However, we narrowly fail to reject this hypothesis.
    The main substantive conclusion from our analysis is that currency risk premia may be
simpler objects than previously thought. First, the most statistically significant violations of
UIP are in the cross section and appear to be highly persistent over time. Second, the FPP, a
long-standing puzzle in the literature, arises partially due to the fact that future mean interest
rates are difficult to predict. Once we make reasonable corrections for this fact, we cannot
reject the null that currency risk premia are uncorrelated with expected changes in exchange
rates, neither for the US dollar nor for the other currencies in our sample. Third, there is some
evidence that the US dollar is special and that, in particular, the dollar trade anomaly and
the FPP are very closely related phenomena.
    We make four caveats to this interpretation. First, any inference on the elasticity of risk
premia requires taking a stand on the precision of investors’ expectations. Although our results
remain stable across a wide range of conventional approaches, we cannot exclude the possibility
that richer forecasting models might produce different results. Second, our methodology does
not allow us to distinguish between permanent and highly persistent differences in expected
returns across currencies, and we make no claims to that effect. Third, the fact that we do
not find statistically reliable evidence of a non-zero elasticity of risk premia with respect to
forward premia in the between-time-and-currency dimension does not mean it does not exist.
Fourth, non-linearities may exist in the functional form linking risk premia to forward premia
that are not picked up by our linear (regression-based) approach.
   Two largely separate literatures have described violations of UIP using regression-based

                                                4
and portfolio-based methods. 4 We contribute to this literature by providing a simple approach
to reconcile the results from these two literatures and estimate the restrictions they jointly
place on models of currency returns.
    A large body of theoretical work studies the FPP in models with two ex-ante symmetric
countries.5 Our analysis relates to this literature in three ways. First, it clarifies that these
models are unlikely to explain the carry trade anomaly, unless they generate large and persis-
tent cross-sectional differences in currency risk premia. Second, some influential quantitative
applications of these models may be calibrated to an overstated version of the FPP because
they do not correct for uncertainty about future interest rates. Third, the focus on generating
a negative covariance between currency risk premia and expected depreciations in these models
may be less relevant empirically than previously thought.
   Papers that offer explicit models of either permanent or highly persistent asymmetries in
currency risk premia include Martin (2012), Hassan (2013), Maggiori (2017), Richmond (2016),
and Ready, Roussanov, and Ward (2017).6 Another strand of the literature has connected
persistent currency risk premia with shocks that are themselves persistent, as in Engel and
West (2005), Colacito and Croce (2011, 2013), Gourio, Siemer, and Verdelhan (2013), and
Colacito et al. (2017).
    Our work builds on papers that use portfolio-based analysis to study the cross section of
multilateral currency returns (Menkhoff et al., 2012, 2017; Koijen et al., 2018). Most closely
related is the work by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011, 2014), who already document
that a large part of carry trade returns result from cross-sectional violations of UIP and identify
risk factors that explain the carry trade and the dollar trade. Our contribution is to relate
these findings to established (regression-based) puzzles in the literature, and to translate them
into restrictions on linear models of currency risk premia.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 1 describes the data. Section
2 decomposes violations of UIP into trading strategies based on cross-currency, between-time-
and-currency, and cross-time variation in forward premia. Section 3 maps the expected returns
on each of the three trading strategies to regression coefficients and discusses the theoretical
implications of these estimates. Section 4 concludes.
   4
     See Tyron (1979), Hansen and Hodrick (1980), Bilson (1981), Meese and Rogoff (1983), Backus et al.
(1993), Evans and Lewis (1995), Bekaert (1996), Bansal (1997), Bansal and Dahlquist (2000), Chinn (2006),
Graveline (2006), Burnside et al. (2006), Lustig and Verdelhan (2007), Brunnermeier et al. (2009), Jurek (2014),
Corte et al. (2009), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2010), Burnside et al. (2011), and Sarno et al. (2012). Hodrick
(1987), Froot and Thaler (1990), Engel (1996), Lewis (2011), and Engel (2014) provide surveys.
   5
     Examples include Backus et al. (2001), Gourinchas and Tornell (2004), Alvarez et al. (2009), Verdelhan
(2010), Burnside et al. (2009), Heyerdahl-Larsen (2014), Evans and Lyons (2006), Yu (2013), Bacchetta et al.
(2010), and Ilut (2012).
   6
     Also see Caballero et al. (2008), Govillot et al. (2010), Berg and Mark (2015), Farhi and Gabaix (2016),
Hassan et al. (2016), Zhang (2018), and Wiriadinata (2018).



                                                       5
1       Data
Throughout the main text, we use monthly observations of US dollar-based spot and forward
exchange rates at the 1-, 6- and 12-month horizon. All rates are from Thomson Reuters
Financial Datastream. The data range from October 1983 to June 2010. For robustness
checks, we also use all UK pound-based data from the same source as well as forward premia
calculated using covered interest parity from interbank interest rate data, which are available
for longer time horizons for some currencies. Our dataset nests the data used in recent studies
on currency returns, including Lustig et al. (2011) and Burnside et al. (2011). In additional
robustness checks, we replicate our findings using only the subset of data used in these studies.
    Many of the decompositions we perform require balanced samples. However, currencies
enter and exit the sample frequently, the most important example of which is the euro and
the currencies it replaced. We deal with this issue in two ways. In our baseline sample (“1
Rebalance”), we use the largest fully balanced sample we can construct from our data by
selecting the 15 currencies with the longest coverage (the currencies of Australia, Canada,
Denmark, Hong Kong, Japan, Kuwait, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Saudi Arabia, Sin-
gapore, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK from December 1990 to June 2010).
In addition, we construct three alternative samples that allow for entry of currencies at 3, 6,
and 12 dates during the sample period, where we chose the entry dates to maximize coverage.
The “3 Rebalance” sample allows entry in December of 1989, 1997, and 2004 and covers 30
currencies. The “6 Rebalance” sample allows entry in December of 1989, 1993, 1997, 2001,
2004, and 2007 and covers 36 currencies. Our largest sample, “12 Rebalance,” allows entry
in June 1986, and in June of every second year thereafter through June 2008, and covers 39
currencies. In between each of these dates, all samples are balanced except for a small number
of observations removed by our data-cleaning procedure (see Appendix A). Currencies enter
each of the samples if their forward and spot exchange rate data are available for at least four
years prior to the rebalancing date (the reason for this prior data requirement will become
apparent below).7
    Throughout the main text, we take the perspective of a US investor and calculate all
returns in US dollars. In section 3.3, we discuss how our results change when we use different
base currencies. Appendix A lists the coverage of individual currencies and describes our
data-selection and -cleaning process in detail.
    The only exception we make to this rule is for the first set of currencies entering the 12 Rebalance sample,
    7

which become available in October 1983.




                                                       6
2       Portfolio-based Decomposition of Violations of UIP
We begin by showing that the FPP, the carry trade, and the dollar trade can be thought of
as three trading strategies that capitalize on different violations of UIP. To this end, we first
introduce the carry trade and derive the trading strategy corresponding to the FPP. We then
use our decomposition to see how the two phenomena relate to each other and estimate their
relative contributions to overall violations of UIP in the data.


2.1     The Carry Trade and the Forward Premium Trade
Consider a version of the carry trade in which, at the beginning of each month during an
investment period, t = 1, ...T , we form a portfolio of all available foreign currencies, i = 1, ..N ,
weighted by the difference of their forward premia (f pit ≡ fit − sit ) to the average forward
                                                   P 1
premium of all currencies at the time (f pt ≡         i N f pit ). Under covered interest parity, a
currency’s forward premium is equal to its interest rate differential with the US dollar, so
that the portfolio is long currencies that have a higher interest rate than the average of all
currencies at time t and short currencies that have a lower than average interest rate. We can
write the return on this portfolio as
                                        P                                
                                            i,t   rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt         ,                               (2)
                                                                                         P
where, for convenience, we denote the double-sum over i and t as                             i,t :

                                       P                   PN PT
                                            i,t xi,t ≡ (    i=1    t=1   xi,t ).                               (3)

More generally, we maintain the convention of denoting means with an overline and by omitting
the corresponding subscripts throughout the paper:

                    1
                        PT              1
                                            PN                     1
                                                                       PT PN
             xi ≡   T    t=1 xit xt ≡   N         i=1 xit x ≡     NT      t=1      i=1   xit , x = f p, rx .   (4)
                                                                                      
    We implement the carry trade (2) using linear portfolio weights f pit − f pt , because they
allow us to relate portfolio returns directly to coefficients in linear regressions ( Pedersen, 2015)
and to parameters in a generic model of currency returns (as we will see below). Note however,
that our results would be very similar if we sorted currencies into a number of bins and then
analyzed the returns on a strategy that is long the bin with the highest-interest-rate currencies
and short the bin with the lowest-interest-rate currencies, as is customary in the literature. 8
    Such sorts can be thought of as non-parametric regressions (Cochrane, 2011). Appendix Table 1 shows
    8

that the Sharpe ratio on our “linear” version of the carry trade is between 80 and 105% of that of a long-short
strategy using five bins as in Lustig et al. (2011). The table also shows mean returns and Sharpe ratios on the


                                                           7
As with this alternative formulation, the carry trade portfolio is “zero-cost” (its weights sum
        P              
to zero, i f pit − f pt = 0) and its return is neutral with respect to the dollar, that is, it is
independent of the bilateral exchange rate of the US dollar against any other currencies. 9
    Table 1 shows the annualized mean return on the carry trade portfolio in our 1 Rebalance
sample. Consistent with earlier research, we find that the carry trade is highly profitable and
yields a mean annualized net return of 4.95% with a Sharpe ratio of 0.54. However, the table
also shows that currencies which the carry trade is long (i.e., currencies with high interest
rates) on average depreciate relative to currencies with low interest rates. Our carry trade
portfolio loses 2.15 percentage points of annualized returns due to this depreciation.
     As we show below, this pattern holds across a wide range of plausible variations: currencies
with high interest rates thus tend to depreciate, not appreciate. 10 An obvious question is then
why the FPP appears to suggest the opposite. The answer is in the currency-specific intercepts,
αi , in Fama’s regression (1), reproduced here for convenience:

                                     rxi,t+1 = αi + β if pp f pit + εi,t+1 .                                (1)

We tend to find that β if pp > 1 in regressions in which currency fixed effects absorb the currency-
                                            PT
                                                1
specific mean forward premium (f pi =          T
                                                  f pit ). If we wanted to trade on the correlation in
                                               t=1
the data that drives the FPP, we would thus have to buy currencies that have a higher forward
premium (interest rate differential to the US dollar) than they usually do ( Cochrane, 2001;
Bekaert and Hodrick, 2008). Such a strategy, we call it the “forward premium trade,”weights
each currency with the deviation of its current forward premium from its currency-specific
                                                                    P                    
mean. We can write the return on the forward premium trade as i,t rxi,t+1 f pit − f pi .
   The carry trade (2) thus exploits a correlation between currency returns and forward premia
conditional on time fixed effects (f pt ), whereas the FPP describes a correlation conditional
on currency fixed effects (f pi ). Figure 1 illustrates the difference between the carry trade
and the forward premium trade for the case in which a US investor considers investing in two
foreign currencies. The left panel plots the forward premium of the New Zealand dollar and the
Japanese yen over time. Throughout the sample period, the forward premium of the former
is always higher than the forward premium of the latter, reflecting the fact that New Zealand
has consistently higher interest rates than Japan. The carry trade is always long New Zealand
dollars and always short Japanese yen. By contrast, the forward premium trade evaluates the
forward premium of each currency in isolation and goes long if the forward premium is higher
equally weighted strategy in Burnside et al. (2011). However, this strategy is less comparable because it is not
neutral with respect to the US dollar.
   9
     See Appendix B.1 for a formal proof of this statement.
  10
     This fact is also apparent in Table 1 of Lustig et al. (2011).



                                                       8
than its currency-specific mean during the investment period (shown in the right panel). As a
result, the forward premium trade is not “dollar neutral” in the sense that it may be long or
short both foreign currencies at any given point in time.
    It is immediately apparent that implementing the forward premium trade may be more
difficult in practice than implementing the carry trade, because it requires an estimate of
the mean forward premium of each currency (f pi ), which is not known before the end of the
investment period. In what follows, we denote investors’ ex-ante expectation of the currency-
specific and the unconditional mean forward premium as

                                 e               e     
                              f pi ≡ Ei0 f pi , f p ≡ E0 f p .

The ex-ante implementable version of the forward premium trade (which we show below is
the version that is relevant for estimating elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward
premia) has a mean return of
                                 P h                        e
                                                               i
                                    i,t   rxi,t+1 f pit − f pi .                            (5)


2.2    Portfolio-based Decomposition
Having recast the FPP as a trading strategy, we can now ask how it relates to the carry trade.
The expected returns on both portfolios load on different violations of UIP, that is, different
components of the unconditional covariance between currency returns and forward premia. To
show this result, we can decompose the unconditional covariance into the sum of the expected
                                                                                              e
returns on three trading strategies plus a constant term. Adding and subtracting f pt , f pi ,
       e
and f p in the second bracket and re-arranging yields
                                 P                                
                                       (rx i,t+1 − rx) f pit − f p
 P h            e         i P h                            e        i P h                      i
                                   i,t
                         e                                            e                             e
= i,t rxi,t+1 f pi − f p     + i,t rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       + i,t rxi,t+1 f pt − f p
 |            {z            } |                     {z                    } |           {z             }
         Static Trade                          Dynamic Trade                       Dollar Trade
                                         P             e
                                       + i,t [rx( f p − f p)],
                                         |         {z         }
                                                     Constant
                                                                                            (6)
where rx again refers to the mean currency return across currencies and time periods.
   The “static trade” trades on the cross-currency variation in forward premia. It is long
currencies that are expected to have a high forward premium on average and short those that
are expected to have a low forward premium. We may think of it as a version of the carry
trade in which we do not update portfolio weights. We weight currencies once (at t = 0),
based on our expectation of the currencies’ future mean level of interest rates, and do not

                                                 9
change the portfolio until the end of the investment period, T . The “dynamic trade” trades
on the between-time-and-currency variation in forward premia. It is long currencies that have
high forward premia relative to the average forward premium of all currencies at the time
and relative to their currency-specific mean forward premium. We may think of the mean
return on the dynamic trade as the incremental benefit of re-weighing the carry trade portfolio
every period. Finally, the “dollar trade” trades on the cross-time variation in the average
forward premium of all currencies against the US dollar. It goes long all foreign currencies
when the average forward premium of all currencies against the US dollar is high relative to its
unconditional mean and goes short all foreign currencies when it is low. This trading strategy
was recently described by Lustig et al. (2014). We follow their naming convention here.
   Upon inspection, the carry trade (2) is simply the sum of the static and dynamic trades,
P                              P h         e        e
                                                          i P h                     e         e
                                                                                                   i
    i,t    rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt = i,t rxi,t+1 f pi − f p + i,t rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       ,
|                 {z            } |          {z            } |                {z                     }
              Carry Trade                 Static Trade                       Dynamic Trade


whereas the forward premium trade (5) is the sum of the dynamic and the dollar trades:
P h                          e
                                i P h                      e         e
                                                                          i P h                    e
                                                                                                        i
    i,t    rxi,t+1 f pit − f pi = i,t rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       + i,t rxi,t+1 f pt − f p .
|                 {z             } |                 {z                      } |           {z            }
          Forward Premium Trade                     Dynamic Trade                        Dollar Trade


The common element between the carry trade and the forward premium trade is the dynamic
trade, that is, the between-time-and-currency part of the unconditional covariance between
expected currency returns and forward premia. By contrast, the cross-currency component is
unique to the carry trade and the cross-time component is unique to the forward premium
trade. The question of whether the carry trade and the forward premium trade are related in
the data thus reduces to estimating the relative contribution of the dynamic trade. On the
other hand, the dollar trade is by construction independent of the carry trade.


2.3          Estimation
Estimating the expected return on each of the three trading strategies requires a model that
specifies how investors form expectations given the available data. We begin by assuming that
we (the econometricians) know how investors form beliefs and have access to the same data so
                                              e
that we can infer their true expectations, f pi :

                                                fd
                                                  e      e
                                                 pi = f pi ,                                      (A1)




                                                     10
where fd
           e
        pi is our estimate of investors’ expectation of f pi . In particular, we begin with the
conventional assumption in the portfolio-based literature that investors simply exp ect f pi to
be equal to the mean of f pit across all available data prior to the investment period. However,
once we re-write our decomposition in regression form in section 3, we will be able to show
that the economic interpretation of our results is more general and holds under a wide range of
more sophisticated models of investor beliefs that also allow for the possibility that we might
            e
estimate f pi with error.
    Table 2 lists the mean returns and Sharpe ratios of the three strategies, as well as the mean
returns and Sharpe ratios of the carry trade and the forward premium trade. All returns are
again annualized and normalized by dividing with f p to facilitate comparison. Columns 1-4
on the top left give the results for our 1 Rebalance sample, where we use all available data
                                         e        e
prior to December 1994 to estimate f pi and f p .
    Column 1 shows the results for one-month forwards, without taking into account bid-ask
spreads. The mean annualized return on the static trade is 3.46% with a Sharpe ratio of 0.39.
It thus contributes 70% of carry trade returns. By contrast, the dynamic trade contributes
30%, with an annualized return of 1.50% and a Sharpe ratio of 0.24. Although the forward
premium trade is not commonly known as a trading strategy in foreign exchange markets, it
yields similar returns to the carry trade, with a mean annualized return of 4.04% and a Sharpe
ratio of 0.27. The dollar trade contributes 63% to this overall return and has a Sharpe ratio
of 0.25, with the dynamic trade contributing the remaining 37%.
    Columns 2-4 replicate the same decomposition but take into account bid-ask spreads in
forward and spot exchange markets. 11 Column 2 again uses one-month forward contracts,
column 3 uses 6-month contracts, and column 4 uses 12-month contracts. Once we take into
account bid-ask spreads, the mean returns on all trading strategies fall. 12 In the case of the
dynamic trade, the mean return in column 2 actually turns negative. However, the same basic
pattern persists across all columns: the static trade accounts for 70%-121% of the mean returns
on the carry trade, and the dollar trade accounts for 63%-124% of the mean returns on the
forward premium trade. 13        14

  11
      We calculate returns net of transaction costs for each currency i as rxnet i,t+1 = I[wit ≥ 0](fit − si,t+1 ) +
                                                                                                      bid    ask

(1 − I[wit ≥ 0])(fitask − sbid
                           i,t+1 ), where wit is the portfolio weight of currency i at time t, and I is an indicator
function that is one if wit ≥ 0 and zero otherwise.
   12
      Transaction costs in currency markets are thus of the same order of magnitude as the mean returns on the
dynamic trade. See Burnside et al. (2006) for a discussion. However, bid-ask spreads reported on Datastream
may be larger than the effective inter-dealer market spreads; see Lyons (2001) and Gilmore and Hayashi (2011).
   13
      The mean returns on the three underlying trades no longer add up to the mean returns on the carry trade
and the forward premium trade when we take into account bid-ask spreads. We thus calculate the percentage
contribution of static (dollar) trade by dividing its mean return with the maximum of zero and the sum of the
mean returns on the static (dollar) and dynamic trades.
   14
      In a similar comparison, Lustig et al. (2011) attribute a somewhat smaller share of the static (uncondi-
tional) component in carry trade returns (53% in their standard specification). The reason for this apparent


                                                        11
   The only potentially sensitive assumption we make in performing this decomposition is that
investors expect f pi to be equal to the mean of f pit prior to 1995. To show that our results
do not depend on this particular base period (and the resulting selection of currencies in our 1
Rebalance sample), the remaining panels and columns repeat the same exercise using the 3, 6,
and 12 Rebalance samples. In each case, we again assume that investors use all available data
before each cutoff date to update their expectations. For example, in the 3 Rebalance sample
(allowing entry of new currencies into the sample in December of 1989, 1997, and 2004), we
             e
calculate f pi for the period 1990-1997 as the mean of f pit for each currency prior to 1990, for
the period 1998-2004 as the mean of f pit prior to 1998, and so on. In this sense, we allow
investors to update their expectations and rebalance their portfolios at three dates for the 3
Rebalance sample and at six and twelve dates for the 6 Rebalance and 12 Rebalance samples,
respectively.
    The results remain broadly the same across the different samples, where the static trade
on average contributes 85.7% of the mean returns to the carry trade, and the dollar trade on
average contributes 81.3% of the mean returns on the forward premium trade. In addition,
the Sharpe ratio on the dynamic trade appears economically small or even negative in all
calculations that take into account the bid-ask spread (they range from -0.14 to 0.19). Whereas
the carry trade delivers an economically significant Sharpe ratio in all samples (ranging from
0.12 to 0.44 net of transaction costs), the forward premium trade tends to deliver somewhat
lower Sharpe ratios (ranging from 0.00 to 0.27), particularly in the samples that allow more
rebalances. Appendix Table 3 shows that these patterns also hold when we exclude currencies
with pegged exchange rates, use an extended sample of interest rate data, or use a wide range
of alternative samples of exchange rate data used in other studies. We argue below that these
patterns also continue to hold when we relax (A1). However, this additional step first requires
clarifying the relationship between portfolio returns and regression coefficients.
    Our main conclusion from Table 2 is that the dollar trade accounts for the majority of
returns to the forward premium trade and the static trade accounts for the majority of returns
to the carry trade. By contrast, the dynamic trade, the common element between the carry
trade and the forward premium trade, contributes an economically small share to the returns
on the two strategies. In this sense, the FPP and the dollar trade anomaly appear intimately
linked, while the carry trade anomaly appears largely independent of the other two phenomena.
discrepancy is that in their exercise, they allow the carry trade to use up to 36 currencies, whereas the uncon-
ditional carry trade uses only 18 currencies. By contrast, our decomposition requires that we restrict all five
trading strategies to use the same set of currencies. These differences in implementation arise because their
decomposition views portfolios as the primitive (regardless of the number of their constituents), whereas our
decomposition focuses on currencies i = 1, ..N as the object of interest. See Appendix Table 2 for a detailed
comparison between the two approaches.




                                                      12
3           Decomposition in Regression Form
Expected returns may vary across currencies, between-time-and-currency, and across time.
Each of these dimensions corresponds to one of the three basic trading strategies outlined above.
To test whether the variation of expected returns in each of these dimensions is statistically
significant and to understand the restrictions that the results in the previous section place
on models of currency returns, it is useful to rewrite (6) in terms of regression coefficients.
Manipulating the expected return on the static trade (the first term on the right-hand side of
(6)) yields
P h                             e          e
                                                i        P h                                               e           e
                                                                                                                             i       P h                      e          e
                                                                                                                                                                               i
      i,t   rxi,t+1           f pi   − fp             =            i,t   (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 )               f pi   − fp             +       i,t   rxt+1        f pi   − fp
                                                                                                                                      |                  {z                     }
                                                                                                                                                         =0
                                                              stat       P           e
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                 e 2
                                                      = β̂                 i,t     f pi   − fp         .

We get the first equality by adding and subtracting rxt+1 . The second equality follows
                       P         e       e
from the fact that        i (f pi − f p ) is zero and does not vary across t. The third equal-
                                                                                                 stat
ity follows
      h       from rewriting
                                  the covariance
                                         i       as an OLS    regression coefficient where β̂      =
P                              e       e     P       e       e 2
   i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pi − f p        / i,t f pi − f p     is an estimate of the slope coefficient
from the specification
                                                                          e        e
                                                                                      
                                                 rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 = β stat f pi − f p + stat
                                                                                        i,t+1 .                                                                        (7)

Appendix C.1 shows that similarly rewriting the second and third terms in (6) yields
                                                                          P                                                 
                                                                             i,t    (rxi,t+1 − rx) f pit − f p
                                                                                                  =
      stat P
                                                   dyn P
                                                                                                               2                            P                    
                            e          e 2                                                        e          e                            dol                        e 2
 β̂            i,t       f pi   − fp        + β̂             i,t       f pi,t − f pt −         f pi   − fp             + α̂dyn + β̂              i,t   f pt − f p          + α̂dol − α̂dol ,
 |                   {z                    } |                                       {z                                      } |                           {z                    }
             Static Trade                                                        Dynamic Trade                                                         Dollar Trade
                                                                                        (8)
               dyn                   dol
where β̂    and β̂ are again OLS estimates of slope coefficients from pooled regressions of
currency returns on the variation in forward premia in the relevant dimension:
                                                                                      h                  e         e
                                                                                                                       i
                     rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx) = β dyn                                  f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      + dyn
                                                                                                                             i,t+1 ,                                   (9)

                                                                                   e
                                                                                      
                                                 rxi,t+1 − rx = γ + β dol f pt − f p + dol
                                                                                        i,t+1 .                                                                       (10)

Because the right hand side variables in these regressions depend on investors’ ex-ante ex-
                                             e                                   dyn
pectations of future mean forward premia, f pi , the three error terms stat                  dol
                                                                        i,t+1 , i,t+1 , and i,t+1



                                                                                          13
naturally capture any errors investors may make in these forecasts. These forecast errors in-
duce a structure in the error terms which is key to our empirical finding that investors do not
appear to expect high-interest rate currencies to appreciate. We discuss it in detail below (see
Appendix C.2 for a formal derivation). 15
                                        P                      e    e              P               e
    Similarly, the residuals α̂dyn = i,t [rxi (f pi −f p−(f pi −f p ))] and α̂dol = i,t [rx(f p−f p )]
in (8) measure the covariance of currency returns with these forecast errors. By contrast, the
three slope coefficients, β stat , β dyn and β dol determine the systematic part of the mean returns
calculated in Table 2. They have a simple economic interpretation. To make this interpre-
tation transparent for the most standard class of models, we henceforth use the language of
a frictionless rational model, referring to conditional expected currency returns as “currency
risk premia.”16

Definition 1 The risk premium on currency i at time t is a rational investor’s expectation of
the log return on the currency, given that all currencies’ forward premia prior to and including
period t are known, Eit [rxi,t+1 ].

    Consider a model where forward premia evolve according to some ergodic, covariance sta-
tionary process and currencies are priced by a representative rational investor who has rational
                                                  e
expectations of future mean forward premia, {f pi }Ni=1 , and demands compensation for holding
the static, dynamic, and dollar trade portfolios during the investment period as specified in
(7), (9), and (10).17 Taken together, these three conditions imply a simple model of currency
returns: Averaging (7) across t and (10) across i, and then adding the three equations yields
                     e        e
                                      h              e         e
                                                                    i                  e
                                                                                           
rxi,t+1 = γ + β stat f pi − f p + β dyn f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      + β dol f pt − f p + stat
                                                                                             i    + dyn
                                                                                                     i,t+1 + t+1 .
                                                                                                              dol

                                                                                                              (11)

    In this simple model, the slope coefficients β stat , β dyn , and β dol measure the elasticity of
currency risk premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-currency, between-time-and-
currency, and cross-time dimension, respectively. They link behavior at time t (demanding a
risk premium between t and some future time period) to information investors can condition
on at time t (perceived variation in forward premia). In this sense, the three elasticities are
behavioral parameters in any model of currency returns, regardless of whether we think of ( 11)
  15
      This correlation structure is also the reason why it is more convenient to estimate each coefficient separately
using (7), (9), and (10). We show in section 3.1.2 how to conduct a joint estimation.
   16
      In this paper, forward premia are the only drivers of risk premia. However, our decomposition can be
easily generalized to account for additional drivers, as recently demonstrated by Menkhoff et al. (2017).
   17
      More formally, the representative rational investor demands risk premia so that the error terms in ( 7), (9),
and (10) are mean zero, covariance stationary, asymptotically orthogonal, and unconditionally uncorrelated
                                                                                   e      e          dyn                 
with the right hand side variable in each of the three equations, E0 [stat i  (f pi − f p )] = E0 [i,t+1 ( f pit − f pt −
    e        e                           e
(f pi − f p ))] = E0 [dolt+1 (f pt − f p )] = 0. Rationality also implies that the investor’s forecasts are such that
        e           e
E0 [f pi (f pi − f pi )] = 0.


                                                           14
as a generic affine model or as a first-order approximation to a non-linear model of currency
returns.18

Proposition 1 The slope coefficients β stat , β dyn , and β dol measure the elasticity of currency
risk premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-currency, between-time-and-currency,
and the cross-time dimension
                                     e                                                               e    e
             cov (Eit [rxi ],f pi )                  cov (Eit [rxi,t+1 −rxi ],(f pit −f pt )−(f pi −f p       ))               cov (Et [rxt+1 ],f pt )
 β stat =         var (
                             e           , β dyn =                                       e      e                  , β dol =                             .19
                          f pi   )                            var ((f pit −f pt )−(   f pi −f p     ))                              var (f pt )


   Under assumption (A1), ordinary least squares estimates of (7), (9), and (10) yield unbi-
ased estimates of these elasticities.
Proof. By the properties of linear regression, we can write β stat as
                    h                   e         e
                                                     i       e −1      h    n                     e      e
                                                                                                               oi     e −1
    β stat   =    E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pi − f p      var f pi      = E0 Eit (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pi − f p       var f pi
                    h                         e          e
                                                            i     e −1                      e
                                                                                                     e −1
             =    E0 Eit {(rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 )} f pi − f p       var f pi    = cov Eit [rxi ], f pi var f pi    .



 The second equality applies the law of iterated expectations. The third equality uses the fact
        e        e
that f pi and f p are known at time t. The proofs for β dyn and β dol are analogous. The second
statement follows directly from the properties of OLS.

    Which of these elasticities is statistically distinguishable from zero? Columns 1-4 of Table 3
estimate the specifications (7), (9), and (10) using our 1 Rebalance sample. As in section 2,
                                            e
we use assumption (A1), calculating f pi as the mean of f pit across all available data prior to
December 1994. The standard errors for β stat and β dol are clustered by currency and time,
respectively, whereas the standard errors for β dyn are Newey-West with 12, 18, and 24 lags for
the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, respectively (correcting for autocorrelation in the error term
within each currency). Where appropriate, we use the Murphy and Topel (1985) procedure
                                                               e         e
to adjust all standard errors for the estimated regressors f pi and f p (see Appendix C.4 for
details).20
    The specifications in column 1 use monthly forward contracts and show a highly statistically
significant estimate for β stat of 0.47 (s.e.=0.08). The estimate of β dyn is about the same size
  18
      In keeping with the portfolio-based decomposition above, this model defines the returns on the three
                                                                             e
strategies relative to a single investment period t = 1, ..., T (where f pi = Ei0 [f pi ]). However, it is easy to
generalize this approach to allow for overlapping investment periods, where a new investment period begins at
each t and investors continuously update their expectations of future mean forward premia. Because this more
general model requires more notation but offers the same economic insights we relegate it to Appendix C.3.
   19
      Unless otherwise indicated all variances and covariances condition on the information available to the
investor at t = 0 for the investment period starting at t: cov(Xit , Yit ) = E0 [(Xit − E0 [Xit ])(Yit − E0 [Yit ])]], t =
1, ..., T, i = 1, .., N.
   20
      Where the original Murphy and Topel (1985) application assumes i.i.d. errors, we generalize their approach
to use the appropriate assumption about error structure for each application, so that our approach is overall
internally consistent.


                                                                          15
0.44 (s.e.=0.25) but statistically distinguishable from zero only at the 10% level, as is the much
larger estimate for β dol (3.11, s.e.=1.60).
    How do these elasticities map into the behavior that drives the carry trade and the FPP?
Although, model (11) allows the elasticity of risk premia with respect to forward premia to
differ in each of the three dimensions, the logic of Proposition 1 applies even if we constrain
some of these elasticities to be equal to each other. For example, we could impose β dyn = β dol ,
so that our model compactly summarizes the FPP in a single coefficient
                                      e        e
                                                                   e
                                                                       
                                                                                 f pp
                 rxi,t+1 = γ + β stat f pi − f p + β f pp f pit − f p + stat
                                                                         i    + i,t+1                       (12)

where β f pp is the elasticity of risk premia with respect to forward premia in the time series
dimension, which can be estimated using the regression
                                                                           e
                                                                                
                                                    f pp                               f pp
                                rxi,t+1 − rxi = β              f pit −   f pi       + i,t+1 .               (13)

At the same time, this regression provides an estimate (and a standard error) for the systematic
variation in currency risk premia driving the forward premium trade. The corresponding
regression for the carry trade takes the form
                                                                   
                                rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 = β ct f pit − f pt + ct
                                                                       i,t+1 ,                               (14)

where again the correct procedure is to regress the variation in currency returns in the relevant
dimension on the portfolio weights used to implement the trading strategy.
    Table 3 shows estimates of these elasticities. Again focusing on the simplest specification
in column 1 using our 1 Rebalance sample, we find that the coefficients in both regressions
are positive and statistically significant. Importantly however, the estimate of β f pp (0.86,
s.e.=0.34) is smaller than one, and smaller than we might have expected given a focus in
the existing literature on the idea that investors expect currencies with high interest rates to
appreciate. We discuss this finding in detail below. The estimate for β ct is 0.68 (s.e.=0.27). 21
   Having represented the carry trade anomaly as a regression coefficient, it is easy to show
that the carry trade and the FPP are linked by the elasticity of risk premia with respect to
between-time-and-currency variation in forward premia: coefficients β ct and β f pp are linear
combinations of β stat and β dyn , and β dyn and β dol , respectively (shown formally in Appendix
C.5). The common element is β dyn . Using these relationships, column 1 of Table 3 reports the
partial R2 of the static trade in the carry trade regression (62%, s.e.=23%) and the partial
  21
    In both regressions, we use Newey-West standard errors with the appropriate number of lags, following the
                                                                                                              e
convention outlined above. In addition, we also adjust standard errors for β f pp for estimated regressors f pi as
above.


                                                       16
R2 of the dollar trade in the forward premium trade regression (90%, s.e.=23%). 22 Based on
these results, we cannot reject the null hypotheses that all of the variation driving the carry
trade originates from the static trade and all the variation driving the FPP originates from
the dollar trade.
     The remaining columns report variations of the same estimates, showing that our results
are similar when we adjust for transaction costs, use forward contracts of longer maturity,
                                                                                                e
include different countries in the sample, and use different time horizons for estimating f pi .
The structure of the table is identical to Table 2: columns 2-4 use returns adjusted for the
bid-ask spread and forward contracts at the 1-, 6-, and 12-month horizon. The remaining
columns and panels repeat the same estimations using our 3, 6, and 12 Rebalance samples,
                                               e
where, as in Table 2, we again calculate f pi as the mean of f pit for each currency using all
available data prior to each cutoff date.
     The pattern that emerges from these variations is similar to the results in column 1. In
all samples, the coefficient on the static trade is a precisely estimated number between zero
and one, and this coefficient usually explains about two thirds of the variation in risk premia
driving the identification of β ct . We thus always reject the null that currency risk premia do
not vary with unconditional differences in forward premia across currencies. The coefficient
on the dollar trade is imprecisely estimated and statistically distinguishable from zero at the
5% level in only one out of 16 specifications. Point estimates range from -0.23 to 3.72. We
thus rarely reject the null that no covariance exists between risk premia and forward premia
in the cross-time dimension. However, the dollar trade always explains more than half, often
more than 90% of the variation driving the identification of β f pp . The coefficient estimates of
β f pp itself are almost always smaller than one and are statistically distinguishable from zero
in 7 out of our 16 specifications. Consistent with our portfolio-based results, the effect of
the dynamic trade on both the carry trade and the FPP is statistically indistinguishable from
zero. We reject the null that β dyn = 0 in only one of our 16 specifications.
     Appendix Table 4 shows that the results from Table 3 also hold across a wide range of
alternative samples used in other studies and when using interest rate data to infer missing
data on historical forward premia. In addition, Appendix Table 5 shows results using the same
15 currencies across rebalances, excluding developing countries from the sample, and adjusting
for expected inflation. 23 All of these variations again yield very similar results. Focusing only
                                               d
  22
     We calculate the partial R2 as ESS dESS    +ESS dyn
                                                         , d ∈ {stat, dol}, where ESS dyn refers to the explained sum of
squares in specification (9) and ESS      stat
                                               , ESS refer to the explained sum of squares in specifications (7) and
                                                     dol

(10), respectively. The standard errors for these objects reported in the text are calculated by bootstrapping
across sample years. Because this simple bootstrap does not account for uncertainty in the estimation of
                    e
forecast errors (f pi − f pi ), we also repeat the same exercise in Appendix Table 6, which uses a block-bootstrap
that also randomizes over the pre-sample. In this specification we again cannot reject both null hypotheses.
  23
     Following standard practice in the literature, this calculation assumes that investors have rational expec-



                                                          17
on developed economies accentuates the role of the dollar trade, yielding larger point estimates
for β dol and an increased partial R2 for the dollar trade in accounting for the FPP.
    As an additional robustness check, we use our 12 Rebalance sample to block-bootstrap
standard errors, shown in Appendix Table 6. In this procedure, we treat each of the 12 two-
year periods in between re-balancing dates as one block and draw 100,000 random samples
with replacement from this set of histories. The table shows that this procedure produces
somewhat wider standard errors for some of our estimates. However, the basic pattern is
identical to the one in Table 3.24 Finally, Appendix C.6 shows that our estimates are unlikely
to be significantly affected by Stambaugh bias.

    The following three subsections now apply these results of our decomposition to make
progress on three inter-related issues. First, we assess analytically how our assumptions about
investors’ expectations (A1) affect our results, and how they interfere with the long-standing
interpretation of the FPP that high-interest-rate currencies appreciate. Second, we use the
standard errors around the elasticities estimated above to decide more generally which kinds
of models we can reject based on regressions of currency returns on forward premia. Third,
we test formally whether our finding that β dol is instrumental in generating the FPP points to
a potentially special role of the US dollar relative to other currencies.


3.1     Decomposition for General Models of Investor Expectations
A remaining concern with our estimates of β stat , β dyn , and β f pp (as well as our estimates of the
expected returns on the corresponding trading strategies) is that they require explicit estimates
      e
of f pi as inputs and are thus contingent on a specific model of how investors form expectations
(A1). Although we have performed a number of variations in estimating these inputs, our model
of investor expectations may be misspecified or we might be estimating their expectations with
error. To address these difficulties, we first show how investors’ ability to predict f pi affects
the elasticities β stat , β dyn , and β f pp in general. We then develop a simple alternative approach
to estimating elasticities of risk premia that does not require specifying investor expectations
of f pi , but only their precision. In a last step, we then discuss how recasting the FPP in this
way qualifies its implications for models of exchange rate determination.

3.1.1    Relation to Fixed Effects Estimator

To see how assumptions on investor expectations affect the results of our decomposition, note
that the only difference between our specifications (7), (9), and (13) and standard fixed effects
tations, that is, we proxy for expected inflation with future realized inflation.
  24
     In this specification, bootstrapping also appropriately accounts for uncertainty in the estimation of forecast
          e
errors f pi − f pi , particularly when computing standard errors for %ESS.


                                                        18
                                                                                 e                e
estimators is that they replace f pi and f p with expectations f pi and f p . That is, had we
been interested in characterizing the elasticity of realized rather than expected returns, we
                                                              e
would have simply used currency fixed effects instead of f pi in our regressions. Denoting the
                                                                                  dyn         f pp
slope coefficients of the corresponding fixed effects specifications as β stat
                                                                          F E , β F E , and β F E we
can show the following result:

Proposition 2 The elasticities of expected returns with respect to forward premia β dyn and
β f pp are smaller in absolute terms than the elasticities of realized returns with respect to forward
premia β dyn           f pp
            F E and β F E . The difference between elasticities of expected and realized returns
depends only on the relative precision of investors’ expectations of f pi ,
                                                                      e
                                                                                       −1
                                                       var f pi −    f pi
                      β dyn = β dyn
                                FE
                                    1 +                                                   ,       (15)
                                               var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p

and                                                                        −1
                                                                        e
                                                       var f pi −    f pi
                                β f pp = β fFpp
                                             E
                                                1 +                              .                 (16)
                                                       var f pit − f pi

In addition, β stat can be written as
                                                   h                                       i
                                                                             e       e
                                    var f pi   E 0   rx i (f p i − f p − (f p i − f p   ))
                  β stat   = β stat
                               FE       e +                         e                    .        (17)
                                    var f pi                     var f pi

Proof. See Appendix C.7.

   The difference between the elasticities of expected and realized returns thus depends only
                                                               e
on the statistical properties of the forecast error (f pi − f pi ). If investors have perfect foresight
                                                                                               e
about future average forward premia, the two concepts are identical (var(f pi − f pi ) = 0).
However, if they do not, β dyn < β dyn  F E and β
                                                    f pp
                                                          < β fFppE . In this sense, the elasticity of
realized returns is an upper bound for the elasticity of expected returns.
    The intuition for this result is akin to attenuation bias, but in reverse. Consider, for
example, equation (13). Classic attenuation bias arises when the right hand side variable in
a linear regression is measured with error, resulting in a downward bias of the coefficient.
Here, the opposite occurs: Any errors investors make when predicting f pi naturally generate
                           f pp                             P f pp
variation in the mean of i,t+1 across currencies. (That is, t i,t+1 must be positive on average
for currencies for which f pi was higher than expected and vice versa — see Appendix C.2 for a
formal derivation.) A fixed effects estimator removes all of these forecast errors from the right
hand side variable (in this sense measuring it with too little error), and assigns this variation to

                                                       19
the slope. For a given elasticity of expected returns, β Fdyn        f pp
                                                           E , and β F E thus mechanically increase
when there is uncertainty about future mean interest rate differentials.
   Similarly, the elasticity of realized returns with respect to cross-sectional variation in for-
ward premia, β stat
                F E , may differ from the elasticity of expected returns, although (in any given
sample) the sign of the difference is ambiguous. By contrast, no distinction exists between the
elasticity of realized and expected returns in the cross-time dimension. In that dimension, the
fact that investors need to estimate f p ex ante has no bearing on the estimate of the covariance
                                                                                               e
of risk premia with forward premia, because cov Et [rxt+1 ], f pt = cov(Et [rxt+1 ], f pt − f p ) =
cov(Et [rxt+1 ], f pt − f p), so that β dol = β dol
                                                F E . (Equation (10) has a constant that absorbs any
errors in predicting f p.)
    Table 4 compares estimates of elasticities of realized and expected returns (where the
latter are from columns 1 and 5 of Table 3). All specifications use one-month forwards and
exclude bid-ask spreads. The table shows that the difference in coefficients is considerable,
particularly for β dyn and β f pp . For example, in our 1 Rebalance sample, the estimate of β Fdyn
                                                                                                 E is
1.13 (s.e.=0.45) and highly statistically significant, whereas our estimate of β dyn is 60% smaller
and statistically insignificant (0.44, s.e.=0.25). Similarly, β fFpp
                                                                  E is 1.81 (s.e.=0.53), whereas β
                                                                                                   f pp

is less than half the size and smaller than one (0.86, s.e.=0.34). Taking account of the fact
that investors may not have perfect foresight about future mean forward premia thus makes
the difference between point estimates above and below one. Before we discuss the theoretical
implications of this finding, we first probe its generality and explore how it might vary under
other reasonable assumptions about investors’ ability to forecast f pi .

3.1.2   Alternative Estimates

Equations (15) and (16) suggest that we could have calculated estimates for β dyn and β f pp
                                                             e
identical to those in Table 3 without taking a stand on f pi , simply by using our pre-sample to
calculate directly the variance (rather than the realizations) of forecast errors across currencies,
and then backing out the elasticities of expected returns from the elasticities of realized returns.
That is, estimating β dyn and β f pp does not require taking a stand on what investors expect, but
only on the precision of these expectations. In this sense, assumption (A1) is not a necessary
condition for our estimates in Tables 3 to be consistent. Instead, it is sufficient if the variance
of forecast errors implied by our model of investor expectations converges in probability to the
true variance of investors’ forecast errors.
                          X      1             2                
                                     f pi − fd
                                              e    p             e
                                             pi −→ var f pi − f pi .                             (A2)
                           i
                               N −1




                                                  20
In other words, any method for backing out investor expectations will do, as long as it gives
us the right idea of how well investors can predict f pi .

Corollary 1 Under assumption (A2), ordinary least squares estimates of (7), (9) and (13)
are consistent.
Proof. See Appendix C.8

    While this corollary bolsters our confidence in the results presented so far, it also suggests
using more sophisticated methods for estimating the variance of forecast errors. Figure 2 plots
estimates of β dyn and β f pp from our 1 Rebalance sample over the variance of the forecast error.
When this variance is zero (perfect foresight) we are back to our estimates of β Fdyn      f pp
                                                                                   E and β F E from
column 1 of Table 4 (the intercepts). The black romboids show the now familiar estimates of
β dyn and β f pp we obtained using the pre-sample means to measure investors’ expectations (col-
umn 2 of Table 4). The variance of forecast errors implied in these estimates is large compared
                                                                                                  
to the between-time-and-currency variation in forward premia (var f pit − f pt − (f pi − f p) )
                                                                                    
(left panel) and the time-series variation in forward premia (var f pit − f pi ), so that the
difference between the estimated elasticities of expected and realized returns is quite sizable.
    Would more sophisticated models of investor expectations imply smaller forecast errors?
The hollow circles in the two graphs mark alternative estimates we obtain from estimating an
autoregressive process,
                                f pit = αi + ρ1,i f pi,t−1 + ρ2 f pt−1 + fit ,                 (18)

in the pre-sample data for each currency and then calculating the implied variance of the
forecast error in a sample with length T = 186 months under the assumption that the estimated
coefficients αi , ρ1,i , and ρ2 (and the standard deviations of fit ) are known to investors and
characterize the true process governing the evolution of f pit . This calculation results in almost
identical adjustments, returning an estimate of 0.47 (s.e.=0.26) for β dyn and an estimate of 0.89
(s.e.=0.36) for β f pp . When we repeat our calculation while imposing the same autocorrelation
coefficients ρ1,i = ρ1 for all currencies and ρ2 = 0 in (18), we obtain tighter standard errors
but also a larger adjustment to both coefficients (marked with a triangle).
    Of course we cannot exclude the possibility that other approaches to estimating the pre-
cision of investors’ forecasts might yield different results. Appendix Table 7 lists a range of
such variations. Perhaps the least conservative of these variations, using a GARCH model
on the full sample (rather than the pre-sample), yields estimates of 0.45 (s.e.=0.29) and 1.01
(s.e.=0.39) for β dyn and β f pp , respectively. With all of these different approaches, our conclu-
sions from Table 3 thus continue to hold: β dyn is never statistically distinguishable from zero,
whereas β f pp is usually smaller than one and statistically significantly different from zero in
some specifications.

                                                21
   We draw three main conclusions from this analysis. First, the elasticities of realized and
expected returns are inherently different objects, akin to the difference between mean returns
on trading strategies that are implementable using the information available at the time and
trading strategies that rely on hindsight. Second, while we can estimate elasticities of real-
ized returns using fixed effects estimators, estimating elasticities of expected returns requires
adjusting for errors in investors’ forecasts of f pi . Third, a wide range of reasonable adjust-
ments for these errors returns results similar to those in Table 3, where we consistently obtain
point estimates for β dyn and β f pp smaller than one, and the former are usually not statistically
distinguishable from zero.

3.1.3    Currencies with High Risk Premia Need not Appreciate

Why is it important that β dyn and β f pp are below one? Most immediately, estimates below
one imply that investors do not, in fact, expect high-interest-rate currencies to appreciate.
                              f pp
Instead the finding that β̂ F E > 1 arises when we look at the data with hindsight, conditioning
on information not available ex-ante.
     To illustrate this point, consider a Monte Carlo exercise where exchange rates, conditional
on investors’ information sets, are unpredictable such that β f pp = 1. For concreteness, also
suppose that forward premia are governed by the process (18) with ρ2 = 0, and parameters
for ρ1,i and αi , as well as the variance of errors fit , equal to our estimates from the pre-sample.
Then a fixed effects regression on a sample with 186 months yields on average an estimate
      f pp
of β̂ F E well above one: 1.45 (with a 90% confidence interval for the ratio β fFpp    E /β
                                                                                            f pp
                                                                                                 ranging
from 1.08 to 2.32).25 Thus, even if we lived in a world where exchange rates are unpredictable,
(β f pp = 1) a regression of realized returns on forward premia with country fixed effects would
show an elasticity of realized returns with respect to forward premia far greater than one,
simply because investors predict forward premia with error. 26
     The fact that investors, conditional on the information available at the time, may in fact
expect high-interest-rate currencies to depreciate rather than appreciate in turn has important
implications for the kind of models we might want to write to understand the interplay between
risk premia and exchange rates: a β f pp smaller than one obviates the long-standing challenge
in the theoretical literature to find a reason why a representative currency’s risk premium
  25
    Coefficient and confidence interval are calculated by using the process for forward premia (18) to simulate
1,000 artificial series of forward premia for each currency included in our 1 Rebalance sample, and then using
                     f pp                    e                
(16) to calculate β̂
                   FE            ar(f p − fcp )/d
                          = 1 + vd  i     i     v ar f p − f p for each series. See Appendix Table 8 for details.
                                                     it        i
  26
    Appendix Table 8 also shows variations of the same Monte Carlo exercise, illustrating how the size of
the difference between elasticities of expected and realized returns varies across different samples. Across
specifications, we find that it increases with the heterogeneity of the countries included in the sample and with
the conditional variance of mean forward premia. That is, the harder it is to predict mean forward premia for
                                                                              f pp
a given process for forward premia and investment horizon, the larger is β̂ F E .


                                                          22
should be negatively correlated with expected depreciations. Following the argument in Fama
(1984), we can write the elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward premia β stat , β dyn ,
β dol , and their linear combinations β ct and β f pp in the following form: 27
                                                                                                                                 
                                var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]) + cov Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ], Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [Δsi ]
 β f pp =                                                                                                                                      .
            var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]) + var Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [Δsi ] + 2cov Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ], Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [Δsi ]
                                                                                                                                             (19)

       This fraction can be larger than one only if the covariance term is negative, that is, only
if a negative covariance exists between risk premia and expected depreciations. However, as
long as β f pp is between zero and one, Fama’s analysis has no implications for this covari-
ance. Any number between zero and one may simply result from the fact that both risk
premia and expected changes in exchange rates vary over time (var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]),
                               
var Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [Δsi ] ) > 0).
    Similarly, estimates between zero and one for β stat , β dyn , β dol , and β ct have no implications
for the covariance of currency risk premia and expected changes in exchange rates in the
relevant dimension. Figure 3 summarizes the implications of our estimates in Table 3 for the
covariance of currency risk premia with expected appreciations. It shows all estimates of β stat ,
β dyn , and β dol from the table and highlights the median estimate of each of the coefficients.
(Appendix Figure 2 shows the same overview for β f pp and β ct .)
    None of our point estimates for β stat and β dyn are larger than one. In fact, we can reject the
hypothesis that either of the two coefficients is larger than one in all but one specification. The
data thus provide little evidence that risk premia and expected appreciations are correlated in
the cross-currency and the between-time-and-currency dimensions.
     In fact, the only potential evidence in favor of a negative covariance between currency risk
premia and expected depreciations comes from the cross-time dimension. There, a number
of point estimates are above one. However, the standard errors are so large that we reject
the hypothesis that β dol > 0 in only one specification and never reject the hypothesis that
β dol < 1. Overall, our multilateral regressions of currency returns on forward premia thus
offer little evidence of a non-zero covariance of currency risk premia with expected changes in
exchange rates,28 with the possible exception of the cross-time dimension.


3.2         Implications for Models of Currency Returns
Beyond the relationship between risk premia and exchange rates, another advantage of rep-
resenting all three anomalies (the FPP, the carry trade, and the dollar trade) in the form of
  27
     To get an expression of this form, replace Eit [rxi,t+1 ] = f pit − Eit Δsi,t+1 in the expressions given in
Proposition 1. See Appendix C.9 for a detailed derivation.
  28
     This conclusion is also consistent with Sarno and Schmeling (2014), who find that currency risk premia
are only weakly related to exchange rates.


                                                                       23
regression coefficients is that we can now use the variance-covariance matrix of our estimated
elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward premia from Table 3 to estimate the restric-
tions that these facts jointly place on models of currency returns. Our generic affine model
of currency returns (11) has three parameters. A theorist wishing to focus her energy on the
most salient features of the data may want to begin with the null hypothesis that each of
these parameters is equal to zero and include them if and only if they significantly improve
the model’s fit to the data. Based on the results from Table 3, she might thus start with
the simplest model the data do not clearly reject {β stat > 0, β dyn = 0, β dol = 0}. This model
explains returns on the carry trade as the result of static, unconditional, differences in risk
premia across currencies.
     Although this model explains most of the significant coefficients shown in Table 3, discard-
ing the mean returns to the forward premium trade, and thus the FPP itself, as a statistical
fluke may not be satisfactory. Columns 1-5, 7, and 8 of the 1 Rebalance and 3 Rebalance
samples, show significantly positive returns to the forward premium trade. Although neither
β dyn nor β dol are by themselves usually statistically distinguishable from zero, their convex
combination (β f pp ) is statistically significant in these seven specifications. We might thus
want to relax our model by adding an additional parameter that can explain this pattern. The
three simplest options to extend the model are {β dyn > 0, β dol = 0}, {β dyn = 0, β dol > 0}, and
{β dyn = β dol = β f pp > 0}.
     Table 5 performs χ2 difference tests, asking which of the three extensions is best able
to explain the mean returns on the forward premium trade observed in the data under the
assumption that the coefficient estimates of β f pp , β dyn , and β dol are normally distributed (see
Appendix C.10 for details). The two columns in the table use the coefficient estimates and
standard errors from columns 1 and 5 of the 1 Rebalance and the 3 Rebalance samples in Table
3, respectively. (Because the linear relationship between the three coefficients holds only in
the absence of transaction costs, these specifications are the only two of relevance.) In both
cases, we cannot reject β dyn = 0 or β dyn = β dol , whereas we can reject β dol = 0 at the 5% level.
The two simplest models that can explain all the statistically significant correlations in Table
3 are thus {β stat > 0, β dyn = 0, β dol > 0} and {β stat > 0, β dyn = β dol = β f pp > 0}.29
     The conclusion from this exercise is that the data strongly reject models in which β stat = 0
and, to the extent that the FPP is a robust fact in the data, also reject models in which
β dol = 0. A parsimonious affine model of currency returns thus need only allow for variation in
currency risk premia in the cross-currency and cross-time dimensions. Any assumptions about
β dyn do not significantly affect the model’s ability to fit the data. 30
  29
     This finding continues to apply when we focus on a sample of developed economies or after adjusting
returns for US inflation.
  30
     Given these results one might be tempted to go a step further and impose β stat = β dyn = β dol . Indeed, we


                                                       24
    This finding suggests that the statistically significant violations of UIP may be fundamen-
tally linked to asymmetries across countries: the carry trade anomaly requires static or highly
persistent asymmetries in risk premia across currencies, while the FPP and the dollar trade
anomaly may arise due to an especially high elasticity of the risk premium on the US dollar.

3.2.1    Example: No-arbitrage Model of Currency Returns

To illustrate how these findings restrict a specific model of currency returns, we apply our
decomposition to a simplified version of the no-arbitrage model by Lustig et al. (2011). Their
model is particularly well-suited for our purposes because it explicitly models both the cross-
section and the time series of the returns on N currencies, rather than focusing only on one
currency pair or on a single cross-section. For simplicity, the model exogenously specifies a
stochastic discount factor (SDF) for each currency, without tracing the innovations to this SDF
to fundamental shocks to productivity or demand (as would be common in the macroeconomic
literature). In a world with complete markets and one representative agent per country and
currency, we might think of each SDF simply as representing the growth rate of the marginal
utility of consumption in a given country.
    The logarithm of each country’s SDF is

                                                  √                           p
                       − mi,t+1 = α + χzit +          γzit ui,t+1 + τ ztw −    δ i ztw uw,t+1 ,             (20)

where ui,t+1 is a currency-specific shock and uw,t+1 is a “global” shock that is common to all
currencies. Both shocks are i.i.d. and follow a standard normal distribution. The N + 1 state
variables, {zit } and ztw , evolve according so some stationary process over time and modulate
the SDFs’ exposures to the two shocks. For example, if zit is low, currency i has little currency-
specific risk, while a high ztw means that global risk is high, in the sense that all currencies are
highly exposed to the global shock. Following our convention above, we denote the time-zero
expectation of the state variables as z e and z we , respectively. The change in the real exchange
rate between two currencies, measured in country i goods per home country good is then
simply mh,t+1 − mi,t+1 , where we index the home country with h.
    While earlier work on this class of model focused on the restrictions on ( 20) needed to
generate the FPP, the major innovation of Lustig et al. (2011)’s work is that they allow some
currencies to be permanently be riskier than others, that is, they allow currencies to differ in
reject this hypothesis only in our 6 Rebalance sample (again using the specifications in columns
                                                                                                1 and 5of Table
                                                                                                       e
3). Appendix Table 9 shows estimates of this model using the specification rxi,t+1 −rx = β f pit − f p +i,t+1 .
15 out of 16 estimates return values larger than zero but less than one, suggesting that such a constrained
model would again be very simple: currencies with high interest rates depreciate, but not enough to reverse
the higher returns resulting from the interest rate differential.



                                                        25
their loading on the global shock (δ i ).31 It is this feature that allows the model to generate
cross-sectional differences in interest rates and expected currency returns.
   Although some authors have argued that the US dollar may have a particularly large
exposure to global shocks, we will also assume that δ h is equal to the mean of δ i across all
currencies as doing so greatly simplifies the exposition. 32 For simplification, we also assume
                                                                P
that the number of countries is large such that at any time        zit = z e , and that the {δ i } are
                                                                          i
normally distributed across countries with variance σ 2δ .
   In this framework, Lustig et al. (2011) derive the forward premium and expected returns
on currency i as
                                       1 w
                             f pit =    (z (δ h − δ i ) + (γ − 2χ) (zht − zit ))
                                       2 t
and
                                        1 w
                                          (z (δ h − δ i ) + γ (zht − zit )) ,
                             Et [rxi,t+1 ] =
                                        2 t
respectively, implying that currencies that have a large loading on the global shock pay lower
returns in equilibrium (because they tend to appreciate in “high-marginal-utility” states). If
χ = 0, expected returns are equal to forward premia, that is, investors pocket on average the
interest differential and exchange rates are in random walk.
    Performing our decomposition we can show

                                                 γ(γ−2χ)+σ 2δ                     γ
                           β stat = 1, β dyn =   (γ−2χ)2 +σ 2δ
                                                                 , and β dol =   γ−2χ
                                                                                      .

For comparison, our baseline estimates and 95% confidence intervals for these coefficients from
column 1 of Table 3 are 0.47 [0.31; 0.63], 0.44 [-0.05; 0.93], and 3.11 [-0.03; 6.25], respectively.
    What do these estimates teach us about this model? First, and most importantly, the model
generates permanent differences in interest rates across countries (β stat > 0). However, in the
data, these differences are partially reversed by predictable depreciations ( β stat < 1). This
simple version of the model cannot match these predictable depreciations because χ affects
depreciations in the time-series, but not the cross-section. In the time-series, we can generate
any value for β dol smaller or greater than one by adjusting χ. We get 1 > β dol > 0 by setting
χ < 0, so that the dollar depreciates relative to all other currencies when it has high interest
rates. By contrast, we get the dollar to appreciate in these states by setting χ > 0. However,
this simple version of the model does not allow the dollar’s stochastic behavior to differ from
  31
     The later work cited above has then argued that such differential loadings arise in microfounded macroe-
conomic models as a result of differences in country size, trade centrality, or endowments of commodities.
  32
     The model considered here corresponds to the setup in section 4.1 of Lustig et al. (2011). In Appendix
C.11 we show the same results for a more general version of the model where we drop this assumption and
also allow for variation over time in a country’s exposure to a second global shock as in Lustig et al. (2014).
Moreover, we obtain identical results when we add the inflation process specified in the extended version of
the model in Lustig et al. (2011) and solve for elasticities of expected real (rather than nominal) returns.


                                                      26
that of other currencies, so that there is a tight link between β dyn and β dol : both coefficients
depend on the same parameters and are larger than one if and only if χ > 0. As a result,
the model cannot, for example, simultaneously match the point estimates for both coefficients
in column 1 of Table 3. In the model, the only difference between the two coefficients is
the addition of σ 2δ in the numerator and the denominator of β dyn , reflecting that time-series
variation ztw yields and additional motive for re-weighting currencies as higher and lower global
risk expands and contracts the size of permanent interest rate differentials.
    To break the tight link between these two coefficients, and to reflect the dominant role of
the dollar trade in generating the FPP, the model would therefore also have to allow for some
kind of asymmetry between the dollar and other currencies, for example by introducing an
additional state variable or assigning different parameters.
   Finally, the model also naturally implies that β dynFE > β
                                                                  dyn
                                                                      and β Ff pp
                                                                               E > β
                                                                                     f pp
                                                                                          , because
investors do not have perfect foresight about f pi over a finite investment horizon:

                             e      1
                    f pi − f pi =     ((γ − 2χ)(z h − z i ) + (δ h − δ i ) (z w − z e )) .
                                    2

The difference between estimates of the elasticities of expected and realized returns can then
be used to discipline the size of forecast errors relative to the variance of forward premia over
time.


3.3     Is the US Dollar Special?
The important role of β dol in accounting for both the dollar trade and the FPP suggests that
the returns on the dollar might behave differently from the returns to other currencies. To
address this question it is useful to first generalize our model of currency returns to allow for
heterogeneous elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward premia across currencies.

3.3.1    Allowing for Heterogeneous Elasticities Across Currencies

Consider a generalized version of (9)
                                                            h                         e          e
                                                                                                       i
      rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx) =    αdyn
                                         i     +   β idyn       f pjt − f pt −       f pj   − fp            + ˜dyn
                                                                                                                i,t+1 ,   (21)

where β dyn
        i   can now differ across currencies. In combination with (7) and (10), this specification
implies a generalized version of our model of currency returns, nesting ( 11) and (12):
                     e        e
                                       h              e         e
                                                                     i                  e
                                                                                            
rxi,t+1 = γ + β stat f pi − f p + β idyn f pjt − f pt − f pj − f p      + β dol f pt − f p +˜i,t+1 ,
                                                                                               (22)


                                                       27
where ˜i,t+1 = αidyn + stat
                         i
                                  dyn
                              + ˜i,t+1 + dol
                                           t . Following the same steps as the proof of Proposition 1
we can again show that currency-specific coefficients β idyn are measures of the elasticity of the
risk premium on currency i with respect to deviations of currency i’s forward premium from
its currency- and time-specific mean. In addition, Appendix C.12 shows we can re-write the
decomposition in (8) as
                                                           P
                                                               (rxi,t+1 f pit )
                                                               i,t
                                                                  =
    stat P
                e            
                             e 2   X dyn X                                  2               dol P
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                      e 2
                                                                                     dyn
 β̂        i,t   f p i − f p     +     β̂ i   f p it − f p t −  f p i − f p     + α̂     + β̂       i,t   f p t − f p     + α̂dol − α̂dol .
 |              {z             }     i      t                                              |                   {z               }
          Static Trade             |                      {z                           }                Dollar Trade
                                                      Dynamic Trade
                                                                                                                                 (23)

    From comparing equations (8) and (23), it follows immediately that

          dyn   P                    e         e
                                                   2 P dyn P                             2
     β̂          i,t   f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      = i β̂ i t f pit − f pt − f pi − f p     ,                                (24)

so that models (11) and (22) predict identical expected returns on the static, dynamic, dollar,
carry, and forward premium trades. In other words, allowing for heterogeneous elasticities
of risk premia with respect to forward premia across currencies does not change the model’s
ability to account for the returns on these trading strategies or the FPP. Instead, the purpose
of extending the model in this way is merely to detect whether the dynamic behavior of specific
currencies is significantly different from that of others.
    Table 6 shows estimates of (21). To save space, we show only the coefficients using one-
month forwards, without taking into account bid-ask spreads. The table shows we cannot
reject the null that β idyn = 0 for most currencies. In fact, looking across columns, we do
not appear to robustly reject this null for any currency, with the possible exception of the
Indian rupee, the Austrian schilling, and the Belgian franc. Although we remain open to the
possibility that risk premia of these, and potentially a few other, currencies may co-move with
deviations of forward premia from their time- and currency specific mean, the evidence does
not appear overwhelming.

3.3.2       Changing the Base Currency

What do these results imply about the role of the US dollar? Throughout the paper, we account
for returns in terms of US dollars. Asking whether the dollar is special is thus equivalent to
asking whether our results would be significantly different if we had chosen a different base
currency. Given a large enough sample of currencies, our estimates of the returns on the static
and the dynamic trades, as well as our estimates of β stat and β dyn , would not change at all, as
both strategies are neutral with respect to the base currency—implying that their returns are

                                                                     28
not affected by the choice of base currency. However, our estimates of β dol might be different,
because the dollar trade is not neutral with respect to the returns on the dollar. 33
   We now generalize our analysis to allow for an arbitrary choice of base currency. To this end,
denote the elasticity of risk premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-time dimension
from the perspective of an investor using currency i as base currency as β i , i = dol, aus, ..., yen.

Proposition 3 In the limit in which the number of currencies tends to infinity (N → ∞),
the elasticity of the risk premium on any base currency j with respect to the average forward
premium on all other foreign currencies equals the elasticity of currency i’s risk premium
against the US dollar with respect to deviations of its forward premium against the US dollar
from its time- and currency-specific mean,

                                                  β i = β dyn
                                                          i .


Proof. See Appendix C.14

    If the number of currencies is large, the coefficients in Table 6 are thus identical to the
coefficients we would estimate on the “base currency trade” (i.e., the equivalent of the dollar
trade but using currency i as the base currency) of each of the other currencies in the sample.
For example, had we chosen to account for all returns in terms of Japanese yen, our estimates
of β stat and β dyn would (in a large sample of currencies) be identical to those in Table 3, but
our estimate of β yen would be equal to β dynyen = 0.55 in column 1 of Table 6.
    One can show that the elasticity of realized returns in the between-time-and-currency
dimension, β dyn                                   dyn 34
              F E , is a weighted average of the β i .    Thus, the null hypothesis that β dol = β dyn
                                                                                                   FE
provides a test of whether the elasticity of the risk premium on the US dollar is significantly
different from elasticity of the average currency in the sample. Table 7 shows we cannot reject
this hypothesis in any of our samples (with a p-value of 0.17 in our 1 Rebalance sample). 35
    However, given our results regarding the prominent role of the dollar trade as a driver of
the FPP in Tables 3 and 5 , our overall results are at least consistent with the notion that
the risk-premium on the US dollar might have dynamics that are systematically different from
those of other countries. 36 Indeed, Table 6 suggests that this property may be shared with a
small number of other currencies.
  33
       See Appendix C.13 for a formal proof of these statements.
  34
       To see this, substitute the (sample equivalent) of (15) into the left hand side of (24) and simplify to get
   dyn    P       dyn              P                          2 P P                             2
β̂ F E = i ω i β̂ i , where ω i = t f pit − f pt − f pi − f p     / i t f pit − f pt − f pi − f p .
    35
       When we restrict our sample of currencies in the 1 Rebalance sample to only developed economies as in
Appendix Table 5, column 3, the p-value on the same test drops to 0.09, and it drops to 0.11 if we adjust for
inflation (as in column 4 of Appendix Table 5).
    36
        For other evidence on the special role of the US dollar, see, for example, Gourinchas and Rey (2007),
Lustig et al. (2014), and Maggiori (2017).


                                                       29
3.4     The Currency-specific FPP
Before concluding, we revisit the FPP in the way it is traditionally framed in the literature and
discuss how its conventional interpretation should be modified in light of our analysis. Many
papers on international currency returns feature a table showing a list of estimates of β fi pp from
Fama’s bilateral regression (1). Table 8 replicates this list using our data. Consistent with the
literature, the coefficients β if pp exhibit wide variation. Some are significantly positive, others
are significantly negative, most are statistically indistinguishable from zero, but the average
across point estimate is above one.
   We have argued that this fact should not be taken as evidence that β f pp > 1. That is, it
does not mean that a representative currency has an elasticity of risk premia with respect to
forward premia above one or that investors in general expect high-interest-rate currencies to
appreciate. The reason is that a weighted average of β if pp yields β fFpp
                                                                        E but not β
                                                                                    f pp
                                                                                         ,

                              X 1  var (f pit )
                                  P 1 i                β if pp = β fFpp
                                                                     E > β
                                                                           f pp
                                                                                .                       (25)
                              i
                                N  i N
                                       var i (f p it )

(See Appendix C.15 for a formal proof.) 37 Mentally averaging across currency-specific estimates
in Table 8 thus yields a consistent estimate of the elasticity of realized but not expected
returns, and is thus by itself not useful to discipline the dynamics of risk premia. In this sense,
tables like our Table 8 make the FPP look worse than it is, because they do not correct for
investors’ information sets. Once we make reasonable corrections for what investors know, we
consistently obtain point estimates for β f pp that are smaller than one, calling into question
the usual interpretation of the FPP that requires a negative covariance between currency risk
premia and forward premia.

   That said, our interpretation of these results is predicated on using data from multiple
countries to learn about the stochastic properties of a representative currency’s risk premium.
If instead we were interested in modeling the dynamics of each individual currency’s risk
premium, respecting for example the fact that the risk premium on the Danish crown may have
systematically different dynamics than the Japanese yen, we may reinterpret the coefficients in
Table 8 as country-by-country results: because (1) includes a currency-specific intercept that
                                            e
absorbs any expectational errors, f pi − f pi , we can rewrite (1) as
                                                                             e
                                                                                  
                            rxi,t+1 − rxi = αi +   β fi pp       f pit −   f pi           f pp
                                                                                      + ˜i,t+1 ,       (26)

                        e
where αi = β fi pp (f pi − f pi ). Following the logic in proposition 1, we may interpret the
   In keeping with our notational convention, vari (f pit ) refers to the variance for a given currency i, as
  37

opposed to var(f pit ), which refers to the corresponding variance across i and t.


                                                     30
coefficients β if pp as consistent estimates of the currency-specific elasticity of risk premia with
respect to forward premia corresponding to the model:
                                 e        e
                                                               e
                                                                   
           rxi,t+1 − rx = β stat f pi − f p + β if pp f pit − f pi + αi + stat
                                                                           i
                                                                                    f pp
                                                                                + ˜i,t+1 .       (27)

    However, this interpretation seems somewhat unappealing for three reasons: The first is
its sheer complexity. For example, such a model would have to explain why the elasticities
of Kuwait and South Africa have opposing signs and why Canada has a significantly larger
elasticity than Japan, but about the same elasticity as Denmark. The second reason is that
the model (27) ignores that the base currency may itself have a risk premium that fluctuates
over time (the dollar trade), thus confounding β dyn     i   and β dol . In this sense, the model (22),
while similarly complex, may be preferable because it features only one coefficient ( β dol ) rather
than N coefficients (all β if pp ) that are specific to the base-currency chosen for the analysis. In
fact, the results in Table 6 show substantially fewer significant coefficients than those in Table
8, demonstrating that estimates of β if pp tend to be particularly high on average when using
the dollar as base currency. Including β dol in the model (22) thus accounts for most of the
variation in currency risk premia that drives the FPP, consistent with our results above.
    Finally, skeptics might argue that any evidence on heterogeneity in the dynamic behavior
of risk premia across currencies would be more convincing if it were associated with a profitable
trading strategy. We have shown that heterogeneity in β if pp is not responsible for the carry
trade or any of the other well-known trading strategies we have considered. In fact, among the
large number of papers on the FPP, we are unaware of any systematic evidence of a strategy
that would generate excess returns based on the fact that β fi pp appears to be larger for some
currencies than for others. To probe this possibility, we use pre-sample data to estimate β i f pp
        e
and f pi for each currency in our 1 Rebalance sample and calculate the Sharpe ratio of each
                                                                                           e
“bilateral forward premium trade,” where we weight each currency with f pit − f pi . Appendix
                                             f pp
Figure 1 plots the ex-ante estimates βˆ   i       over the Sharpe ratio for each currency. Consistent
with our prior findings, we find no relationship between the two. If anything, the slope shown
is negative, meaning that the “bilateral Forward Premium Trade” generates less attractive
                                           f pp
returns for currencies that have a high βˆi .


4     Conclusion
A large empirical literature studies the forward premium puzzle, the carry trade, the dollar
trade, and other violations of uncovered interest parity. However, the relationship between
these anomalies and their implications for theoretical work have often remained unclear because
some anomalies are identified in regression-based, others in portfolio-based analyses. As a

                                                  31
result, theoretical work often only loosely connects these anomalies, for example, by attributing
the (portfolio-based) carry trade anomaly to the (regression-based) forward premium puzzle.
In this paper, we introduced a decomposition of violations of uncovered interest parity into
a cross-currency, a between-time-and-currency, and a cross-time component. Subject to a
standard assumption on investor expectations, each component can be written as the expected
return to a trading strategy or as a function of a slope coefficient in a regression that measures
the elasticity of currency risk premia with respect to forward premia. This decomposition
allowed us to show analytically how regression- and portfolio-based facts relate to each other,
to test whether they are empirically distinct, and to estimate the joint restrictions they place
on models of currency returns and exchange rates.
    Our analysis produced four main insights. First, the cross-time component accounts for
all of the systematic variation driving the dollar trade anomaly and most of the variation
driving the forward premium puzzle. The two anomalies are thus intimately linked. By
contrast, the cross-currency component accounts for most of the systematic variation driving
the carry trade. Explaining the carry trade thus primarily requires explaining permanent or
highly persistent differences in interest rates across currencies that are partially, but not fully,
reversed by predictable movements in exchange rates. By contrast, explaining the forward
premium puzzle primarily requires explaining cross-time variation in the expected return on
the US dollar against all other currencies.
    Second, having translated all three anomalies into regression coefficients with standard
errors, we are able to estimate the joint restrictions they place on models of currency returns.
We find the simplest model that the data do not reject features positive elasticities of risk
premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-currency and cross-time dimensions, but
not necessarily in the between-time-and-currency dimension. The three anomalies are thus
best explained in a model with two kinds of asymmetries: a highly persistent asymmetry that
makes some currencies have persistently higher interest rates and returns than others, and
an asymmetry in the dynamic response of currency returns to variation in forward premia
between the US dollar and other currencies. We also never reject the hypothesis that all three
elasticities are smaller than one, such that high-interest-rate currencies need not systematically
appreciate in any of the three dimensions.
    Third, although the data seem to favor a special role of the US dollar, we (narrowly) cannot
reject the hypothesis that the elasticity of the risk premium on the US dollar is identical to
that of an average country. Nevertheless, the US dollar appears to be one of a small number
of currencies that pay significantly higher expected returns when their interest rates are high
relative to their currency-specific average and to the world average interest rate at the time.
   Fourth, the tight correspondence between portfolio returns and regression coefficients in
our decomposition reveals an important distinction between the elasticity of expected and

                                                32
realized returns, akin to the difference between mean returns on trading strategies that are
implementable, using only information available in real time, and trading strategies that rely on
hindsight. Standard quantifications of the forward premium puzzle, using a pooled regression
of currency returns on forward premia with currency fixed effects (or, equivalently, averaging
the coefficients from currency-by-currency regressions), condition on information only available
with hindsight, and are thus informative only about the dynamics of realized, but not expected
returns. Once we correct for this fact, the forward premium puzzle is significantly diminished—
to the point that it does not require a systematic association between currency risk premia
and expected depreciations, thus potentially resolving a long-standing puzzle in the theoretical
literature.
    In sum, we hope our results may help guide future theoretical work, having synthesized
and clarified the joint implications of three well-established anomalies in currency markets.
However, we stress that our synthesis between regression- and portfolio-based facts also has
natural limitations: it is confined to representing trading strategies in a linear form, it faces
well-known limitations when attempting to detect time-series variation in expected returns, and
our quantitative results may change if investors’ expectations of future mean forward premia are
significantly more precise than our simple forecasting models suggest. Nevertheless, we believe
the simplicity of our approach may prove useful for distilling the theoretical implications of
portfolio-based analysis in other areas of empirical asset pricing.


References
Alvarez, F., A. Atkeson, and P. J. Kehoe (2009). Time-varying risk, interest rates, and exchange
  rates in general equilibrium. Review of Economic Studies 76 (3), 851–878.
Bacchetta, P. and E. Van Wincoop (2010). Infrequent portfolio decisions: A solution to the
  forward discount puzzle. The American Economic Review 100 (3), 870–904.
Bacchetta, P., E. van Wincoop, and T. Beutler (2010). Can parameter instability explain the
  Meese-Rogoff puzzle? In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2009, NBER
  Chapters, pp. 125–173. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Backus, D. K., S. Foresi, and C. I. Telmer (2001). Affine term structure models and the forward
  premium anomaly. The Journal of Finance 56 (1), 279–304.
Backus, D. K., A. W. Gregory, and C. I. Telmer (1993). Accounting for forward rates in
  markets for foreign currency. Journal of Finance 48 (5), 1887–1908.
Bansal, R. (1997). An exploration of the forward premium puzzle in currency markets. Review
  of Financial Studies 10 (2), 369–403.
Bansal, R. and M. Dahlquist (2000). The forward premium puzzle: different tales from devel-
  oped and emerging economies. Journal of International Economics 51 (1), 115–144.

                                               33
Bansal, R. and I. Shaliastovich (2010). Confidence risk and asset prices. American Economic
  Review 100 (2), 537–41.

Bekaert, G. (1996). The time variation of risk and return in foreign exchange markets: A
  general equilibrium perspective. Review of Financial Studies 9 (2), 427–70.

Bekaert, G. and R. J. Hodrick (2008). Internatinal Financial Management. Pearson.

Berg, K. A. and N. C. Mark (2015). Third-country effects on the exchange rate. Journal of
  International Economics 96 (2), 227 – 243.

Bilson, J. F. O. (1981). The speculative efficiency hypothesis. The Journal of Business 54 (3),
  435–51.

Brunnermeier, M. K., S. Nagel, and L. H. Pedersen (2009). Carry trades and currency crashes.
  In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, Volume 23, NBER Chapters, pp. 313–347. National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleshchelski, and S. Rebelo (2006). The returns to currency
  speculation. NBER Working Papers 12489, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleshchelski, and S. Rebelo (2011). Do peso problems explain
  the returns to the carry trade? Review of Financial Studies 24 (3), 853–891.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009). Understanding the forward premium
  puzzle: A microstructure approach. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2),
  127–54.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011). Carry trade and momentum in currency
  markets. Annual Review of Financial Economics 3 (1), 511–535.

Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P.-O. Gourinchas (2008). An equilibrium model of ”global
  imbalances”; and low interest rates. American Economic Review 98 (1), 358–93.

Chinn, M. D. (2006). The (partial) rehabilitation of interest rate parity in the floating rate era:
  Longer horizons, alternative expectations, and emerging markets. Journal of International
  Money and Finance 25 (1), 7–21.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: discount rates. The Journal of finance 66 (4),
  1047–1108.

Colacito, R., M. Croce, S. Ho, and P. Howard (2017). Currency risk factors in a recursive
  multi-country economy. Journal of Finance, forthcoming (112).

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2011). Risks for the long run and the real exchange rate.
  Journal of Political Economy 119 (1), 153 – 181.

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2013). International Asset Pricing with Recursive Preferences.
  Journal of Finance 68 (6), 2651–2686.

                                                34
Corte, P. D., L. Sarno, and I. Tsiakas (2009). An economic evaluation of empirical exchange
  rate models. Review of Financial Studies 22 (9), 3491–3530.

Driscoll, J. and A. Kraay (1998). Consistent covariance matrix estimation with spatially
  dependent panel data. The Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (4), 549–560.

Engel, C. (1996). The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: A survey of recent
  evidence. Journal of Empirical Finance 3 (2), 123–192.

Engel, C. (2014). Chapter 8 - exchange rates and interest parity. In K. R. Elhanan Helpman
  and G. Gopinath (Eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 4 of Handbook of
  International Economics, pp. 453 – 522. Elsevier.

Engel, C. and K. D. West (2005). Exchange rates and fundamentals. Journal of Political
  Economy 113 (3), 485–517.

Evans, M. D. D. and K. K. Lewis (1995). Do long-term swings in the dollar affect estimates
  of the risk premia? Review of Financial Studies 8 (3), 709–42.

Evans, M. D. D. and R. K. Lyons (2006). Understanding order flow. International Journal of
  Finance & Economics 11 (1), 3–23.

Fama, E. F. (1984). Forward and spot exchange rates. Journal of Monetary Economics 14 (3),
  319–338.

Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix (2016). Rare disasters and exchange rates *. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 131 (1), 1–52.

Froot, K. A. and R. H. Thaler (1990). Anomalies: Foreign exchange. The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 179–192.

Gilmore, S. and F. Hayashi (2011). Emerging market currency excess returns. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3 (4), 85–111.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and H. Rey (2007). From world banker to world venture capitalist: U.s. ex-
 ternal adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. In G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustain-
 ability and Adjustment, NBER Chapters, pp. 11–66. National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and A. Tornell (2004). Exchange rate puzzles and distorted beliefs. Journal
 of International Economics 64 (2), 303–333.

Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan (2013). International risk cycles. Journal of Inter-
 national Economics 89 (2), 471–484.

Govillot, N., H. Rey, and P. Gourinchas (2010). Us external returns and the exorbitant duty.
 2010 Meeting Papers 371, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Graveline, J. J. (2006). Exchange rate volatility and the forward premium anomaly. Mimeo.



                                             35
Hansen, L. P. and R. J. Hodrick (1980). Forward exchange rates as optimal predictors of future
  spot rates: An econometric analysis. Journal of Political Economy 88 (5), 829–53.

Hassan, T. A. (2013). Country size, currency unions, and international asset returns. The
  Journal of Finance 68 (6), 2269–2308.

Hassan, T. A., T. M. Mertens, and T. Zhang (2016). Currency manipulation. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Heyerdahl-Larsen, C. (2014). Asset prices and real exchange rates with deep habits. Review
  of Financial Studies 27 (11), 3280–3317.

Hodrick, R. (1987). The empirical evidence on the efficiency of forward and futures foreign
 exchange markets, Volume 24. Harwood Academic Publishers.

Ilut, C. (2012). Ambiguity aversion: Implications for the uncovered interest rate parity puzzle.
   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3), 33–65.

Jurek, J. W. (2014). Crash-neutral currency carry trades.           Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 113 (3), 325–347.

Koijen, R. S., T. J. Moskowitz, L. H. Pedersen, and E. B. Vrugt (2018). Carry. Journal of
 Financial Economics 127 (2), 197 – 225.

Lewis, K. K. (2011). Global asset pricing. Annual Review of Financial Economics 3 (17261),
  435 – 466.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011). Common risk factors in currency markets.
  Review of Financial Studies 24 (11), 3731–3777.

Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2014). Countercyclical currency risk premia.
  Journal of Financial Economics 111 (3), 527–553.

Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and
  consumption growth risk. American Economic Review 97 (1), 89–117.

Lyons, R. K. (2001). The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates. MIT Press.

Maggiori, M. (2017, October). Financial intermediation, international risk sharing, and reserve
 currencies. American Economic Review 107 (10), 3038–71.

Martin, I. (2012). The forward premium puzzle in a two-country world. Mimeo.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff (1983). The out-of-sample failure of empirical exchange rate models:
 Sampling error or misspecification? In Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics,
 NBER Chapters, pp. 67–112. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2012). Carry trades and global foreign
 exchange volatility. Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681–718.



                                              36
Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2017). Currency value. The Review
 of Financial Studies 30 (2), 416–441.

Moon, S. and C. Velasco (2017). Do foreign excess return regressions convey valid information?
 Revista de Economá Aplicada 25 (73), 5–19.

Murphy, K. M. and R. H. Topel (1985). Estimation and inference in two-step econometric
 models. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 3 (4), 370–79.

Newey, W. K. and K. D. West (1987). Hypothesis testing with efficient method of moments
  estimation. International Economic Review 28, 777–787.

Pedersen, L. H. (2015). Efficiently inefficient: how smart money invests and market prices are
  determined. Princeton University Press.

Ready, R., N. Roussanov, and C. Ward (2017). Commodity trade and the carry trade: A tale
  of two countries. The Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2629–2684.

Richmond, R. (2016). Trade network centrality and currency risk premia. Mimeo, NYU
  Department of Finance.

Sarno, L. and M. Schmeling (2014). Which fundamentals drive exchange rates? a cross-
  sectional perspective. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 46 (2-3), 267–292.

Sarno, L., P. Schneider, and C. Wagner (2012). Properties of foreign exchange risk premiums.
  Journal of Financial Economics 105 (2), 279–310.

Stambaugh, R. F. (1999). Predictive regressions. Journal of Financial Economics 54 (3),
  375–421.

Tyron, R. (1979). Testing for rational expectations in foreign exchange markets. International
  Finance Discussion Papers 139.

Verdelhan, A. (2010). A habit-based explanation of the exchange rate risk premium. Journal
  of Finance 65 (1), 123–146.

Wiriadinata, U. (2018). External debt, currency risk, and international monetary policy trans-
 mission.

Yu, J. (2013). A sentiment-based explanation of the forward premium puzzle. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 60 (4), 474–491.

Zhang, T. (2018). Monetary policy spillovers through invoicing currencies.




                                              37
                                                                          New Zealand
                                                                                             LONG
                      ALWAYS LONG                               LONG            LONG

                      New Zealand
                                                                                    SHORT
                                                                     SHORT




                                                                              Japan

                                                                                LONG            LONG
                          Japan

                    ALWAYS SHORT
                                                                 SHORT           SHORT




Figure 1: Carry Trade vs. Forward Premium Trade
Forward premia of the New Zealand dollar and Japanese yen against the US dollar 1995-2010. Left panel:
Carry Trade uses f pit −f pt as portfolio weights, always long the New Zealand dollar, always short the Japanese
yen; Right panel: Forward Premium Trade uses f pit − f pi as portfolio weights, goes long when a currency’s
forward premium exceeds its currency-specific mean. The plot cumulates monthly forward premia to the annual
                                 P12
frequency according to f pi,t = m=1 f pi,t+m .
                                 Dynamic Trade                                              Forward Premium Trade
              2




                                                                                2
                                                                                          Fixed Effects
              1.6




                                                                                1.6
              1.2




                                                                                1.2
                        Fixed Effects

          β
           dyn
                                                                            β
                                                                             fpp                     Unrestricted ρi,1, ρ2
                                                                                                     pre-sample mean
              .8




                                                                                .8
                                   Unrestricted ρi,1, ρ2
                                    pre-sample mean
              .4




                                                                                .4


                                                                                                                         ρi,1 = ρ1, ρ2 = 0

                                                   ρi,1 = ρ1, ρ2 = 0
              0




                                                                                0




                    0        1      2        3        4        5                      0           1            2               3
                                   V ar (f pi −f pi )                                             V ar (f pi −f pi )
                                                  e                                                              e

                            V ar (f pi,t −f pt −(f pi −f p))                                      V ar (f pi,t −f pi )

Figure 2: Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia
Estimates of β dyn and β dol as a function of the estimate of β dyn            dol
                                                                     F E and β F E from column 1 of Table 4 and
                                                    e
the variance of the forecast error var(f pi − f pi ) as given in equations (15) and (16). Rhomboids mark the
estimates from our standard specification in column 1 of Table 3. Circles mark the point estimates we obtain
from estimating equation (18) over the pre-sample and then calculating the implied variance of the forecast error
in a sample with length T = 186, months under the assumption that the estimated autocorrelation coefficients
{ρ1,i } and ρ2 , and the standard deviations of fit characterize the true process governing the evolution of f pit .
Triangles mark results of the same calculation when imposing ρ1,i = ρ1 for all currencies. Minor discrepancies
between the estimate shown and the one implied by the function are due to small departures from a fully
balanced sample due to our data-cleaning algorithm. Standard error bands show the 95% confidence interval.




                                                                       39
Figure 3: Summary of Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with Respect to
Forward Premia across Samples
The figure plots all estimates and 95% confidence intervals of β stat , β dyn , and β dol from Table 3. Small squares
show point estimates, and large squares identify the median estimate for each elasticity across samples/horizons.
The right-hand-side axis summarizes the implications of the estimates for linear models of currency risk premia.
Appendix Figure 2 shows the same overview for β f pp and β ct .




                        Table 1: Mean Annualized Return to the Carry Trade

                                           P                       
                       Carry Trade return, i,t rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt                   4.95
                           of which forward premium                                  7.11
                           of which appreciation                                     -2.15
                       Sharpe Ratio                                                   0.54
                       Note: Mean annualized return and Sharpe Ratio of the carry trade
                       calculated by standardizing the expression in (2) with the uncon-
                       ditional mean forward premium in the sample, f p. The second and
                       third lines give the part of the mean annualized
                                                                 P  carry trade return
                                                                                      
                       attributable to the forward premium ( i,t f pit f pit − f pt )
                                           P                            
                       and appreciation( i,t (sit − si,t+1 ) f pit − f pt ), respectively.
                       One-month forward and spot exchange rates from the 1 Rebal-
                       ance sample ranging from 12/1994 to 6/2010.




                                                         40
                            Table 2: Mean Returns on Five Trading Strategies


                                                         (1)       (2)   (3)           (4)           (5)     (6)   (7)            (8)
Sample                                                            1 Rebalance                               3 Rebalance
Horizon (months)                                          1         1     6             12            1       1     6             12

Static Trade
    P                  e       e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi − f p )]                       3.46        1.36    3.58      3.82          3.09     0.33      2.55      2.53
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.39        0.15    0.32      0.32          0.37     0.04      0.24      0.22
Dynamic Trade
    P                                   e      e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt − (f pi − f p ))]     1.50      -0.24     0.33      1.20          1.42     -0.85     -0.12     0.45
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.24      -0.04     0.05      0.19          0.20     -0.12     -0.02     0.07
Dollar Trade
    P                          e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pt − f p )]                       2.55        1.24    2.52      3.18          1.90     0.26      2.20      2.36
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.25        0.12    0.26      0.27          0.15     0.02      0.17      0.18

Carry Trade
   P
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt )]                     4.95      2.81      4.25      5.24         4.50      1.99      2.95      3.35
    Sharpe Ratio                                        0.54      0.31      0.34      0.44         0.54      0.23      0.26      0.29
              % Static Trade                            70%      121%       92%       76%          69%         .      105%       85%

Forward Premium Trade
   P                           e
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pi )]                     4.04      1.77      3.03      4.51         3.31      0.28      2.26      2.94
    Sharpe Ratio                                        0.27      0.12      0.20      0.27         0.18      0.02      0.12      0.16
              % Dollar Trade                            63%      124%       88%       73%          57%         .      106%       84%

Sample                                                            6 Rebalance                               12 Rebalance

Static Trade
    P                          e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi − f p )]                       2.42      -0.38     1.96      1.96          3.81     0.22      2.92      2.87
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.29      -0.05     0.20      0.21          0.46     0.03      0.30      0.29
Dynamic Trade
    P                                   e      e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt − (f pi − f p ))]     1.85      -0.48     0.34      -0.08         1.65     -0.89     0.41      0.19
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.26      -0.05     0.04      -0.00         0.26     -0.14     0.06      0.01
Dollar Trade
    P                          e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pt − f p )]                       2.09        0.23    2.39      3.64          1.88     -0.18     1.15      2.13
     Sharpe Ratio                                       0.16        0.02    0.18      0.19          0.14     -0.01     0.09      0.13

Carry Trade
   P
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt )]                     4.28        1.66    2.81      2.23         5.45      2.19      3.95      3.45
    Sharpe Ratio                                        0.50        0.19    0.25      0.12         0.69      0.28      0.40      0.22
              % Static Trade                            57%           .     85%      104%          70%         .       88%       94%
FP Trade
   P                           e
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pi )]                     3.95        0.74    2.92      3.71         3.53      -0.01     1.78      2.44
    Sharpe Ratio                                        0.21        0.04    0.15      0.17         0.20      -0.00     0.10      0.12
              % Dollar Trade                            53%           .     88%      102%          53%         .       74%       92%

Bid-Ask Spreads                                          No         Yes      Yes       Yes           No      Yes       Yes       Yes
Note: Mean returns and Sharpe ratios on the Static, Dynamic, Dollar, Carry, and Forward Premium Trades defined in equations
(2), (5), and (6) calculated using 1-, 6-, and 12-month currency forward contracts against the US dollar. All returns are annualized
and divided by f p estimated in the 1 Rebalance sample post 12/1994 to facilitate comparison. The table also reports the percentage
contribution of Static (Dollar) Trade to the mean returns on the Carry (Forward Premium) Trade, calculated by dividing
                                                                                                                   P        its mean
return by the maximum of zero and the sum of the mean returns on the Static (Dollar) and Dynamic Trades.              i,t denotes the
double-sum over i and t. See Appendix A for details.

                                                               41
     Table 3: Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with respect to Forward Premia


                                       (1)         (2)     (3)                (4)             (5)         (6)     (7)                (8)
Sample                                             1 Rebalance                                            3 Rebalance
Horizon (months)                        1           1       6                 12               1           1       6                 12

Static T: β stat                    0.47***      0.37***      0.56***      0.60***         0.26***      0.18***      0.26***      0.25***
                                     (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.10)       (0.10)          (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.06)
Dynamic T: β dyn                     0.44*        0.41*         0.36       0.53**           0.28*         0.24         0.21        0.26*
                                     (0.25)       (0.25)       (0.32)       (0.26)          (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.15)       (0.15)
Dollar T: β dol                      3.11*        3.09*         3.21        3.72*            0.91         0.83         1.44         1.78
                                     (1.60)       (1.58)       (1.96)       (2.16)          (1.18)       (1.18)       (1.22)       (1.20)

Carry Trade: β ct                    0.68**       0.55**       0.62**      0.71***         0.57***       0.45**       0.42**      0.43**
                                     (0.27)       (0.26)       (0.29)       (0.26)          (0.19)       (0.18)       (0.21)      (0.19)
% ESS Static T                         62           54           79           66              56           44           72          62

Forward Premium T: β f pp            0.86**       0.83**       0.85**      1.09***          0.41**       0.37*        0.48**      0.60***
                                     (0.34)       (0.34)       (0.42)       (0.40)          (0.20)       (0.20)       (0.21)       (0.21)
% ESS Dollar T                         90           91           94           91              75           76           93           93

N                                     2706         2706         2631         2541            4494         4494         4374         4230

Sample                                             6 Rebalance                                            12 Rebalance

Static T: β stat                    0.23***      0.15***      0.25***      0.24***         0.34***      0.23***      0.31***      0.30***
                                     (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.05)          (0.08)       (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.08)
Dynamic T: β dyn                      0.19         0.16         0.10         -0.02           0.16         0.13         0.06         -0.01
                                     (0.14)       (0.14)       (0.12)       (0.06)          (0.11)       (0.12)       (0.09)       (0.05)
Dollar T: β dol                       0.87         0.75         1.83       1.56**            1.71         1.61         0.02         -0.23
                                     (2.59)       (2.60)       (2.14)       (0.70)          (2.26)       (2.27)       (2.04)       (1.35)

Carry Trade: β ct                   0.56***      0.45***       0.45**        0.11          0.67***      0.52***      0.57***        0.22
                                     (0.18)       (0.17)       (0.19)       (0.14)          (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.17)
% ESS Static T                         70           58           92           99              90           86           99          100

Forward Premium T: β f pp             0.24         0.20         0.22         0.08           0.30*        0.26*         0.05         -0.03
                                     (0.19)       (0.19)       (0.17)       (0.08)          (0.16)       (0.16)       (0.14)       (0.05)
% ESS Dollar T                         62           64           96          100              92           94            1           95

N                                     4842         4842         4712         4556            6019         6019         5874         5626

Bid-Ask Spreads                        No           Yes         Yes          Yes              No          Yes          Yes          Yes
                                                                                                                     stat
Note: Estimates of the elasticity of currency risk premia with respect to forward premia in the cross-currency ( β        ), between-time-
and-currency (β dyn ), and cross-time dimension (β dol ) using specifications (7), (9), and (10), respectively. The table also shows
                                                                                                             d
the slope coefficients from specifications (14) and (13) and the partial R2 , calculated as ESS dESS     +ESS dyn
                                                                                                                   , d ∈ {stat, dol}, where
ESS  dyn  refers to the explained sum of squares in specification (9) and ESS      stat , ESS dol refer to the explained sum of squares in
specifications (7) and (10), respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors for β stat and β dol are clustered by
currency and time, respectively, whereas the standard errors for β dyn , β ct , and β f pp are Newey-West with 12, 18, and 24 lags for the
1-, 6-, and 12-month horizons, respectively. Additionally, β dol is also adjusted at the 6-, and 12-month horizon using Newey-West
as per Driscoll and Kraay (1998). Where appropriate, we use the Murphy and Topel (1985) procedure to adjust all standard errors
                                 e        e
for the estimated regressors f pi and f p (see Appendix C.4 for details). Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5
(**) and 10% (*) level.


                                                                 42
                    Table 4: Elasticities of Realized vs. Expected Returns


                      (1)     (2)          (3)     (4)              (5)     (6)          (7)     (8)
Sample                1 Rebalance          3 Rebalance              6 Rebalance         12 Rebalance

                      β stat
                        FE      β stat     β stat
                                             FE           β stat    β stat
                                                                      FE      β stat    β stat
                                                                                          FE       β stat

Static Trade        0.53***    0.47***    0.43***        0.26***   0.50***   0.23***   0.65***    0.34***
                     (0.13)     (0.08)     (0.09)         (0.05)    (0.11)    (0.05)    (0.12)     (0.08)

                      β dyn
                        FE      β dyn      β dyn
                                             FE           β dyn     β Fdyn
                                                                        E     β dyn     β Fdyn
                                                                                            E      β dyn

Dynamic Trade       1.13**      0.44*     0.83***        0.28*     0.71**     0.19     0.74**      0.16
                    (0.45)      (0.25)     (0.32)        (0.15)    (0.34)    (0.14)    (0.33)     (0.11)

                      β fFpp
                          E      β f pp    β fFpp
                                               E          β f pp    β fFpp
                                                                        E     β f pp    β Ff pp
                                                                                             E     β f pp

F.P. Trade          1.81***    0.86**     0.89***        0.41**    0.77*      0.24     1.04***    0.30*
                     (0.53)    (0.34)      (0.32)        (0.20)    (0.41)    (0.19)     (0.37)    (0.16)

                      FE                    FE                       FE                  FE

% ESS Static T         39         62        36             56        79        70        79         90

% ESS Dollar T         80         90        51             75        71        62        71         92

Note: This table compares estimates of the elasticity of realized returns with respect to forward
                   dyn         f pp
premia, β stat
           F E , β F E , and β F E (the slope coefficients from regressions with currency fixed effects
corresponding to (7), (9), and (13)) with estimates of the elasticity of risk premia with respect
to forward premia from columns 1 and 5 in Table 3. All specifications use one-month forwards
and exclude bid-ask spreads. The columns marked F E in the bottom panel of the table show
the partial R2 of the static trade in the carry trade regression and the partial R2 of the dollar
                                                                           d
trade in the forward premium trade regression calculated as ESS dESS    +ESS dyn
                                                                                 , d ∈ {stat, dol}, where
     stat              dyn
ESS       and ESS          refer to the explained sum of squares in the equivalent of specifications
(7) and (9) estimated using currency fixed effects and ESS dol refers to the explained sum of
squares in specification (10). The unlabeled columns show the partial R2 calculated using the
corresponding specifications without currency fixed effects from columns 1 and 5 of Table 3 for
comparison. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5 (**) and 10% (*) level.




                                                    43
            Table 5: χ2 Difference Tests


                        (1)           (2)
Sample              1 Rebalance 3 Rebalance
Null Hypothesis              p-values

β dyn = 0                0.16               0.30
β dol = 0                0.02               0.04
β dol = β dyn            0.11               0.15

Note: χ2 difference tests of the ability of restricted
linear models of currency returns to explain the re-
turns on the forward premium trade documented
in columns 1 and 5 of Table 2. p − values are cal-
culated under the assumption that the coefficient
estimates of of β f pp , β dyn , and β dol in columns 1
and 5 of Table 3 are normally distributed. See
Appendix C.10 for details.




                          44
Table 6: Currency-specific Elasticities of Risk Premia with Respect to Forward Premia


                            (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
    Sample              1 Rebalance       3 Rebalance       6 Rebalance       12 Rebalance

    Australia                 1.03             0.23             -0.26               -0.33
    Austria                                                    4.29***            4.40***
    Belgium                                   2.59**           2.95**            3.79***
    Canada                    1.20              1.45             1.31                2.84
    Czech Rep.                                 -0.76             2.68            7.30***
    Denmark                   1.91              0.69             0.56                0.33
    ECU                                                         -0.50            -1.25***
    Euro                                       2.75              4.29                2.04
    France                                     0.90              0.82                0.15
    Germany                                    2.08              2.16              3.64*
    Hong Kong                 1.66             1.12              0.20                0.62
    Hungary                                   6.06**            8.69*             6.27***
    Iceland                                                                       -5.93**
    India                                     3.66***          3.44***            3.59***
    Indonesia                                                                     2.67***
    Ireland                                                       1.24             1.18**
    Italy                                      -1.31             -1.43              -0.27
    Japan                     0.55             0.80              -0.72              -0.27
    Korea                                                        -1.76              -1.05
    Kuwait                    1.33              1.59              0.44               0.96
    Malaysia                 -1.64             -2.44             -2.17            -2.46**
    Mexico                                      0.91              0.76               1.96
    Netherlands                                2.39*              2.50             3.88*
    New Zealand              -0.84             -0.19             -1.77              -2.09
    Norway                    0.55             -0.69             -0.84              -0.95
    Philippines                                1.03              0.25                1.00
    Poland                                     -3.08             -1.61            5.43***
    Saudi Arabia             2.72*             2.40               1.40            3.43**
    Sweden                  3.08***            -0.09              0.16               0.18
    Singapore                1.25*              0.09              0.27               0.11
    Slovak Rep.                                                                  21.76***
    Spain                                                        1.61             -2.22**
    Switzerland               1.59             2.90              3.03              4.50*
    Taiwan                                     0.70              1.00                0.07
    Thailand                                   1.55             1.63*              1.75*
    Turkey                                                      -0.27                2.18
    UAE                                         1.21           3.77***             3.21**
    United Kingdom           2.86             2.52***          2.83**               -0.58
    South Africa            2.34**             2.27**          2.95***               0.92

    Note: Currency-specific elasticities of risk premia with respect to forward premia,
    β idyn , estimated using (21). Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5
    (**) and 10% (*) level. Standard errors (not shown) are Newey-West using 12 lags.
    1-month forward contracts used throughout.
                                                45
                                         Table 7: Is the US Dollar Special?


                                            (1)            (2)             (3)                  (4)
Sample                                  1 Rebalance    3 Rebalance     6 Rebalance         12 Rebalance

β dol                                       3.11*           0.91               0.87              1.71
                                           (1.60)          (1.18)             (2.59)            (2.26)
          P
β Fdyn
    E =       i   ω i β idyn               1.13**         0.83***             0.71**            0.74**
                                           (0.45)          (0.32)             (0.34)            (0.33)
                    P
p-val(β dol =           i   ω i β dyn
                                  i )       0.17              0.96             0.95               0.65

Note: This table compares point estimates of β dol from columns 1 and 5 of Table 3 with
the weighted average of estimates of β idyn from columns 1-4 of Table 6. One can show
                                          P
      P                                      t (f pit −f pt −(f pi −f p))
                                                                           2

that i ω i β idyn = β Fdyn
                        E  , where ω i = P   P                               2 . To obtain the p-value of the
                                                t (f pit −f pt −(f pi −f p))
             P                             i

test β dol = i ω i β dyn
                     i , we run a bivariate panel regression of rxit − rxi on both f pt − f p
and f pit − f pt − (f pi − f p)), and test if the two resulting coefficients (β dol and β Fdyn        E ) are
equal. Standard errors are clustered by time. There is a small discrepancy between β dol
estimated from this multivariate regression and the the estimates shown in the first row of
this table due to few data exclusions resulting from our data-filtering procedure. Asterisks
denote statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5 (**) and 10% (*) level. See Appendix A
for details.




                                                         46
         Table 8: Traditional Bilateral Forward Premium Puzzle Regressions


                         (1)                (2)               (3)                    (4)
Sample               1 Rebalance        3 Rebalance       6 Rebalance           12 Rebalance

Australia                 3.25*             2.15*               2.06                    1.86
Austria                                                       6.27***                   0.09
Belgium                                                         3.03                   3.99*
Canada                   4.36***           2.31***            4.47***                4.73***
Czech Rep.                                  -3.60*             -5.50                5.28***
Denmark                  4.43***             1.13               0.96                    1.45
ECU                                                             1.49                -4.10***
Euro                                                            3.63                   4.38*
France                                                          0.73                    0.34
Germany                                                         1.90                    3.33
Hong Kong                1.05***           1.03***            1.06***               1.14***
Hungary                                      2.34               8.04                 7.40***
Iceland                                                                                 0.42
Indonesia                                                                             3.97**
Ireland                                                        4.26*                  1.86**
Italy                                                          -2.09                  -2.59*
Japan                    2.55***           2.88***              3.32                    2.03
Korea                                                          -2.45                   -2.52
Kuwait                  -1.94***           -2.08***          -2.00***                -1.78**
Malaysia                 -1.96**             -1.72            -2.61*                   -1.10
Mexico                                       -0.73             -0.37                    2.01
Netherlands                                                     2.00                    1.84
New Zealand                1.10              1.26              -2.06                   -1.58
Norway                     1.89              -0.12             -1.07                   -0.88
Philippines                                  0.85              3.51                    2.77
Poland                                     -5.99***           -5.80*                   3.40*
Saudi Arabia             1.36***           1.46***           1.47***                1.58***
Sweden                    3.37**              0.02             -0.75                   -1.25
Singapore                  0.74              1.31*              1.13                2.66***
Slovak Rep.                                                                         11.47***
Spain                                                         5.42***                 -3.42*
Switzerland              3.59**             2.37**              3.57                4.58***
Taiwan                                       -0.05             -0.05                    0.55
Thailand                                     0.96               1.07                  2.26**
Turkey                                                         -0.99                   -0.82
UAE                                        1.15***            1.15***                1.19***
United Kingdom           2.66*               0.63               0.88                   0.06
South Africa             2.43**             2.44*             2.65**                    1.33

 f pp
βF E                     1.81***           0.89***             0.77*                1.04***

β f pp                   0.86**             0.41**              0.24                  0.30*

Note: Estimates of the currency-specific elasticity of risk premia with forward premia β fi pp
using the specification rxi,t+1 = αi + β fi pp f pit +it . Standard errors (not shown) are Newey-
West using 12 lags. 1-month forward contracts used throughout. The table also reproduces
                                                      f pp       f pp
for comparison the corresponding estimates of β F       E and β       as in Table 4. Asterisks denote
statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5 (**) and 10% (*) level.


                                                 47
                           Online Appendix
                                               to

             “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates in a
                           Multi-Currency World”
                                              by

                          Tarek A. Hassan and Rui C. Mano


A Appendix to Section 1                                                                                                       1
  A.1 Interest Rate Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    2
  A.2 Spot and Forward Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                      2

B Appendix to Section 2                                                                                                       4
  B.1 The Carry Trade is neutral with respect to the US dollar . . . . . . . . . . . .                                        5

C Appendix to Section 3                                                                                                        5
  C.1 Detailed derivation of (8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    5
  C.2 Structure of Error Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    6
  C.3 Generalized Model: Overlapping Investment Periods           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    9
  C.4 Choice of Standard Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   12
  C.5 Details on the coefficients β ct and β f pp . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   13
  C.6 Possibility of Stambaugh Bias . . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   15
  C.7 Detailed proof of Proposition 2 . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   16
  C.8 Proof of Corollary 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   18
  C.9 Deriving the “Fama Conditions” . . . . . . . . . . .        .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   19
  C.10 Details on χ2 difference tests . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   21
  C.11 Generalized No-arbitrage Model . . . . . . . . . . .       .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  C.12 Derivation of (23) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   22
  C.13 Appendix to Section 3.3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   23
  C.14 Proof of Proposition 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   24
  C.15 Derivation of (25) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   25


A     Appendix to Section 1
We use two different types of data: foreign exchange data, which comprises spot and forward
rates for maturities of 1, 6, and 12 months, and interbank interest rate data, for maturities of

                                               1
1 and 12 months. All data are monthly, retrieved at the last trading day of the month.
    We use an algorithm to clean the foreign exchange data based on departures from Covered
Interest Parity (CIP) and discrepancies between different sources of data. The algorithm is
described below.


A.1     Interest Rate Data
We use two different sources for interbank interest rate data. The first is sourced from Global
Financial Data (GFD). This source comprises interbank rates (mostly local LIBOR rates) for
maturities 1 and 12 months. The second source is Datatastream (DS) Eurocurrency rates for
the 1- and 12-month maturity, which comprise a smaller cross section of currencies. Generally,
these series are virtually equal to each other.

   • GFD Interbank rates: mnemonics for these series are IBccg1D and IBccg12D for 1- and
     12-month maturities, respectively. ccg is the country code for each country in GFD,
     which are not the official ISO currency codes.

   • DS Interbank Eurocurrency rates: mnemonics for 1 and 12 months are ECiso1M and
     ECiso1Y, respectively. As mentioned above, DS uses ISO codes. Check in the FX Data
     subsection for details.

   In both cases, we did not use the series for 2, 3, and 6 months because their coverage
tends to be less extensive, both in the cross-section and time-series dimension. See the data
provider’s websites for details on respective detailed methodology.


A.2     Spot and Forward Rates
We use data on dollar-based spot and forward exchange rates from Datastream (DS) to con-
struct currency returns. Datastream contains four sources of these data: World Markets
PLC/Reuters (WM/R), Thomson/Reuters (T/R), HSBC, and Barclays Bank PLC (BB). The
most comprehensive in terms of currencies is WM/R. However, this series only begins in De-
cember 1996. T/R goes back to May 1990. Both HSBC and BB are not available for recent
years but have data back to October 1983 (BB) and October 1986 (HSBC) for some curren-
cies. All providers also offer spot exchange rates corresponding to their forward rates. The
mnemonics for these series are: dsisoSP for spot and dsiso1F, -3F, -6F, and -1Y or -YF for
1-, 3-, 6-, and 12-month-maturity forwards. ds corresponds to the dataset mnemonic: TD
for Thomson/Reuters, BB for Barclays Bank, and MB for HSBC. WM/R has a different
structure for spot and forward rates. The mnemonics for spot rates do not have a clear pat-
tern other than some abbreviation of the currency name and the dollar sign in the end (e.g.,
AUSTDO$ for the Australian Dollar quote). The forward rates follow the pattern given above

                                               2
for the other sources with mnemonic US. Datastream uses the iso codes as country codes. To
check ISO codes specified by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), go to
http://www.oanda.com/help/currency-iso-code-country.
    The general rules for mnemonics (e.g., departures from ISO codes) have some exceptions.
In addition to mid rates, bid and offer quotes are also available. To distinguish between these
three, DS codes have a suffix -Ex where x is B, R, or O, respectively, for bid, mid, and offer
quotes. See the data provider’s website for details on respective detailed methodology.
    In addition to dollar-based data, we complement our spot and forward data with pound-
based data from another provider also available through DS listed as BMI. These data include
one-month forward and spot rates for 14 European currencies, the US dollar, and Japanese
yen from January 1976 onward. These are same as those in Burnside et al. (2006).
    In time periods in which they overlap, the data from the different providers are very similar.
We assemble a comprehensive panel of dollar-based forward premia and currency returns in
three steps. First, we use forward and spot rates from the same source to construct a panel
of forward premia and currency returns from each provider. (The data providers vary on the
fixing time. Using a forward rate from one source with a spot from another could therefore
lead to inaccuracies.) Second, we combine the panels in the following order: When available
we use WM/R data, which appears to be the most recent and most accurate source. We fill in
missing observations using the Thomson/Reuters, HSBC and Barclays Bank datasets in that
order. In a final step, we check the consistency of the data using the following algorithm.
    For observations for which we have information on a single dollar-based forward premium,
we compare the forward premia to differentials in the interbank rates at the one-month horizon.
If the interest rate differential in the Global Financial Data (GFD) data is within 20bps
of the interest differential sourced from DS, we exclude the observation if the one-month
forward premium deviates from the one-month GFD interest differential by more than 50bps
(a dramatic violation of covered interest parity). By this criterion, we exclude Italy 1/1985
and 2/1985; Switzerland 2/1985; Germany 2/1985; United Kingdom 3/1985; Belgium 7/1990;
and Indonesia 12/1997, 3/1998, 5/1998-7/1998, 2/2001-11/2002.
    For observations for which we have information on a single forward premium, a forward
premium from the pound-based data and information on interest rate differentials from one
source, we again check if the one-month forward premium deviates from the interest differential
by more than 50bps. If it does, we check the forward premium from the pound-based dataset. If
the pound-based forward premium deviates from the interest differential by less than 50bps, we
exclude this observation. By this criterion, we exclude Austria 1/1990-2/1990; Spain 9/1987,
5/1988; Ireland 11/1986, 11/1987, 1/1989, 1/1991, 9/1992-11/1992, 1/1993; Belgium 2/1985;
and Norway 2/1985.
    For observations for which we have information on the forward premium from multiple
dollar-based sources and information on interest differentials from one source, we again check

                                                3
if the 1-month forward premium deviates from the interest differential by more than 50bps. If
it does we check the forward premium from the alternative sources. If the forward premia from
one other source deviates from the interest differential by less than 50bps we substitute this ob-
servation. By this criterion we replace Norway 5/1988, Sweden 5/1988, Malaysia 12/1993, and
Belgium 10/1987 and 5/1988 with data from BB; and Iceland 2/2009 and Thailand 12/2006,
11/2008 with data from TD.
    For observations for which we have information on the forward premium from multiple
dollar-based sources and information on interest differentials from both GFD and DS, we check
if the interest rate differential in the GFD data is within 20bps of the interest differential
sourced from DS. If so, we check if the one-month forward premium deviates from one of
the interest differentials by more than 50bps. If it does, we check the forward premium
from the alternative sources. If the forward premium from one other source deviates from
the interest differential by less than 50bps we substitute this observation. By this criterion,
we replace Switzerland 1/1989, Germany 5/1988, France 1/1989, Italy 5/1988, Netherlands
5/1988, United Kingdom 1/1989 with data from BB; and Singapore 10/1997 and Thailand
10/2003 with data from TD.
    Following Lustig et al. (2011), we drop South Africa 8/1985 and Turkey before 11/2001
due to large covered interest parity departures we could not verify. Finally, we drop Malaysia
8/1998-6/2005 and Indonesia 1/2003-5/2007 because forward rates are zero.
    Our “1 Rebalance,” “3 Rebalance,” “6 Rebalance,” and “12 Rebalance” samples are built
with the dollar-based data after applying the above algorithm and exclusions.
    In addition, we look at four alternative samples: “1 Rebalance (no fixed),” “LRV,” “4
Rebalances (CIP),” and “BER.” “1 Rebalance (no fixed)” is the same as “1 Rebalance,”
excluding Saudi Arabia riyal and Hong Kong dollar. “LRV” is the same as “1 Rebalance” but
instead of using our data cleaning algorithm, we use the notes provided in p.8 of Lustig et al.
(2011) to approximate as best as we can the dataset used there. “4 Rebalance (CIP)” is a
sample with four rebalances at 6/1983, 12/1989, 12/1997, and 12/2004 where we extended our
dollar-based data with both pound-based data and interest rate differentials. Finally, “BER”
uses the same pound-based data as Burnside et al. (2006) with the same rebalacing periods as
“4 Rebalance (CIP).”


B     Appendix to Section 2
A number of the proofs below make use of the following identities for all xit , yit = f pit , rxi,t+1
                                              P                       P
                                                  i,t   [xt yit ] =       i,t   [xt y t ] ,
                        P                     P                       P                       P
                            i,t   [xyit ] =       i,t   [x y i ] =        i,t   [x y t ] =        i,t   [x y] ,


                                                                 4
and
                                                       P                               P
                                                             i,t   [xi yit ] =              i,t   [xi y i ] .

   To see that these identities must hold consider for example the first statement above. Using
the definitions (3) and (4), we can then show
                                       P                            P P                               P            P
                                           i,t   [xt yit ] =            i          t   xt yit =         xt (t             i   yit )
                                                                    P                                 P P
                                                             =          t   xt (N y t ) =                   i      t   xt y t
                                                                    P
                                                             =          i,t    [xt y t ] .

The remaining statements follow using the same steps.


B.1              The Carry Trade is neutral with respect to the US dollar
To see this result formally, note that the return on an equally weighted portfolio of all foreign
                                                P
currencies relative to the US dollar is rxt+1 = i N1 rxi,t+1 from (4). In addition, we have that
                                                    P                                               
                                                       i,t    rxt+1 f pit − f pt                            = 0,

such that
                          P                                                                    P                                   
                             i,t   (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt                          =         i,t       rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt        .   (28)

The returns to the carry trade are thus independent of the returns on the US dollar.


C              Appendix to Section 3
C.1              Detailed derivation of (8)
Re-writing the second term on the right-hand side of (6) yields
P         h                         e         e
                                                  i                P         h                                               e     e
                                                                                                                                         i
    i,t       rxi,t+1 f pit − f pt − f pi − f p               =          i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                         P h                                               e   e
                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                     + i,t (rxt+1 + (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                     P h                                                       e     e
                                                                                                                                         i
                                                              =          i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                         P h                            e        e
                                                                                                                     i
                                                                     + i,t rxi f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                        dyn P
                                                                                                      e           e
                                                                                                                       2
                                                              =      β̂        i,t   f p i,t − f p t  −  f p i − f p       +
                                                                         P    h                        e       e
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                     + i,t rxi f pi − f p − f pi − f p                  .

 We again get the first equality from adding and  subtractingrxt+1 + (rx    i − rx). The second
                                          P                      e       e
                                                                            
equality again follows from the fact that   i,t f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       = 0 and does not


                                                                                 5
vary across t. The third equality then follows from re-writing the first term as an OLS regression
coefficient where
     dyn       P         h                                                e         e
                                                                                        i P                  e         e
                                                                                                                              2
β̂         =       i,t       (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      / i,t f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p

 is the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in (9).
    Similarly, we can rewrite the third term on the right-hand side of (6) as
      P h                          e
                                      i   P h                                  e
                                                                                   i P h                        e
                                                                                                                    i
           i,t   rxi,t+1 f pt − f p      =     i,t (rx it − rx i )   f p t − f p      +   i,t rx i    f p t − f p
                                           P h                                  e
                                                                                   i P h                        e
                                                                                                                    i
                                         =     i,t (rx it − rx i )   f p t − f p      +   i,t rx i    f p t − f p
                                              dol P
                                                                     
                                                                    e 2      P      h             e
                                                                                                     i
                                         = β̂       i,t f pt − f p         + i,t rx f p − f p            ,

                 dol
where β̂                 the OLS estimate of the slope coefficient in (10).


C.2              Structure of Error Terms
Some readers might find it useful to first read section 3.1 of the main text before reading this
this appendix.
    Note that the only difference between our specifications (7), (9), and (10) and standard
                                                                                e           e
fixed effects estimators is that they replace f pi and f p with expectations f pi and f p . That is,
had we been interested in characterizing the elasticity of realized rather than expected returns,
                                                                   e
we would have simply used currency fixed effects instead of f pi in our regressions. Denoting
                                                                                       dyn
the slope coefficients of the corresponding fixed effects specifications as β stat                 dol
                                                                               F E , β F E , and β F E ,
we can write realized currency returns without loss of generality as
                                       dyn
                                                                                          
     rxi,t+1 = γ + β stat
                     F E f pi − f p + β F E f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p    + β dol
                                                                              F E f pt − f p + ϑi,t+1 , (29)

                                                        e        e
                                                                                               
where ϑi,t+1 is mean-zero and orthogonal to f pi − f p , f pi − f p , f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p ,
                
and f pt − f p . It follows directly that
                                                                        
           rxi = β stat
                   FE   f p i − f p   + ϑ i , rx t+1 = β dol
                                                         FE  f p t − f p   + ϑt+1 , and rx = γ + ϑ.                       (30)

We can then write variation of returns in the between-time-and-currency dimension as
                                                                                                                  
       rxi,t+1 − rxi − rxt+1 + rx = β dyn
                                      F E f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p                        + ϑi,t+1 − ϑi − ϑt+1 + ϑ .




                                                                      6
Adding and subtracting terms reveals the structure of the error term, dyn
                                                                       i,t+1 , in (9)

                                                             e         e
                                                                           
rxi,t+1 − rxi − rxt+1 + rx        =    β dyn f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                                                        e         e
                                                                                                                                                      
                                            dyn     dyn
                                       + βF   E −β         f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p    − β dyn    f pi − f p − f pi − f p     + ϑi,t+1 − ϑi − ϑt+1 + ϑ
                                         |                                                         {z                                                    }
                                                                                                                       dyn
                                                                                                                   i,t+1



     The first two terms in the bracket reflect errors investors make when predicting f pi : the
                                                                            e
first term depends only on the variance of the forecast error (var(f pi − f pi )). It is zero if and
                                               e
only if investors have perfect foresight, f pi = f pi , as in that case β dyn
                                                                          FE = β
                                                                                   dyn
                                                                                        (see Proposition
2 for details). The second term clearly depends on the forecast error itself.
                              dyn                                                                    e
     We can now verify that i,t+1  is uncorrelated with the regressor, E0 [dyn
                                                                              i,t+1 ((f pi −f p)−(f pi −
   e                                              e      e
f p ))] = 0. Noting that E0 [(f pi,t − f pt − (f pi − f p ))(ϑi,t+1 − ϑi − ϑt+1 + ϑ)] = 0, plugging in
the structure shown above, and re-arranging yields
                h                                                                  e          e
                                                                                                      i
         E0       β dyn
                    FE  − β dyn
                                  f p i,t − f p t − f p i − f p      f p i,t − f p t −  f p i − f p
                       h                         e       e
                                                                                      e       e
                                                                                                    i
                 = E0 β dyn f pi − f p − f pi − f p                 f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p           .

                                 
Adding and subtracting f pi − f p in the last round bracket on both sides of the equation
yields
                                                              2      h                                        e           i
              dyn     dyn                                                                                                               e
             βF E − β       E 0    f p i,t − f p t −   f p i − f p       + E0 f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p       f p i − f p − f pi − f p
                                                                           |                              {z                                }
                                                                                                                             =0
                     h                                                                      i                               e           2 
                                                 e          e                                                                                        e
     =   β dyn E0          f pi − f p −       f pi   − fp              f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p         + β dyn E0         f pi − f p − f pi − f p         .
               |                                            {z                                        }
                                                            =0



 Re-arranging these expressions yields
                                                                                                                         2  
                                                                                                            e           e
                                                          E0   f pi − f p −        − fp                 f pi
                              β Fdyn   =β      dyn    1 +    h                              i ,
                                  E                                                         2   
                                                            E0 f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p


which is true, as shown in (15).
   Similarly, from (30) we can write variation of returns in the cross-currency dimension as
                                                                            
                                                 rxi − rx = β stat
                                                              F E f pi − f p + ϑi − ϑ.                                                                           (31)




                                                                                     7
Adding and subtracting terms again yields the structure of the error term, stat
                                                                            i    ,
                 e        e
                                                                                    e          e
                                                                                                       
rxi −rx = β stat f pi − f p + β stat
                                 FE  − β stat
                                                f p i − f p   + β stat
                                                                          f p i − f p  − f p i − f p      + ϑi − ϑ ,
                               |                                         {z                                      }
                                                                                                 stat
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                (32)
where again the first term can be shown to depend on the variance of the forecast error (refer
again to Proposition 2).                                   h        e           i
                                                              stat             e
   Following the same steps, we can again verify that E0 i         f pi − f p      = 0: Noting that
   h        e         e
                          i
E0 ϑi − ϑ f p i − f p        = 0, plugging in the structure in (32), and re-arranging yields
                                      h                        e          e
                                                                               i
                                 β stat
                                 E0 FE  − β stat
                                                   f p i − f p   f p i − f p
                               h        e          e
                                                                        e          e
                                                                                         i
                                  stat
                           = E0 β        f p i − f p − f pi − f p           f pi − f p      .

                                 
Adding and subtracting f pi − f p in the last round bracket on both sides of the equation
and eliminating terms yields
                                 h                                                                                      
                                                    2 i                                e        e
                                                                                                                     2
                    β stat
                      F E E0           f pi − f p                 − β stat
                                                                      F E E0           − f p − f pi − f p
                                                                                      f pi
                                                                    |                       {z                              }
                                                                                            e     e
                                                                         =−E0 [(rxi −rx)(f pi −f p −(f pi −f p))]
                                                       
                     stat                e          e 2
              = β           E0        f pi   − fp             ,

For the substitution of the second term on the right hand side note that using ( 31) we can
write
                         h             e      e            i
                      E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p − f pi − f p
                         h                          e        e              i
                            stat
                    = E 0 β F E f p i − f p + ϑi − ϑ f p i − f p − f p i − f p     .
                                                                                 e         e
                                                                                              
Again noting that ϑi is orthogonal to forward premia, and adding and subtracting f pi − f p
yields
   h                                                                                                                              
                       e          e                       i                                     e       e
                                                                                                                               2
E0 (rxi − rx)       f pi   − f p − f pi − f p                        =       −β stat
                                                                                F E E0          − f p − f pi − f p
                                                                                               f pi
                                                                                       h e          e
                                                                                                        e          e               i
                                                                             +β stat
                                                                                FE 0 E   f p i − f p     f p i − f p   − f p i − f p
                                                                                     |                       {z                        }
                                                                                                          =0 by rationality


Substituting this expression as indicated above and simplifying yields ( 17).



                                                                         8
   Finally, we have
                                                                        
                                           rxt+1 − rx = β dol
                                                          F E f pt − f p + ϑt+1 − ϑ.                 (33)

Because the specification (10) contains a constant term we have that β dolFE = β
                                                                                 dol
                                                                                     (again see
Proposition 2 for details). It suffices to add and subtract terms to show
                                             e                        e
                                                                           
                          rxt+1 − rx = β dol f p − f p + β dol f pt − f p + ϑt+1 − ϑ,                (34)
                                       |       {z     }                      | {z }
                                                                               dol         t+1
                                                        γ

           h                          e
                                           i
where E0       dol
                t+1       f pt − f p            = 0 by construction.

Residuals in specifications (7) and (10)

Note that in our empirical applications of this model we use the full panel of data to estimate
β stat and β dol . To derive the structure of the error term in the specifications (7) and (10), note
that from (29) and (34) we have
                              e        e
                                                               e         e
                                                                              
     rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 = β stat f pi − f p + β dyn f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p      + stat
                                                                                    i    + dyn
                                                                                            t+1 .

                                           e         e
                                                         
Further, substituting β dyn f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p      +dyn
                                                              t+1 = rxi,t+1 −rxi −rxt+1 +rx yields


                                           stat     stat
                                            i,t+1 = i    + rxi,t+1 − rxi − rxt+1 + rx,
              h       e           e
                                     i       h         e          e
                                                                      i
where again E0 stat   f p   − f p      = E 0    stat
                                                        f p   − f p      = 0, and stat
                                                                                   i,t+1 is the error term
            P i,t+1
                stat
                           i
                          stat
                                                  i         i
from (7) and t i,t+1 = i .

   Similarly, from (29) and (30), and (34) we have
                               e
                                                                                      
                                                         dyn
rxi,t+1 −rx = γ+β dol f pt − f p +β stat
                                      F E f pi − f p + β F E f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p    + ϑi,t+1 − ϑ.
                                    |                               {z                                }
                                                                                  dol
                                                                                   i,t+1


                                                                                              e
                                                                                                    
Because f pi − f p and f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p are by construction orthogonal to f pt − f p ,
                  h                e
                                      i     h               e
                                                                i
                    dol                         dol
we again have E0 i,t+1 f pt − f p       = E0  t f p t − f p      = 0, where dol
                                                                               i,t+1 is the error
                    P dol       dol
term from (10) and i i,t+1 = t .



C.3     Generalized Model: Overlapping Investment Periods
Some readers might find it useful to first read section 3.1 of the main text before reading this
this appendix.

                                                                9
    Consider an extension of the model in Section 3 where currencies are priced by a sequence
of rational marginal investors. The marginal investor at each point in time τ has an investment
horizon of T periods. There is an infinite number of investment periods. Denote the population
mean forward premium of currency i as f pi , whereas the mean in each investment period is
               τ
denoted as f pi , and τ is the beginning of the investment period, τ +1, ..., τ +T . As before, each
marginal investor observes each currency’s n entire  o history of forward   premia
                                                                               h τ iand has rational
                                                τ ,e                τ ,e
expectations of mean forward premia f pi                , where f pi ≡ Eiτ f pi . In particular,
                                               h e,ττ ,i τ      e,τ
                                                                     i
rational expectations again imply that Eτ f pi f pi − f pi               = 0 for all τ . In addition to
covariance stationarity of forward premia, we now also require that the precision of investors’
forecasts of future mean
                           forward premia is invariant across investment periods. That is, the
                                 τ                       e,τ
variance ratio varτ f pi,t − f pi /varτ f pi,t − f pi        is well-defined and constant for all τ .
To save space we re-derive the main results of the paper only for the model corresponding to
(12). The extension to the three-dimensional case is straight-forward.
    Each marginal investor demands compensation for holding the static and forward premium
trade portfolios as specified in (7) and (13), so that during the investment period beginning in
τ,
                    e,τ       e,τ
                                                       e,τ
                                                             
 rxi,t+1 = γ+β stat f pi − f p       +β f pp f pi,t − f pi +stat,τ
                                                               i
                                                                         pp,τ
                                                                    +fi,t+1  , t = τ +1, ..., τ +T, (35)
      h         e,τ        e,τ
                                i       h                         e,τ
                                                                        i
and Eτ stat,τ
        i       f p i − f p        = E τ    f pp,τ
                                             i,t+1    f p i,t − f p i      = 0.
   The proofs of Propositions 1 and 2 are as follows: For any given τ we have from (13),
                                         h                 n            e
                                                                              oi
                                    Eτ (rxi,t+1 − rxi,τ ) f pi,t −   f pi,τ
                         β f pp =                             e
                                                                            ,
                                            varτ f pi,t − f pi,τ
                                      h                         n           e
                                                                                oi
                                    Eτ Eit [(rxi,t+1 − rxi,τ )] f pi,t − f pi,τ
                                  =                              e
                                                                    
                                              varτ f pi,t − f pi,τ

for all t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T . Similarly, we have from (7),
                                         h               e          e
                                                                       i
                                       Eτ (rxi,τ − rxτ ) f pi,τ − f pτ
                            β stat   =              e         e
                                                                          ,
                                            varτ f pi,τ − f pτ
                                         h                   e          e
                                                                           i
                                       Eτ Eit [rxi,τ − rxτ ] f pi,τ − f pτ
                                     =                e         e
                                                                   
                                               varτ f pi,τ − f pτ

for all t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T .


                                                     10
         We can then follow the usual steps from Proposition 2 to show that
                                                                                                                    
             h                                                                                          i 
          
          E                     τ
                                                  τ
                                                      i       h
                                                                                 τ
                                                                                                   e,τ
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                             var f p − f pτ
                                                                                                                                   
           τ   rx i,t+1  −  rx  i    f p i,t − f p i      E τ   rx i,t+1 −  rx  i     f p i,τ − f p i           τ    i,t       i
β f pp   =
                                         τ
                                                        +                                  τ
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                             e,τ
                                                                                                                                     , t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T
                   var τ   f p i,t − f p  i                          var τ   f p i,t −  f p i               varτ f pi,t − f pi
                                                                                                           
          |                   {z                      } |                       {z                       }
                                   f pp,τ
                                =β F E                                                     =0




                                                                                      τ
                                                                                         
                                                                     varτ f pi,t − f pi
                                                           f pp,τ
                                                β f pp = β F E
                                                                                    e,τ
                                                                                           , t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T.
                                                                    varτ f pi,t − f pi


 which also demonstrates that β Ff pp      f pp
                                   E,τ = β F E for all τ , as the variance ratio on the right hand
side is time-invariant by assumption. Similarly,
                                                                                                                
               h     τ           i     h     e,τ             τ           i                   
                                 τ                          e,τ              τ
                                                                                    
             E rxτ    f pi − f p         Eτ rxτi f pi − f p     − f pi − f p        var f pτ − f pτ
             τ    i                                                                     τ    i
  β stat    
           =         τ               +                τ                              e,τ            , t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T
                                τ                                   τ                                e,τ
               varτ f pi − f p                     varτ f pi − f p                  varτ f pi − f p
                                                                                   
            |         {z             }                                             
                              β stat
                                F E,τ




 which again also demonstrates that β stat       stat
                                       F E,τ = β F E for all τ , due to covariance stationarity (all
the variance ratios on the right hand side are time-invariant by assumption).
   This result also implies that we can write the data generating process for realized returns
without loss of generality as
                                                                                            
                                                                         f pp
                                rxi,t+1 = γ + β stat
                                                FE     f p i − f p   + β FE     f p i,t − f p i + ϑi,t+1 ,                                            (36)
                                                                                                  e,τ
                                                                                                           
where ϑi,t+1 is orthogonal to                             f pi − f p , f pi,t − f pi , and f pi,t − f pi . Moreover, the
                         f pp
coefficients β stat
               F E and β F E are stable over time as shown above. This implies that for each
investment period beginning at t = τ we can also write
                                               τ           τ
                                                                                                   τ
                                                                                                         
         rxi,t+1 = γ +          β stat
                                  FE         f pi    − fp           +   β fFpp
                                                                            E        f pi,t −     f pi       + ζ τi,t+1 , t = τ + 1, ..., τ + T,      (37)
                                                                    τ
                                                                                                  τ
                                                                                                                
where        ζ τi,t+1
             =        −       β stat
                                f pi −
                                FE          β fFpp
                                            +   E   f p − f p + ϑi,t+1 .
                                                                    f pi             β stat
                                                                                       FE
   It follows directly that for a given investment period beginning at t = τ :
                                                                         τ          τ
                                                                                           τ
                                                      rxτi = γ + β stat
                                                                   FE    f p i − f p     + ζi .                                                       (38)

We can then write variation of returns in the time series dimension for any investment period
τ as
                                                                           τ
                      rxi,t+1 − rxτi = β Ff pp                    τ
                                            E f pi,t − f pi,τ + ζ i,t+1 − ζ i .




                                                                                      11
                                                                            pp,τ
   Adding and subtracting terms yields the structure of the error term, fi,t+1  , in (13)
                                                                    e,τ
                                                                           
                                            f pp
      rxi,t+1 −       rxτi         = β                 f pi,t −   f pi
                                                                                       τ
                                                                                                                     e,τ
                                                                                                                                           τ
                                        + β Ff pp
                                               E −β
                                                    f pp
                                                                           f pi,t − f pi          − β f pp f pi,t − f pi     + ζ τi,t+1 − ζ i ,
                                         |                                                         {z                                       }
                                                                                                    f pp,τ
                                                                                                   i,t+1

                        τ                              τ
where ζ τi,t+1 − ζ i = ϑi,t+1
                        h −      ϑi .             i                    h                            i
                           f pp,τ              e,τ                                    e,τ              τ
    To verify that, Eτ i,t+1      f pi,t − f pi      = 0, recall that Eτ f pi,t − f pi      ϑi,t+1 − ϑi    =
0. Plugging in the remainder of the the error term from the expression above and re-arranging
yields
                  h                                                                           i                                          2 
                                                                     τ                       e,τ                                           e,τ
            Eτ         β fFpp
                           E    −β      f pp
                                                       f pi,t −   f pi         f pi,t −   f pi          = Eτ β      f pp
                                                                                                                               f pi −   f pi

                                                   τ
Adding and subtracting f pi in the last round bracket on the left hand side of the equation
yields
                                                                   2                       h                                   i
                                                                τ                                                   e,τ                 τ
            β Ff pp
                 E    −β    f pp
                                       Eτ        f pi,t −    f pi             + β Ff pp
                                                                                     E  − β f pp
                                                                                                  E τ f p i,τ − f p i      f p it − f p i
                                                                                                  |                 {z                     }
                                                                                                                                   =0
                                                 
                                                e,τ 2
   = β f pp Eτ              f pi,τ − f pi

Re-arranging these expressions yields
                                                                                                            2  
                                                                                             τ           e,τ
                                                                           Eτ      −     f pi       f pi
                                               β fFpp      =β   f pp   1 +                  
                                                   E                                      τ 2 
                                                                            Eτ f pi,t − f pi

which is true, as shown in (25).h    e            i
                                                 e
   The proof showing that E0 stati  f p i − f p      = 0 is analogous to the one shown in Ap-
pendix C.2.


C.4     Choice of Standard Errors
Standard errors for estimates of β stat are clustered by currency because the panel is composed
of repeated values in the time-series dimension. Similarly, standard errors for estimates of β dol
are clustered by time.
    Standard errors for estimates of β dyn are corrected for both heteroscedasticity and serial
correlation using a Newey-West adjustment (Bartlett kernel) with a 12-month lag. For horizons

                                                                                  12
larger than one month, we must additionally take into account the fact that returns overlap.
Therefore, for the 6- and 12-month horizons, the standard errors of estimates of β dyn are
corrected for serial correlation at 12- and 24-month lags. Throughout, we calculate standard
errors for β dyn    f pp
              i , β i , and β
                              f pp
                                   in the same way as those for β dyn . In the case of β dol we use a
Newey-West adjustment in addition to clustering by time using the Driscoll and Kraay (1998)
procedure at the 6- and 12-month horizons.
     Finally, an additional adjustment to the standard errors for estimates of β stat , β dyn , and
                                                                                                   e
β f pp is made following Murphy and Topel (1985) to account for the fact that the inputs {f pi }
are estimated in the pre-sample.
     In addition, to check the robustness of our results to sample variance in the estimation of
average forward premia, we bootstrap standard errors across blocks of rebalances in Table 6.
We choose the 12 Rebalance sample as our population and run our regressions on boostrapped
draws with replacement from those original 12 blocks of data. Standard errors presented are
for 100,000 draws.


C.5       Details on the coefficients β ct and β f pp
                                                             e
                               E0 [(rxi,t+1 −rxi )(f pit −f pi )]
                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                     
Equation (13) defines β f pp =                        e
                                       var (f pit −f pi )
                                                                  . Multiply by var   f p it − f p i , add and
                  e
                     
subtract f pt − f p from the term that multiplies (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) inside the expectation, and
reorganize to get
                     e
                           h                           e
                                                                       e
                                                                          i    h                           e
                                                                                                                i
β f pp var f pit − f pi = E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − f pi − f pt − f p       +E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pt − f p      .

Adding and subtracting rxt+1 − rx to the returns term in the first expectation above,
                     e
                                 h                                          e
                                                                                           e
                                                                                              i
β f pp var f pit − f pi     =   E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi − (rxt+1 − rx)) f pit − f pi − f pt − f p       +
                                    h                      e
                                                                          e
                                                                             i      h                          e
                                                                                                                    i
                                +E0 (rxt+1 − rx) f pit − f pi − f pt − f p       + E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pt − f p      .


                                                        e
                                                                       e
                                                                          
    Note that the first term equals β dyn var f pit − f pi − f pt − f p      , as defined in equation
(9). Gathering terms yields
                     e
                                                   e
                                                                   e
                                                                      
β f pp var f pit − f pi     =   β dyn var f pit − f pi − f pt − f p      +
                                    h                       e
                                                               i        h                                 e
                                                                                                              i
                                E0 (rxt+1 − rx) f pit − f pi + E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi − (rxt+1 − rx)) f pt − f p      .
                                              e
                                                                        P
The last term is equal to zero since f pt − f p do not vary across i, and i (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) /N =
                                                          h                       e
                                                                                     i
rxt+1 − rx. Additionally, the second term simplifies to E0 (rxt+1 − rx) f pt − f p , because




                                                          13
(rxt+1 − rx) do not vary across i. Using the definition of β dol from equation (10),
                          e
                                                  e
                                                                  e
                                                                                           e
                                                                                                
     β f pp var f pit − f pi = β dyn var f pit − f pi − f pt − f p      + β dol var f pt − f p .

Finally, because
                            e
                                                       e     e              e
                                                                                
              var f pit − f pi   = var f pit − f pt + f p − f pi + f pt − f p
                                                        e     e
                                                                                  e
                                                                                      
                                 = var f pit − f pt + f p − f pi + var f pt − f p
                                                            e     e            e
                                                                                  
                                   +2cov f pit − f pt + f p − f pi , f pt − f p ,
                                      |                    {z                     }
                                                                    =0


one arrives at
                                                         e
                                                                         e
                                                                              
                                         var f pit −     − f pt − f p
                                                       f pi
                  β f pp =                         e      e
                                                                           e
                                                                                β dyn
                              var f pit − f pt + f p − f pi + var f pt − f p
                                                                 e
                                                                    
                                                 var f pt − f p
                              +                       e      e
                                                                              e
                                                                                   β dol ,
                                var f pit − f pt + f p − f pi + var f pt − f p

demonstrating that β f pp is a linear combination of β dyn and β dol .

    Take the definition of β ct as in equation (14):
                                                                                −1
                    β ct = E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt      var f pit − f pt      .

Add and subtract (rxi − rx) in the expectation term:
                                                                                                        
E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt = E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt + (rxi − rx) f pit − f pt .


                                                           
   Note that E0 (rxi − rx) f pit − f pt = β stat
                                            F E var f pi − f p as defined in C.7. Moreover,
from (17), we have that
                                         e          e
                                                               h              e          e               i
   β stat
     FE   var f p i − f p   = β stat
                                     var  f p i − f p     + E 0   (rx i − rx)  f p i − f p   − f p i − f p     ,

which means
                                                                                       
 E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt      =   E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt +
                                                        e        e
                                                                       h           e        e            i
                                             β stat var f pi − f p + E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p − f pi − f p     .




                                                        14
                             e          e
                                             
Add and subtract           f pi   − fp           from the forward premia to get

                                                    h                                             e        e
                                                                                                                    e       e
                                                                                                                                i
E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt               =   E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p + f pi − f p
                                                                 e        e
                                                                                h            e       e            i
                                                     +β stat var f pi − f p + E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p − f pi − f p     .

From equation (9) we know that β dyn is such that
  h                                             e         e
                                                              i                           e         e
                                                                                                          
E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       = β dyn var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      ,

which means
                                       h                               e         e
                                                                                       i
E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 ) f pit − f pt    = E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pi − f p
                                                                e       e
                                                                                         e     e
                                                                                                    
                                          dyn                                     stat
                                        +β var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       + β var f pi − f p
                                            h            e        e            i
                                        +E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p − f pi − f p       .
            h                               e         e
                                                         i
Note that E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pi − f p      = 0 and let
          h            e      e              i
αdyn = E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p − f pi − f p      . Collect terms to get
                                                             e          e
                                                                                           e          e
                                                                                                           
                α    dyn              var   f p it − f p t −  f p i − f p               var  f p i − f p
    β ct =                   + β dyn                                         + β stat                    .
           var f pit − f pt                     var f pit − f pt                        var f pit − f pt

C.6      Possibility of Stambaugh Bias
Because forward premia are persistent, it is possible that our estimates may be affected by
Stambaugh bias. Consider the following autoregressive system for each currency i :

                                             rxi,t+1 = α + β if pp f pi,t + ui,t+1                                  (39)
                                             f pi,t+1 = γ + φf pi,t + vi,t+1 ,                                      (40)

where the error terms ut+1 and ν t+1 are normally-distributed with mean zero, and a potentially
currency-specific covariance matrix Σ such that:
                                                                 "               #
                                                                     σ 2u σ uv
                                                          Σ=                         .
                                                                      . σ 2v

    Stambaugh (1999) shows that in this environment,
                                                      f pp                   σ uv
                                                 E[β̂ i      − β if pp ] =        E[φ̂ − φ]                         (41)
                                                                             σ 2v

                                                                      15
for each currency i.
    One can show that, for a given precision of investors’ expectations of future mean forward
premia (f pi ), the overall elasticity of risk-premia with respect to forward premia, β f pp , is a
linear function of these country-specific regressions coefficients β if pp (see Proposition 2 and
equation (25) in the main text).
    Appendix Table 10 uses data from our 1 Rebalance sample and the formulas above to
estimate σσuv2 and the size of the bias for each individual currency under the (possibly extreme)
            v
assumption that φ = 0.99 (see Panel A). The Table shows two main results: First, the esti-
mated biases for some currencies are positive and negative for others, so that the aggregation
of all of these biases has a negligible effect on our overall estimate of β f pp (shown in Panel B).
Taking the bounds for all of the estimated currency-specific Stambaugh biases at face value
implies that our estimates of β f pp should be only 0.01, lower than its true value (corresponding
to 1.1% of the size of the estimated coefficient in our main specification). Similarly, conducting
the Stambaugh calculation directly for the mean return across currencies (rxt+1 ) and the mean
forward premium (f pt ), yields an estimated bias in the estimate of β dol of 0.07 (or 2.1% of
the size of the estimated coefficient). Second, consistent with the existing literature ( Moon
and Velasco, 2017), we also find that the estimated Stambaugh bias for the currency-specific
coefficients (β fi pp ) is also modest for most currencies. Possible exceptions are the the New
Zealand dollar and the Singapore dollar, where the bias may reach up to -27% and +19% of
the point estimate, respectively.


C.7        Detailed proof of Proposition 2
From (9) we have that
                          h                                  n                e        e
                                                                                          oi
                        E0 Eit (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
              β dyn   =                                     e         e
                                                                                            .
                                          var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p

                                                                
Taking iterated expectations, adding and subtracting f pi − f p in the curly brackets, and
                                                           
multiplying and dividing with var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p yields
                                                 h              e        i 
                                                                           e                                      
                 E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pi − f p − f pi − f p          var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
          dyn                                                                   
β dyn   = βF E +                                                                                    e        e
                                                                                                                    ,
                                 var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p                     var f pit − f pt − f p − f p
                                                                                                             i


                      E0 ((rxi,t+1 −rxt+1 −(rxi −rx))[f pit −f pt −(f pi −f p)])
where β Fdyn
          E =                       var (f pit −f pt −(f pi −f p))
                                                                        is the slope coefficient from the fixed
                                                                                                    
effects specification rxi,t+1 − rxt+1               − (rxi − rx) = β Fdyn
                                                                       E    f pit − f pt − f pi − f p + i,t+1 .




                                                                     16
Now note that the second term in the round brackets is equal to zero and write
                                                                                       
                                                         var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                 β   dyn
                                           =   β Fdyn
                                                   E
                                                                           e        e
                                                                                         .                         (42)
                                                        var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p

Finally, replace
                  e         e
                                                                             e         e
                                                                                               
var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p      = var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p + f pi − f p − f pi − f p
                                                                                e
                                                                                     
                                   = var f pit − f pt − f pi − f p + var f pi − f pi

and cancel terms to get (15).


   From (13) we have that
                                 h                                  n           e
                                                                                    oi                     
                                                                                                          e −1
                   f pp
               β          = E0 Eit (rxi,t+1 − rxi )) f pit −                 f pi        var f pit −   f pi      .


                                   and subtracting f pi in the curly brackets, and multiplying
Taking iterated expectations, adding
and dividing with var f pit − f pi yields
                                                         h            i 
                                                                      e                        
                                        E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pi − f pi      var f pit − f pi
                                  f pp
                    β f pp   = β F E +                                                   e
                                                                                               ,
                                               var f pit − f pi              var f pit − f p             i

                                                                −1
where β fFpp
          E = E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − f pi    var f pit − f pi     is the slope coefficient from
                                                  f pp
                                                                      f pp
the fixed effects specification rxi,t+1 − rxi = β F E f pit − f pi + i,t+1 . The second term in the
round brackets is equal to zero and so
                                                                                     
                                                                    var f pit − f pi
                                               β f pp =    β fFpp
                                                               E
                                                                                  e
                                                                                     ,
                                                                    var f pit − f pi

which leads to equation (16).

   From (7) we have that
                               h                n e         e
                                                              oi     e          
                                                                                e −1
                    β stat = E0 Eit ((rxi − rx)) f pi − f p      var f pi − f p

                                                               
Taking iterated expectations, adding and subtracting f pi − f p in the curly brackets, and




                                                                     17
                                            
multiplying and dividing with var f pi − f p yields:
                                                            h                                               i 
                                                                         e               e                                                 
                                     E0 (rxi − rx)                    f pi    − fp               − f pi − f p               var f pi − f p
        β   stat
                   =   β stat
                          FE     +                                                                                            e          ,
                                                                                                                                          e
                                                              var f pi − f p                                               var f pi − f p

                                                    −1                   e
where β stat
        F E = E0 (rxi − rx) f pi − f p   var f pi − f p . Because f p and f p are constants,
one can disregard them when measuring var (.), yielding (17).


C.8         Proof of Corollary 1
Consider (13):                                                             
                                                                          e    f pp
                                        rxi,t+1 − rxi = β f pp f pit − f pi + i,t+1 .
                                                                        e
Under the assumption that we observe f pi without error (A1) we have
                                                                   h f pp i
                                                                  E β̂      = β f pp ,

where                                                   P                                                       
                                                                                                             e
                                             f pp           i,t   (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit −                f pi
                                        β̂          =               P                                              .
                                                                                        e 2
                                                                       i,t f p it − f p i

                                                                  e
However, in reality we may observe f pi with error and instead run the regression
                                                                                                 e
                                                                                       f pit − fcpi + ν fi,t+1
                                                                            f pp                           pp
                                       rxi,t+1 − rxi = β̃                                                      ,




                                                                                   18
         e
where fcpi is our estimate of investors’ expectation of f pi . The OLS estimate of β̃
                                                                                      f pp
                                                                                           is then
given as

         P h                                n      e           oi P                   e   2 −1
             i,t       (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − fcpi                  i,t    f pit − fcpi
                                                                                                                    
                                              P                         e   e
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     e 2 −1
    P                                      e                                c     P             c
  =  i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − f pi + i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pi − f pi           i,t f pit − f pi
                                                  |                   {z        }
                                                                      =0
    P                                      
                                           e P
                                                                  
                                                                 e 2
         i,t (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − f pi      i,t f pit − f pi
  =            P                        
                                       e 2    P               cpe
                                                                   2
                   i,t   f  p it − f p i        i,t   f p it − f i
            P                     e
                                      2
       f pp    i,t f pit − f pi
  = β̂
            P                   cpe
                                     2
               i,t   f p it −    f i

                                                                                                 e
               is the OLS estimate we would have obtained if fcpi = f pi .
             f pp                                                                                           e
where β̂
                                                        f pp
     Finally, under assumption (A2) and using that i,t+1      is assymptotically orthogonal to
            e 
  f p − fcp :
    it             i

                                                                                                                                  
                                        P                    
                                                            e 2                             P                   
                                                                                                               e 2
                            i,t f pit −                 f pi                plimN →∞ i,t f pit −         f pi                     
                                                        f pp                                                                 f pp 
              plimN →∞                             β̂              =                                    2 plimN →∞ β̂         
                           P                     e 2                                 P                   e                        
                                      f p    − cp
                                               f                               plimN →∞ i,t f pit − fcpi
                                i,t       it      i
                             2                                                                        2 
           P                                      e 2                                   P                                            e
                                                                                                                                         
   plimN →∞ i,t    f pit − f pi + f pi − f pi                                plimN →∞    i,t f pit − f pi         + var f pi − f pi
                                                            f pp                                                                            f pp
                              2                   !β
                                                  e 2
                                                                       =              
                                                                                        P                   2                        β
           P                                   c                             plimN →∞         f p    − f p        + var   f p   −  f p
                                                                                                                                       e
   plim  N →∞      fp − fp
                        i,t    it + fp − fp
                                        i            i     i                             i,t      it       i                  i        i


                                                                       =     β f pp ,


concluding the proof.


C.9          Deriving the “Fama Conditions”
We have already seen that the slope coefficient in (13) can be written as
                                                                                    
                                            f pp     E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − Ei0 f pi
                                        β          =                                   ,                                                   (43)
                                                            var f pi,t − Ei0 f pi

The next step is to observe that, without loss of generality,

                                                    f pit = Eit [rxi,t+1 ] + Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] ,


                                                                        19
and, as a result,
                                                                              
                                                  Ei0 f pi = Ei0 [rxi ] + Ei0 Δsi .

Substituting these two expressions in the curly brackets on the right hand side of ( 43) yields
                                                                                                   
               f pp     E0 (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] + Eit [Δsi,t+1 ]) − Ei0 [rxi ] + Ei0 Δsi
           β          =                                                                               .
                               var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] + Eit [Δsi,t+1 ]) − Ei0 [rxi ] + Ei0 Δsi

    To draw any conclusions about the properties of expected returns (or currency risk premia)
we must now take expectations conditional on i and t in the square brackets and re-arrange
to get

                                                                                                                                          
               E0 [(Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Eit [rxi ]) (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ])] + E0 (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Eit [rxi ]) Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi
  β f pp =                                                                                                                                  .
                                             var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]) + Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi




   Note however, that the next step, transforming the first term into a variance, and the
second term into a covariance requires an additional assumption that is made implicitly in
Fama (1984) – that investors do not update their expectations of the mean returns on a given
currency during the investment period

                                                            Eit [rxi ] = Ei0 [rxi ] .                                                        (F1)

  ] we impose this condition, we can write
Once
                                                                                                                             
                               var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]) + cov Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ] , Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi
β f pp =                                                                                                                               .
           var (Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ]) + var Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi + 2cov Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ] , Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi


 which is the basis both for our and for Fama’s claim that
                                                                                 
                        cov Eit [rxi,t+1 ] − Ei0 [rxi ] , Eit [Δsi,t+1 ] − Ei0 Δsi < 0 if β f pp > 1,

where Fama (1984), in addition, imposes
                                                                   
                                                               Ei0 f pi = f pi .                                                            (F2)

so that, in his application, β f pp = β fFppE.
                                                38

    The derivations for β stat , β dyn , β dol , and β ct are analogous.
  38
    While one can argue that (F2) is irrelevant when attempting to estimate the elasticity of risk premia with
respect to forward premia for only one currency pair (N = 1) rather than a “representative” currency (β fi pp
rather than β f pp in our notation), (F1) is needed regardless of which of the two objects we consider.




                                                                         20
C.10                Details on χ2 difference tests
This section gives analytical details for the construction of the χ2 difference test statistics used
to calculate the p-values in Table 5. These are distance metric statistics (Newey and West,
1987) where we focus solely on variance coming from estimation uncertainty about β dol and
β dyn .
     The objective of these tests is to determine which aspect of behavior can best explain the
expected returns on the forward premium trade, given that the hypothesis tests in Table 3
were inconclusive, in the sense that neither β dol nor β dyn are statistically distinguishable from
zero. However, for the forward premium trade to arise, at least one of these parameters must
be non-zero. To this end, we take as given the returns on the trading strategy, as well as the
parts explained by the constants (expectational errors), and ask if our ability to explain the
returns to the trading strategy significantly changes under the null that β dyn = 0 , β dol = 0 or
β dol = β dyn .
     For the hypothesis that β dyn = 0, we calculate
                                                                                                                                            i2 2
                        P                           e                                 dol   P h                    e
                                                                                                                                         e
                             it   rxit f pit −   f pi− α̂dyn − α̂dol − β̂        it f pt − f p − f p − f p
       r
   X =                                              
                                                        dol P
                                                                 h           e
                                                                                          e
                                                                                              i2                                                      ,
                                                d
                                                V ar β̂             f pt − f p − f p − f p
                                                              it


where the denominator is the variance of the returns to the forward premium trade under the
null. Similarly, for β dol = 0,
                                                                                                                                               i2 2
                        P                          e                                 dyn    P h                                  e          e
                            it   rxit f pit −   f pi− α̂dyn − α̂dol − β̂       it f pit − f pt −                                f pi   − fp
       r
  X =                                                          h                             i2                                                         ,
                                                       dyn P                    e         e
                                               d
                                               V ar β̂            f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                             it



and for β dol = β dyn , we estimate the restricted common coefficient β̂ r such that:
                                                                                                                                i2 2
           P                        e                       P h              e         e
                                                                                            i2        P h         e
                                                                                                                               e
               it   rxit f pit − f pi − α̂dyn − α̂dol − β̂ r it f pit − f pt − f pi − f p       − β̂ r it f pt − f p − f p − f p
Xr =                                                                                                              i2                   ,
                                         P h                 e        e
                                                                           i2       P h            e
                                                                                                               e
                                Vdar β̂ r it f pit − f pt − f pi − f p         + β̂ r it f pt − f p − f p − f p


where in each case
                                                                    X r − X u ∼ χ1 .
with
                                                                    h                e               i2                   h                        i2 2
           P                        e                       dyn P                                        e             dol P                   e           e
               it   rxit f pit − f pi − α̂dyn − α̂dol − β̂          it    f pit − f pt − f pi − f p               − β̂        it    f pt − f p − f p − f p
Xu =                                            h                  e              i2               h                                  i2                  .
                                        dyn P                                       e          dol P                      e                 e
                                Vdar β̂       it    f p it − f p t  −   f p i − f p       + β̂       it     f p t −  f  p    −    f p − f p




                                                                               21
C.11                 Generalized No-arbitrage Model
The no-arbitrage model in Lustig et al. (2014) is more general, allowing δ h to differ from the
mean exposure across countries and allowing for time-variation in heterogeneous exposures to
an additional global shock. The SDF is

                                                        √                               p                      √
                            −mi,t+1 = α + χzit +            γzit ui,t+1 + τ ztw −           δ i ztw uw,t+1 +       κzit ugt+1 ,

where ugt+1 again follows a standard normal distribution. These generalizations do not sub-
stantially change our conclusions. Forward premia and expected returns are

                                                  1 w
                                        f pit =    (z (δ h − δ i ) + (γ + κ − 2χ) (zht − zit ))
                                                  2 t
and
                                  1 w
                                    (z (δ h − δ i ) + (γ + κ) (zht − zit )) .
                                      Et [rxi,t+1 ] =
                                  2 t
Performing our decomposition yields
                                                                                                     2
                                                  (γ+κ)(γ+κ−2χ)+σ 2δ                        −2δ h ˉ
                                                                                                  δ+ˉ
                                                                                                    δ +(γ+κ)(γ+κ−2χ)+δ 2h
                         β stat = 1, β dyn =        (γ+κ−2χ)2 +σ 2δ
                                                                     ,        and β dol =     −2δ h ˉ
                                                                                                    δ+ˉ
                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      δ +(γ+κ−2χ)2 +δ 2
                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                             h




C.12                 Derivation of (23)
In Section C.1, we derived equation (8):
                                                         P                                  
                                                              (rxi,t+1 − rx) f pit − f p
                                                             i,t
                                                                            =
    stat P
                e            
                             e 2      dyn P
                                                                     e          e
                                                                                    2               dol P
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              e 2
                                                                                             dyn
 β̂        i,t   f p i − f p     + β̂       i,t   f p i,t − f p t −   f p i − f p       + α̂     + β̂       i,t   f p t − f p     + α̂dol − α̂dol ,
 |              {z             } |                                {z                           } |                     {z               }
             Static Trade                                     Dynamic Trade                                          Dollar Trade


           dyn       P                         e         e
                                                             2      dyn P                             2
Use β̂                    i,t   f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p       = β̂ F E i,t f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p (as shown
in Appendix C.7, equation (42)), together with the definition of β Fdyn
                                                                     E,

     dyn   P                                          2          P                                                                          
β̂ F E         i,t       f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p         =          i,t   (rxit − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p                    .

We can then write
     dyn P
                                                    2   XX                                                       
                                            e       e
β̂           i,t         f pi,t − f pt − f pi − f p       =     (rxit − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx)) f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                         i     t
                                                                       X        dyn X                                  2
                                                              =              β̂ i       f pit − f pt − f pi − f p
                                                                         i          t


                                                                             22
Substituting into equation (8) leads to (23).


C.13      Appendix to Section 3.3.2
Denote by f pji,t the forward premium of currency i against currency j at time t. If j = U SD,
we simply write f pi,t as before. For any two currencies, i and j, it must be true by convertibility
(existence of triangular trades) that:

                                        f pji,t = f pi,t − f pj,t                              (44)
                                      rxji,t+1         = rxi,t+1 − rxj,t+1 .

Taking means over time of the equations in (44) one gets:

                                                   j
                                               f pi = f pi − f p j                             (45)
                                               rxji      = rxi − rxj

Take the mean over currencies of equation (44) to get
                           P                P
                                  f pji,t
                               i6=j           i6=j f pi,t
                                          =               − f pj,t
                                 N          P N                         
                                        j     i f p i,t                1
                                   f pt =               − f pj,t 1 +
                                               N                      N
                                                                  
                                        j                   N +1
                                   f pt = f pt − f pj,t              .
                                                               N

If N → ∞,

                                               j
                                         f pt = f pt − f pj,t                                  (46)
                                       rxjt+1          = rxt+1 − rxj,t+1 ,

where we followed the same steps for excess returns.
   Finally, take means over currencies j in equation (45):
                             P           j              P
                                 i6=j f pi                  i6=j   f pi
                                                =            − f pj
                                   N              P    N                   
                                           j         i f pi               1
                                      fp        =           − f pj 1 +
                                                     N                  N
                                                                     
                                           j                        1
                                      fp        = f p − f pj 1 +        .
                                                                   N




                                                             23
Again, if N → ∞,

                                                       j
                                                  fp       = f p − f pj                                                             (47)
                                                  rxj = rx − rxj ,

where we used the same steps for excess returns as for forward premia.


Claim 2 If N → ∞, β stat and β dyn are independent of the choice of base currency.
Proof. By the definition of β stat in equation (7), where the US dollar is the base currency,
                                                        e          e
                                                                        h               e          e
                                                                                                         i−1
                             stat
                         β          = cov rxi −   rx, f pi   − fp            var       f pi   − fp              .

Using (44)-(47) we can write rxji − rxj = rxi − rxj − (rx − rxj ) = rxi − rx. Taking conditional
                                               e,j    e,j    e      e
expectations in these equations also yields f pi − f p = f pi − f p . Thus,
                                                  e,j     e,j
                                                               h     e,j       e,j
                                                                                     i−1
                      β stat = cov rxji − rxj , f pi − f p        var f pi − f p

for any base currency j other than the US dollar as well.
    By the definition of β dyn in equation (9), where the US dollar is the base currency,
                                                                                  e          e
                                                                                                    h                              e          e
                                                                                                                                                      i−1
    dyn
β         = cov rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx) , f pi,t − f pt −                   f pi   − fp              var f pi,t − f pt −       f pi   − fp               .

Using (44)-(47) we can again write
                                      
rxji,t+1 − rxjt+1 − rxji − rxj            = (rxi,t+1 − rxj,t+1 ) − (rxt+1 − rxj,t+1 ) − (rxi − rxj − (rx − rxj )) =
                                          = rxi,t+1 − rxt+1 − (rxi − rx) ,

and similarly for forward premia by taking the conditional expectations operator through equa-
tions (45), (46), and (47). Thus,
                                                                          h                                   i−1
                                                          j      e,j     e,j                       j      e,j     e,j
β dyn = cov rxji,t+1 − rxjt+1 − rxji − rxj , f pji,t − f pt − f pi − f p          var f pji,t − f pt − f pi − f p

for any base currency j other than the US dollar as well.


C.14          Proof of Proposition 3
First, we generalize our notation to account for returns in units of different currencies. Denote
by f pji,t the forward premium of currency i against currency j at time t, where for the US



                                                             24
dollar, we maintain f pdol
                       i,t = f pi,t . By convertibility, we have


         f pji,t = f pi,t − f pj,t , Δsji,t+1 = Δsi,t+1 − Δsj,t+1 , and thus rxji,t+1 = rxi,t+1 − rxj,t+1 ,

where we again use the convention that Δsji,t+1 and rxji,t+1 refer to values in terms of currency
                                                            j                                                          e,j       e       e
j. If N → ∞, we can also write f pt = f pt − f pj,t and consequently, f p = f p − f pj (see Ap-
                                                           j     e,j
                                                                                 e
                                                                                                e
                                                                                                   
pendix C.13 for a formal derivation). We can then write f pt −f p = − f pj,t − f pj − f pt − f p
and, analogously, rxjt+1 − rxj = − (rxj,t+1 − rxj − (rxt+1 − rx)).
Using these identities, we can then show that, for a given base currency j,
     h                             j          e,j
                                                      i             h                              j          ej
                                                                                                                      i
E0       rxjt+1   − rx   j
                                  f pt   − fp                = Ej0       rxjt+1    − rx   j
                                                                                                   f pt   − fp
                                                                     h                                       e
                                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                                               i
                                                             = Ej0 (rxj,t+1 − rxj − (rxt+1 − rx)) f pj,t − f pj − f pt − f p       .
                                                                                    j        e,j
                                                                                                  
By definition, the left-hand side of this equation is equal to cov rxjt+1 − rxj , f pt − f p        =
        j                                                                                            
β j var f pt . Similarly, the right-hand side can be replaced with covj rxj,t+1 − rxt+1 , f pj,t − f pt =
                                    j
  dyn                       dyn
β j varj f pj,t − f pt = β j var f pt , where the last equality again uses the identities above.
It follows that β j = β dyn
                        j .



C.15           Derivation of (25)
                                                                     P              
                                                     (rx it  − rx
                                                              f ppi ) f p it − f p i
By the properties of OLS we have           = i,t P         β̂ F E           2          . In addition (1) intro-
                                                         i,t f pit − f pi
                         f pp                   f pp  P                                      P                2
duced β fi pp , where β̂ i can be written as β̂ i =         (rxi,t+1 − rxi ) f pit − f pi /          f pit − f pi ,
                                                                               t                                                     t
because a currency-specific constant is in the regression. We can then write
                     f pp                P                              P                    2
                    β̂ F E =         i,t (rx it − rx i ) f p it − f p i   /  i,t f p it − f p i
                                    XX                                    X X                     2
                                  =         (rxit − rxi ) f pit − f pi /                 f pit − f pi .
                                          i     t                                                   i      t


   After dividing and multiplying each term inside the summation by the currency-level vari-
                        P               2
ance of forward premium, t f pit − f pi , one gets
                              P                                                                             !
                   X                                                               X                      2           XX                       2
        f pp            t (rxit − rxi ) f pit − f pi
     β̂ F E    =            P                      2                                  f pit − f pi                /             f pit − f pi
                 i              t f pit − f pi                                     t                                    i    t
                           P                     2 !
                 X    f pp       f p it  − f p i
               =   β̂ i P t                       2 ,
                 i          i,t  f p  it − f p  i

which yields (25).

                                                                          25
Appendix Figure 1: Sharpe Ratio on bilateral forward premium trade for each currency in
1 Rebalance sample plotted over that currency’s β if pp estimated in the pre-sample. 1-month
forward contracts used throughout.




Appendix Figure 2: Summary of Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with
Respect to Forward Premia across Samples and Horizons
The figure plots all estimates and 95% confidence intervals of β f pp and β ct from Table 3. Small squares show
point estimates, and large squares identify the median estimate for each elasticity across samples/horizons. The
right-hand-side axis summarizes the implications of the estimates for linear models of currency risk premia.




                                                      26
Appendix Table 1: Implementing the Carry Trade Using Alternative Weighting Schemes


                      1 Rebalance           3 Rebalance          6 Rebalance            12 Rebalance

Expected Return     4.95   6.43   2.73    4.50   4.60   3.11    4.28   4.60   2.97    5.45   5.29   2.88
Sharpe Ratio        0.54   0.66   0.80    0.54   0.53   0.69    0.50   0.55   0.67    0.69   0.66   0.63

max $ short          0      0     -0.60    0      0     -0.42    0      0     -0.23    0      0     -0.17
max $ long           0      0      0.71    0      0      0.75    0      0      0.69    0      0      0.72

Linear weights       Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes
HML                         Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes
Equally weighted                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Note: Mean returns and Sharpe ratios achieved by three different implementations of the carry trade
across our four main samples. (1) “Linear weights”: weight each currency by the difference between its
forward premium and the average forward premium across currencies at the time as in equation ( 2); (2)
“HML”: separate currencies into five portfolios and go long the currencies in the last portfolio (highest
forward premia) and short the currencies on the first portfolio (lowest forward premia) as described in
Lustig et al. (2011); (3) “Equally weighted”: go long all currencies whose forward premium is larger
than zero and short all other currencies, normalizing total investment to $1 as described in Burnside
et al. (2011).




                                                 27
                                 Appendix Table 2: Comparing Carry Trade and Static Trade

                                (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
     Panel I: All Countries

     Static Trade
     Expected Return           4.90           4.90           4.90           5.36         4.51           3.46
     Sharpe Ratio              0.46           0.46           0.46           0.47         0.42           0.39

     Carry Trade
     Expected Return           10.15          7.18           7.05           6.94         6.43           4.95
     Sharpe Ratio               1.13          0.64           0.63           0.64         0.66           0.54

     Ratio Static/Carry        48%            68%            70%            77%          70%            70%




28
     Max total curr.            36            18              18             13           15             15
     Max curr. short             6             3               3              2            3              0
     Max curr. long              6             3               3              3            3              0

     Currencies added and    - kwd sar     - kwd sar      - kwd sar      - kwd sar
     substracted relative  + bef dem frf + bef dem frf   + bef dem frf                    =              =
     to 1 Rebalance sample   frf itl nlg   frf itl nlg     frf itl nlg
     Same # curr. in             No            Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
     Static & Carry T.
     Prtf. Construction        HML           HML             HML            HML          HML        linear weights
     Time Period            1/95-12/09    1/95-12/09      1/95-12/09     1/95-12/09    1/95-6/10       1/95-6/10
     Data Source                LRV           LRV            LRV            LRV       Hassan-Mano   Hassan-Mano
                                          Continuing Appendix Table 2: Comparing Carry Trade and Static Trade

                                                (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)                    (5)                   (6)
     Panel II: Developed

     Static Trade
     Expected Return                           4.23                    4.23                    4.83                    5.60                   4.51                  3.46
     Sharpe Ratio                              0.46                    0.46                    0.47                    0.41                   0.42                  0.39

     Carry Trade
     Expected Return                           6.75                    5.33                    6.72                    6.06                   6.43                  4.95
     Sharpe Ratio                              0.64                    0.45                    0.50                    0.43                   0.66                  0.54

     Ratio Static/Carry                        63%                     79%                     72%                     92%                    70%                   70%

     Max total curr.                            14                      14                      14                       8                     15                     15
     Max curr. short                             2                       2                       2                       1                      3                      0
     Max curr. long                              4                       4                       3                       2                      3                      0

     Currencies added and - hkd kwd myr - hkd kwd myr                                  - hkd kwd myr           - hkd kwd myr




29
     substracted relative   sar sgd zar   sar sgd zar                                    sar sgd zar             sar sgd zar                   =                      =
     to 1 Rebalance sample + bef dem frf + bef dem frf                                  + bef dem frf
                               itl nlg       itl nlg                                        itl nlg
     Same # curr. in             No            Yes                                            Yes                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes
     Static & Carry T.
     Prtf. Construction        HML            HML                                            HML                     HML                  HML                linear weights
     Time Period            1/95-12/09    1/95-12/09                                      1/95-12/09              1/95-12/09            1/95-6/10               1/95-6/10
     Data Source                LRV           LRV                                            LRV                     LRV               Hassan-Mano           Hassan-Mano
     Note: This table compares our decomposition of carry trade from Table 2 to a similar exercize in Lustig et al. (2011) (LRV). It shows that the procedure in LRV
     attributes a lower percentage to the static trade predominantly due to the inculsion of additional currencies in the carry trade relative to the static trade. Column (6)
     of Panel I replicates our results from Table 2. Column (1) replicates closely the results from Table 2 in LRV. The remaining columns show step by step the differences
     in the two procedures. Panel I uses the full sample of currencies. Panel II uses only 15 developed coutries’ currencies: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Germany,
     Euro, France, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK as in LRV. Data come from two sources: “LRV” was downloaded
     on 6/12/2014 from http://web.mit.edu/adrienv/www/Data.html; “Hassan-Mano” denotes the data used throughout this paper. The Static Trade uses only currencies
     that were available prior to December 1994 in all columns. The Carry Trade is either not constrained to use the same currencies as the Static Trade (1) or constrained
     to do so (2)-(6). (3) uses the same data as (2) but assigns currencies to portfolios to minimize the difference in the number of countries in all portfolios. (4) uses the
     same data and portfolio allocation as (3) but excludes euro-zone currencies, which we excluded to get a balanced sample. Column (5) uses our 1 Rebalance sample with
     15 currencies, which differs slightly from the sample used in LRV on three dimensions: (1) it goes beyond Dec09 to Jun10; (2) it extends the time coverage for some
     currencies; and (3) uses a different filtering algorithm for cleaning the data. Column (6) uses the same data as (5), but weights all currencies linearly by their forward
     premia to construct the static and carry trades, rather than building the HML portfolio. This is Table 1 in this paper.
         Appendix Table 3: Currency Portfolios Using Alternative Samples

                                                      (1)   (2)     (3)    (4)      (5)   (6)
Sample                                                 1 Rebalance (no fixed)          LRV
Horizon (months)                                       1     1       6      12       1     1

Static Trade
    P                  e       e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi − f p )]                     3.36   1.38    3.64    3.97   4.10    1.96
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.44   0.18    0.37    0.38   0.47    0.22
Dynamic Trade
    P                                   e      e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt − (f pi − f p ))]   1.05   -0.62   -0.25   0.50   1.02    -0.76
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.18   -0.11   -0.04   0.09   0.16    -0.12
Dollar Trade
    P                          e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pt − f p )]                     2.86   1.37    3.01    3.82   2.42    1.09
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.24   0.12    0.26    0.27   0.24    0.11

Carry Trade
   P
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt )]                   4.41    2.31    3.70   4.68   5.12    2.93
    Sharpe Ratio                                      0.50    0.26    0.32   0.41   0.55    0.32
              % Static Trade                          76%    182%    107%    89%    80%    163%

Forward Premium Trade
   P                           e
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pi )]                   3.90    1.65    2.97   4.48   3.44    1.10
    Sharpe Ratio                                      0.27    0.11    0.20   0.26   0.23    0.07
              % Dollar Trade                          73%    183%    109%    88%    70%    330%

Sample                                                   4 Rebalance (CIP)                BER

Static Trade
    P                  e       e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi − f p )]                     4.87   0.19            2.97   5.11    -6.78
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.53   0.02            0.21   0.49    -0.63
Dynamic Trade
    P                                   e      e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt − (f pi − f p ))]   0.93   -2.34           0.11   1.12    -5.94
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.12   -0.31           0.01   0.21    -1.09
Dollar Trade
    P                          e
      i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pt − f p )]                     4.51   2.55            4.26   6.30    1.54
     Sharpe Ratio                                     0.31   0.17            0.26   0.26    0.06

Carry Trade
   P
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pt )]                   5.80   2.08            3.62   6.23    -2.78
    Sharpe Ratio                                      0.71   0.25            0.24   0.63    -0.28
              % Static Trade                          84%      .             99%    82%       .

Forward Premium Trade
   P                           e
     i,t [rxi,t+1 (f pi,t − f pi )]                   5.44    1.57           4.54   7.42    -1.36
    Sharpe Ratio                                      0.27    0.08           0.22   0.30    -0.05
              % Dollar Trade                          83%    747%            99%    85%       .

Bid-Ask Spreads                                   No     Yes       Yes     Yes       No     Yes
Note: This table replicates all calculations in Table 2 using alternative data samples. Columns
1-4 of the top panel use the 1 Rebalance sample but drop currencies that have a fixed official
exchange rate with respect to the US dollar. Columns 5 and 6 of the top and bottom panels use
samples that are as close as possible to the samples used in Lustig et al. (2011) and Burnside
et al. (2006). Columns 1-4 of the bottom panel use an extended sample using all available US
dollar- and UK pound-based forward data as well as forward rates imputed using interest rate
data. See Appendix A for details.                30
Appendix Table 4: Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with respect to Forward Premia
Using Alternative Samples

                                          1 Rebalance (no fixed)                        LRV
                                      (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)              (5)         (6)
       Horizon (months)                1        1        6       12                1           1

       Static T: β stat             0.52***    0.44***   0.63***   0.66***      0.57***   0.45***
                                     (0.08)     (0.08)    (0.10)    (0.10)       (0.09)    (0.10)
       Dynamic T: β dyn               0.41       0.38      0.28      0.46        0.43*      0.40
                                     (0.28)     (0.28)    (0.36)    (0.29)       (0.25)    (0.25)
       Dollar T: β dol               3.12*     3.11**      3.28     3.80*       3.32**     3.23*
                                     (1.61)     (1.57)    (2.25)    (2.24)       (1.59)    (1.82)

       Carry Trade: β ct            0.63**      0.50*    0.56**    0.65**       0.69**    0.56**
                                    (0.26)      (0.26)   (0.28)    (0.25)       (0.27)    (0.26)
       % ESS Static T                 71          68       90        78           73        65

       Forward Premium T: β f pp    0.96**     0.92**    0.95*     1.22***      0.88**    0.84**
                                    (0.40)     (0.40)    (0.50)     (0.47)      (0.35)    (0.35)
       % ESS Dollar T                 94         95        98         95          92        93

       N                             2334       2334      2269      2191         2616         2616

                                              4 Rebalance (CIP)                         BER

       Static T: β stat             0.21***    0.13***             0.24***      0.26***     0.19
                                     (0.06)     (0.03)              (0.06)       (0.03)    (0.14)
       Dynamic T: β dyn              0.18*       0.15                0.20       0.38***    0.19*
                                     (0.11)     (0.11)              (0.12)       (0.15)    (0.11)
       Dollar T: β dol                1.83       1.72               2.06*         1.31      1.46
                                     (1.19)     (1.20)              (1.10)       (1.32)    (1.25)

       Carry Trade: β ct            0.57***    0.39**              0.36**       0.67***   0.38**
                                     (0.16)    (0.17)              (0.17)        (0.18)   (0.18)
       % ESS Static T                  69        55                  74            53       68

       Forward Premium T: β f pp    0.42***    0.38***             0.63***      0.74***   0.60***
                                     (0.15)     (0.15)              (0.18)       (0.25)    (0.20)
       % ESS Dollar T                  94         95                  96           88        96

       N                             5558       5533                5231         3161         3997

       Bid-Ask Spreads                  No        Yes      Yes        Yes          No        Yes
       Note: This table replicates all calculations in Table 3 using alternative data samples.
       Columns 1-4 of the top panel use the 1 Rebalance sample but drop currencies that have
       a fixed official exchange rate with respect to the US dollar. Columns 5 and 6 of the top
       and bottom panels use samples that are as close as possible to the samples used in Lustig
       et al. (2011) and Burnside et al. (2006). Columns 1-4 of the bottom panel use an extended
       sample using all available US dollar- and UK pound-based forward data as well as forward
       rates imputed using interest rate data. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1
       (***), 5 (**) and 10% (*) level. See Appendix A for details.



                                                   31
Appendix Table 5: Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with respect to Forward Premia
calculated using a fixed set of currencies, focusing on developed countries, and after adjusting
for US inflation




                                                                                                                             s
                                                              s




                                                                                                                            cie
                                                            cie



                                                                           s




                                                                                                                                          s
                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                        ren
                                                         ren



                                                                        tri




                                                                                                                                        tri



                                                                                                                                                       ted
                                                                                        ted
                                                                      un




                                                                                                                                      un
                                                                                                         lts
                                           lts




                                                                                                                       cur
                                                        cur




                                                                                                                                                   jus
                                                                                    jus
                                                                      Co




                                                                                                         su




                                                                                                                                     Co
                                          su




                                                                                                                       of
                                                       of




                                                                                                      Re
                                       Re




                                                                                                                                                 ad
                                                                                  ad
                                                                   ed




                                                                                                                                  ed
                                                                                                                  set
                                                   set




                                                                                                                                               on
                                                                                on




                                                                                                     e
                                       e




                                                                lop




                                                                                                                               lop
                                                                                                 lin
                                   lin




                                                                                                                                            ati
                                                                             ati




                                                                                                                  ed
                                                  ed



                                                                 ve




                                                                                                                                ve
                                                                                                  se
                                   se




                                                                                                                                          Infl
                                                                           Infl




                                                                                                              Fix
                                               Fix




                                                                                               Ba
                                Ba




                                                              De




                                                                                                                             De
                                 (1)             (2)     (3)                (4)                 (5)            (6)     (7)                 (8)
 Sample                                          1 Rebalance                                                   3 Rebalance

 Static T: β stat              0.47***      0.47***         0.52***     0.47***               0.26***     0.29***           0.25***     0.26***
                                (0.08)       (0.08)          (0.10)      (0.08)                (0.05)      (0.04)            (0.05)      (0.05)
 Dynamic T: β dyn               0.44*        0.44*            0.40       0.44*                 0.28*        0.27              0.21       0.27*
                                (0.25)       (0.25)          (0.35)      (0.25)                (0.15)      (0.19)            (0.18)      (0.15)
 Dollar T: β dol                3.11*        3.11*          3.82**      3.46**                  0.91        1.70              1.23        0.90
                                (1.60)       (1.60)          (1.52)      (1.62)                (1.18)      (1.08)            (1.14)      (1.18)

 Carry Trade: β ct             0.68**          0.68**       0.90**         0.68**             0.57***         0.51**        0.63**      0.56***
                               (0.27)          (0.27)       (0.40)         (0.27)              (0.19)         (0.22)        (0.29)       (0.19)
 % ESS Static T                  62              62           85             62                  56             63            68           57

 Forward Premium T: β f pp     0.86**          0.86**       1.85***     0.92***               0.41**          0.58**        0.55**        0.41**
                               (0.34)          (0.34)        (0.44)      (0.35)               (0.20)          (0.25)        (0.24)        (0.20)
 % ESS Dollar T                  90              90            99          92                   75              91            95            75

 N                              2706           2706          1674          2706                4494           3407           2759         4428

 Sample                                          6 Rebalance                                                  12 Rebalance

 Static T: β stat              0.23***      0.26***         0.22***     0.22***               0.34***     0.38***           0.18**      0.33***
                                (0.05)       (0.03)          (0.05)      (0.05)                (0.08)      (0.04)           (0.09)       (0.09)
 Dynamic T: β dyn                0.19         0.17            0.12        0.18                  0.16        0.08             0.05         0.15
                                (0.14)       (0.19)          (0.20)      (0.14)                (0.11)      (0.15)           (0.15)       (0.12)
 Dollar T: β dol                 0.87         1.85            1.18        1.29                  1.71        2.55             1.15         1.85
                                (2.59)       (2.94)          (2.87)      (2.65)                (2.26)      (1.75)           (2.27)       (2.28)

 Carry Trade: β ct             0.56***         0.52**       0.63**      0.54***               0.67***     0.68***           0.66***     0.65***
                                (0.18)         (0.22)       (0.29)       (0.17)                (0.16)      (0.18)            (0.25)      (0.16)
 % ESS Static T                   70             79           83           71                    90          98                96          91

 Forward Premium T: β f pp      0.24            0.28         0.26           0.27              0.30*           0.35*          0.26         0.30*
                               (0.19)          (0.26)       (0.29)         (0.20)             (0.16)          (0.20)        (0.25)        (0.16)
 % ESS Dollar T                  62              90           97             81                 92              99            99            94

 N                              4842           3503          2759          4728                6019           4128           3191         5899

 Note: This table replicates calculations without bid-ask spreads in Table 3 using alternative assumptions and
 samples. Columns 1 and 5 replicate the results from Table 3. Columns 2 and 6 use the same countries included
                                                                    e
 in the 1 Rebalance sample, while still updating expectations of f pi at 3, 6, and 12 dates (but not allowing entry
 of currencies as in Table 3). Columns 3 and 7 include only developed countries (see caption of Appendix Table
 2). Columns 4 and 8 subtract the lead of 1-year U.S. inflation from returns.
                                                              32
Appendix Table 6: Bootstrapped Standard Errors for 12 Rebalance Sample

                                    (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)
     Horizon (months)                1         1        6         12

     Static T: β stat             0.34**     0.23    0.31***   0.30***
                                  (0.15)    (0.15)    (0.12)    (0.11)
     Dynamic T: β dyn              0.16      0.13      0.06      -0.01
                                  (0.11)    (0.12)    (0.14)    (0.11)
     Dollar T: β dol               1.71      1.61      0.02      -0.23
                                  (2.36)    (2.40)    (2.88)    (1.76)

     Carry Trade: β ct            0.67*** 0.52**      0.57**    0.22
                                   (0.24) (0.25)      (0.23)   (0.27)
     % ESS Static T                90***  86***       99***    100***
                                    (15)   (24)        (18)     (15)

     Forward Premium T: β f pp      0.30     0.26      0.05      -0.03
                                   (0.27)   (0.28)    (0.36)    (0.24)
     % ESS Dollar T                92***    94***       1       95***
                                    (24)     (23)      (22)       (23)

     Bid-Ask Spreads                 No       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Note: This tables uses our 12 Rebalance sample to block-
     bootstrap standard errors corresponding to columns 5-8 of Table
     3. In this procedure, we treat each of the 12 two-year periods in
     between re-balancing dates as one block and draw 100,000 ran-
     dom samples with replacement from this set of histories. Using
     this approach to constructing standard errors, the table also re-
     ports standard errors for % ESS Static T and % ESS Dollar T.




                                     33
Appendix Table 7: Alternative Estimates of β dyn and β f pp using Different Approaches to
                                                          e
Estimating the Variance of Forecast Errors, var(f pi − f pi )

                  Restrictions on (18)                  β dyn           β f pp

                  ρ1,i = ρ1 , ρ2 = 0                   0.17             0.38
                                                      (0.18)           (0.24)
                  ρ2 = 0                              0.45*            0.88**
                                                      (0.25)           (0.35)
                  unrestricted                        0.47*            0.89**
                                                      (0.26)           (0.36)


                  unrestricted GARCH(1,1)              0.45            1.01**
                                                      (0.28)           (0.39)

                  Note: Estimates of β dyn and β f pp calculated by combin-
                  ing (15) and (16) with different approaches to estimating
                                                                  e
                  the variance of forecast errors, var(f pi − f pi ). The esti-
                  mates in the top panel are calculated by estimating (18)
                  in the pre-sample data for each currency and then calcu-
                  lating the implied variance of the forecast error in a sam-
                  ple with length T = 186 months. Bottom panel: The
                  GARCH(1,1) model relaxes the assumption that innova-
                  tions to forward premia in (18), fit , are distributed with
                  constant variance and assumes instead fit ∼ N 0, σ 2i,t
                                                  2
                  where σ 2i,t = b0i + b1i (fi,t−1 ) + b2i σ 2i,t−1 . If the estimated
                  coefficients in the GARCH imply nonstationary dynam-
                  ics, we revert to an AR(1) specification. In case the
                  estimated ρ1,i coefficient is larger than 1, we set it to
                  0.999. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1
                  (***), 5 (**) and 10% (*) level. See section 3.1.2 of the
                  main text for details.




                                                   34
Appendix Table 8: Estimates of β Ff pp
                                    E in Monte Carlo Simulations where Exchange Rates are
                 f pp
Unpredictable (β      = 1)




                                                       D




                                                                              es




                                                                                              e
                                                     NZ




                                                                                           pl
                                                                          tri




                                                                                         am
                                                                        un
                                                      d
                                                   an




                                                                                       S
                                                                      Co




                                                                                    ce
                                                D




                                                                 ed




                                                                                   lan
                                             AU




                                                              lop




                                                                                 ba
                                          Y,




                                                            ve




                                                                               Re
                                                          De
                                        JP




                                                                             1
                Process for f pit                    β Ff pp
                                                          E /β
                                                               f pp



                common AR(1)            1.09            1.10         1.12
                                    [1.01, 1.25]    [1.05, 1.17] [1.06, 1.19]
                AR(1)                   1.10            1.13         1.45
                                    [1.01, 1.27]    [1.05, 1.24] [1.08, 2.32]
                GARCH(1,1)              1.29            1.21         1.92
                                     [1.02, 1.9]    [1.08, 1.42] [1.15, 3.33]

                                                                 f pp
                Note: This table shows the average β̂ F E and 90% con-
                fidence intervals obtained from imposing β f pp = 1 and
                simulating 1,000 time paths of forward premia for each
                of the currencies in our sample. Three models were used
                to generate these time paths: (i) “common AR(1)” as in
                equation (18) where ρi,1 = ρ1 and ρ2 = 0; (ii) “country-
                specific AR(1)” as in equation (18) where ρ2 = 0; and
                (iii) “GARCH(1,1)” as described in the note of Appendix
                Table 7. Three different samples of currencies were used:
                (i) “JPY, AUD and NZD” — a sample restricted to the
                Japanese yen, Australian dollar and New Zealand dollar;
                (ii) “Developed countries” using only developed countries
                from our 1 Rebalance sample (see caption of Appendix
                Table 2); and (iii) our 1 Rebalance sample. Parameters
                are estimated in each of these (full) samples and then, for
                given parameters, simulated for an artificial sample of 180-
                months.




                                               35
Appendix Table 9: Estimates of the Elasticity of Risk Premia with respect to Forward Premia
Using Constrained Model


                          (1)      (2)     (3)            (4)        (5)       (6)     (7)          (8)
   Sample                          1 Rebalance                                 3 Rebalance
   Horizon (months)       1         1       6             12          1         1       6           12

   Overall Beta: β     0.97***    0.85**   0.92**    1.05***      0.60***    0.49**     0.58**   0.62***
                        (0.35)    (0.34)   (0.39)     (0.37)       (0.22)    (0.22)     (0.24)    (0.24)

   N                     2706     2706      2631       2541         4494      4494       4374      4230

   Sample                          6 Rebalance                                12 Rebalance

   Overall Beta: β     0.59***    0.48**   0.57***     0.26       0.70***    0.57***   0.66***    0.37*
                        (0.21)    (0.21)    (0.22)    (0.17)       (0.19)     (0.19)    (0.19)    (0.20)

   N                     4842     4842      4712       4556         6019      6019       5874      5644

   Bid-Ask Spreads       No        Yes       Yes         Yes           No    Yes     Yes      Yes
   Note: Estimates of the elasticity of currency risk premia with respect to forward premia for a
   constrained model in which β stat = β dyn = β dol using the specification
                                                               e
                                                                  
                              rxi,t+1 − rx = α + β f pit − f p + i,t+1 .

   Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1 (***), 5 (**)
   and 10% (*) level.




                                                     36
Appendix Table 10: Bounds for Stambaugh Bias in Estimates of β fi pp , β f pp , and β dol Calculated
using Kendall’s Approximation

                                                                        f pp
                   Panel A                  hStambaugh
                                                   i   hBias   in β̂ i i
                                                          f pp                         f pp
                   Currency        σ uv
                                   σ 2v
                                           E φ̂ − φ E β̂ i − β fi pp                 β̂ i

                   AUD             15.9      -0.02            -0.34              3.25
                   CAD            -12.7      -0.02             0.27              4.36
                   CHF              6.6      -0.02            -0.14               3.59
                   DKK              3.1      -0.02            -0.07               4.43
                   HKD              0.1      -0.02             0.00               1.05
                   JPY              6.1      -0.02            -0.13               2.55
                   KWD             -1.2      -0.02             0.03              -1.94
                   MYR              3.0      -0.02            -0.06              -1.96
                   NOK             -0.5      -0.02             0.01               1.89
                   NZD             13.8      -0.02            -0.30              1.10
                   SAR              0.0      -0.02             0.00               1.36
                   SEK             10.6      -0.02            -0.23              3.37
                   SGD             -6.6      -0.02             0.14               0.74
                   UK              -1.1      -0.02             0.02               2.66
                   ZAR             -8.8      -0.02             0.19               2.43

                                                                 f pp          dol
                   Panel B                Stambaugh
                                             h      i Bias inhβ̂ and
                                                                   i β̂
                                   σ uv
                   Coefficient     σ 2v
                                           E φ̂ − φ       E β̂ − β                     β̂

                   β f pp         n/a         -0.02           -0.01                  0.86
                   β dol          -3.4        -0.02            0.07                  3.27

                   Note: Panel A shows estimates of σσuv2 for each currency in
                                                          v
                   our 1 Rebalance sample estimated using (48) and (49); the
                   bias in the autoregressive coefficient in (49) calculated un-
                   der the assumption that φ = 0.99 and using and Kendall’s
                   approximation, E[φ̂ − φ] = − 1+3φ   T
                                                         ; the resulting bias in
                                    f pp
                   estimates of β i calculated using (50); and the point es-
                   timate of β fi pp for each currency. The first line in Panel B
                   shows the Stambaugh bias in β f pp implied by these num-
                   bers, calculated using the expressions given in Proposi-
                   tion 2 and (25), under the additional assumption that the
                   variance of the forecast error of f pi is equal to that es-
                                                                          e
                                                             var(f pi −f pi )
                   timated for our 1 Rebalance sample, var(f      pit −f pi )
                                                                              = 1.08.
                   The second line in Panel B also shows an estimate for the
                   Stambaugh bias in β dol , calculated in the same way as the
                   numbers in Panel A, but using rxt+1 and f pt .
                                                  37
