                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE VALUE OF BROWNFIELD REMEDIATION

                                          Kevin Haninger
                                              Lala Ma
                                        Christopher Timmins

                                        Working Paper 20296
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20296


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We gratefully acknowledge the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Office of Solid Waste
and Emergency Response Center for Program Analysis, the EPA Office of Brownfields and Land
Revitalization (OBLR), and EPA Regional Offices for their financial support and for providing access
to the data. We especially thank Ryan Smith of the OBLR for his partnership. We would also like
to thank seminar participants at Iowa State University and CEnREP Camp Resources for helpful comments.
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the EPA or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This work was conducted while
Kevin Haninger was an American Association for the Advance of Science Policy Fellow at the EPA.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Kevin Haninger, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Brownfield Remediation
Kevin Haninger, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 20296
July 2014, Revised September 2015
JEL No. Q51,R11

                                              ABSTRACT

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Brownfields Program awards grants to redevelop contaminated
lands known as brownfields. This paper estimates cleanup benefits by combining administrative records
for a nationally representative sample of brownfields with high-resolution, high-frequency housing
data. We find property value increases accompanying cleanup averaging from 5.0% to 11.5%; for
a welfare interpretation that does not rely on the intertemporal stability of the hedonic price function,
a double-difference matching estimator finds even larger effects of up to 15.2%. Our various specifications
lead to the common conclusion that Brownfields Program cleanups yield positive, statistically significant,
but highly-localized effects on housing prices.


Kevin Haninger                                       Christopher Timmins
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency                 Department of Economics
 and AAAS                                            Duke University
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW                         209 Social Sciences Building
Room 3417G, EPA West, Mail Code 5101T                P.O. Box 90097
Washington, DC 20460                                 Durham, NC 27708-0097
kevin.haninger@gmail.com                             and NBER
                                                     christopher.timmins@duke.edu
Lala Ma
University of Kentucky
Gatton College of Business & Economics
Department of Economics
lala.x.ma@gmail.com
1         Introduction
Land revitalization is a beneficial, yet costly, process to undertake. Lands are often contami-
nated with harmful substances that require expensive procedures to treat. In some cases,
toxic waste sites pose a direct threat to human health. In other cases, sites may pose a
low risk to nearby residents, but are left unused or under-used until even small amounts
of contaminants are removed. Most would agree upon the importance of treating (or at
least containing) health hazards at high-risk sites. As for low-risk sites, however, it is far
less obvious that the benefits of remediation should exceed the costs. Even though these
sites may not be especially toxic, their oftentimes poor aesthetic quality combined with their
additional need for special treatment preceding redevelopment makes the surrounding area
an undesirable place to live or work. Thus, the benefits of revitalizing these sites include the
economic development that would result from making them more productive and attractive.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has designated these lower-risk sites as
brownfields and has aimed to promote their revitalization through grant funding.
    This paper uses a slate of quasi-experimental approaches to estimate the benefits of
brownfield cleanup by examining its effect on nearby property values. In this respect, the
paper draws upon the extensive literature on property-value hedonics to recover homeowner
willingness-to-pay for remediation.1 The value of cleanup, as captured by the value capitalized
into nearby housing prices, is suitable for measuring a variety of beneficial effects, which
includes the effects on numerous local neighborhood amenities.
    Although our paper is not the first to estimate brownfield sites’ impact on nearby
residential and commercial property values (Ihlanfeldt and Taylor, 2004; Leigh and Coffin,
2005; Linn, 2013), we advance the existing body of work on two important fronts. First,
while these previous papers are careful in their investigation of the potential threats from
correlated unobservables, all focus on only a subset of brownfields within one or two states.
To our knowledge, ours is the first paper that combines EPA administrative records with
high-resolution, high-frequency housing data to estimate the effects of brownfield cleanup
across the entire federal Brownfields Program. Next, only under certain conditions that we
describe below can the capitalization of disamenities into local housing markets be given a
welfare interpretation (Kuminoff and Pope, 2014). We utilize different sources of variation
available in our unique data to estimate cleanup benefits without relying on those assumptions,
making our estimates particularly useful for cost-benefit analysis.
    1
        See Taylor (2003) and Palmquist (2005) for summaries of this literature




                                                        2
1.1     Identifying the Effects of Brownfield Remediation
In an ideal research environment, one would randomly select brownfield sites for cleanup
and observe the impacts of that cleanup on nearby housing prices. The random selection
of sites into the remediation process would guarantee that unobservable determinants of
changes in local housing prices would not be correlated with changes induced by remediation,
allowing the researcher to cleanly identify the latter. While more common in some areas of
research, opportunities for these sorts of experiments are not often available in environmental
economics.2 Indeed, it is the case that the Brownfields Program awards cleanup grants based
on a competitive process. The outcome of this process may lead to the award of cleanup
funds to locations that differ systematically from locations that do not receive funds. We
therefore adopt a variety of quasi-experimental approaches to identifying the effect of cleanup
on brownfields including fixed effects and ‘difference-in-differences’ (DID).
    The fixed effect and DID approaches to recovering the benefits of site remediation suffer
from a similar problem. In particular, each requires an assumption that the hedonic price
function, which describes the equilibrium relationship between house attributes (including
exposure) and price, is stable over time. However, recent work on environmental gentrification,
a process whereby changes in the socioeconomic characteristics of a community accompany
changes in environmental amenities, suggests there may be substantial neighborhood turnover
in response to brownfield redevelopment (Banzhaf and McCormick, 2007; Wolverton, 2009),
rendering this assumption questionable. Put differently, with a new local population, the
willingness-to-pay for not being exposed to an untreated brownfield site that is revealed by
the hedonic price function may be very different after cleanup. Kuminoff and Pope (2014)
show that the results of simple fixed effect estimation of the price response to cleanup may
therefore fail to identify the MWTP of either those living in proximity to the brownfield before
or after cleanup. Instead, it will recover a ‘capitalization’ effect (i.e., the simple response of
price to a cleanup, without any additional welfare interpretations). The capitalization effect
of a cleanup may be interesting in its own right (e.g., considering implications for property
tax revenue collection), but it does not imply a welfare interpretation. To overcome this
problem, we suggest a DID nearest-neighbor matching estimator (DD-NNM) that does not
require any comparisons over time as an alternative to the traditional DID estimator.
    Together, our fixed effect and quasi-experimental approaches to estimation all lead to a
common conclusion - that cleanups conducted under the Brownfields Program yield a large,
statistically significant, positive, but highly-localized effect on housing prices.
   2
    See Banerjee and Duflo (2009) for a description of the extensive role played by randomized experiments
in development economics, and Greenstone and Gayer (2009) for a discussion of the benefits and limitations
of quasi-experimental methods for environmental questions.


                                                    3
1.2     Outline
This paper is divided into six sections. Section 2 describes the EPA Brownfields Program
and cleanup process, paying particular attention to the cleanup grant application and
scoring procedures. Section 3 describes our methodological approach, detailing the different
specifications we use to recover estimates of MWTP in the presence of correlated unobservables.
Section 4 describes the data, and Section 5 reports estimates from each specification. Section
6 concludes with a brief discussion and cost-benefit calculation.


2       The EPA Brownfields Program
A brownfield is a “real property, the expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which may be
complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or
contaminant.” 3 Typically, brownfields are lands that were previously used for industrial
or commercial purposes and include areas that are contaminated by low concentrations
of hazardous substances. These sites are diverse in nature and can range from being old
dry cleaning establishments and gas stations to processing plants for materials such as
steel, bricks, and asbestos. Generally, brownfields pose lower risk to human health than
other types of hazardous waste sites, as they exclude sites listed or proposed for listing
on the National Priorities List and sites that are remediated under the Toxic Substances
Control Act of 1976. The U.S. Government Accountability Office estimates that there are
more than 450,000 brownfields nationwide. In 1995, the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency initiated the Brownfields Program to assist public and private sector organizations in
revitalizing brownfields, mainly by providing grant funding. The aim was not only to improve
the environment, but also to promote social and economic reinvestment in these unused
lands. In 2002, the Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act (i.e.,
the ‘Brownfields Law’) was signed as an amendment to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), which established the
Superfund Program. The passage of the Brownfields Law formalized EPA policies regarding
brownfields and expanded financial and technical assistance for brownfield remediation
through the Brownfields Program.
    3
     http://epa.gov/brownfields/. See the EPA’s website for further details on the Brownfields Program and
a link to public law 107-118 (H.R. 2869), ‘Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act’.




                                                      4
2.1     Brownfield Grants, Applications, Scoring, and Awards
Brownfields grants serve as the foundation of the Brownfields Program and support land
revitalization efforts by funding environmental site assessment, cleanup, and job training
activities. There are four types of competitive grants that serve specific purposes in the land
revitalization process: assessment grants, cleanup grants, job training grants, and revolving
loan fund grants.
    This paper focuses on the effect of cleanup grants on housing values. Cleanup grants
provide up to $200,000 to perform cleanup activities at a brownfield site contaminated by
petroleum or hazardous substances. While the amount of cleanup funding is small in the
grand scheme of land redevelopment, grants from the Program are perceived to provide
liability relief, the lack of which is seen to be a real deterrent to development as a result
of lawsuits pursued under CERCLA (Alberini et al., 2005). Entities eligible for cleanup
grants include state, local, and most tribal governments; quasi-government entities such as
redevelopment agencies; and non-profit organizations. Eligible entities must have completed
a site assessment to determine the contamination to be remediated and have sole ownership
of the cleanup site before proposal submission.4 Due to budgetary limitations, no eligible
entity may apply for funding cleanup activities at more than three sites. Cleanup grants
require a 20 percent cost share in the form of a contribution of money, labor, material, or
services for eligible and allowable costs; however, applicants may request a waiver of the cost
share requirement based on financial hardship. The above requirements represent ‘threshold
criteria’ against which cleanup grant proposals are evaluated. Applicants must pass all
threshold criteria in order to qualify for funding. Other threshold criteria include community
notification, opportunity for public comment prior to proposal submission, and a letter from
the appropriate state or tribal environmental authority acknowledging that the applicant
plans to apply for federal brownfield assistance.
    Conditional upon passing all threshold criteria, the proposal will receive a numerical
score from the evaluation panel. Scores are based on several evaluation fields, including
community need, project description and feasibility, community involvement and partnerships,
and reduction of threats to human health and the environment. Once scored, cleanup grant
proposals are ranked from highest to lowest score and then awarded funding in rank order
until the program budget has been exhausted.5 Since passage of the Brownfields Law through
   4
     Historically, many brownfields are owned by local governments due to bankruptcy of a previous business
that occupied the site.
   5
     Guidelines for cleanup grants can be found at http://www.epa.gov/brownfields/applicat.htm. The score
and award cutoff may intially seem well-suited for identification using regression discontinuity (RD). However,
since the main score is the sum of the various sub-scores for each evaluation field, and each field describes
a very different aspect of the applicant, it is unclear what RD would control for in absence of proposal


                                                      5
FY 2013, the EPA has competitively awarded 993 cleanup grants totaling $188.6 million.
    If a proposal is not awarded in one year, the applicant can reapply in a subsequent year.6
This implies that the brownfield site could be associated with different proposal scores and
different award statuses. We take the applicant’s most recent score and application outcome,
assuming that it represents the applicant’s best and most knowledgeable proposal effort.
More details on how scores are compared across grant years are provided in Section 4.


3     Model and Identification
Since brownfield cleanup activity is not directly traded in markets, a revealed preference
approach is used to infer its value from its impact on nearby housing prices. This paper
uses the hedonic method to model a property’s price.7 For a thorough discussion of the
hedonic method, see the reviews by Taylor (2003) and Palmquist (2005). The hedonic price
function is defined as a mapping from the attributes of a house, including the presence of a
nearby brownfield, to a price in equilibrium. The implicit price of brownfield exposure may
be measured with, for example, the hedonic price gradient with respect to distance.
    The hedonic method is based on the idea that homeowners’ disutility from living in close
proximity to a brownfield site can be measured by observing compensating price differentials
in housing markets. In general, the homeowner’s marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for
some desirable attribute (e.g., distance from a brownfield site) can be read off of the hedonic
gradient (i.e., the derivative of the hedonic price function), owing to utility-maximizing
homeowners’ sorting behavior. Rosen’s seminal paper (Rosen, 1974) and the literature it
sparked describe procedures for recovering the MWTP functions for heterogeneous individuals.
Bishop and Timmins (2011) describe many of the difficulties encountered in this exercise -
because of these difficulties, the typical approach in the applied hedonics literature has been
to ignore this heterogeneity and either recover a function that describes price as a linear
function of distance, or one that treats exposure discretely, defining it according to whether a
house falls inside a particular distance band drawn around a brownfield. That is the approach
we adopt here.
    One of the more difficult problems that arises when implementing the hedonic method is
sub-scores, which we do not have.
   6
     Within the universe of brownfield cleanup proposals, we identified 172 properties that reapplied for
funding at least once in the six-year period after the program began, 87 of which were eventually awarded
funding.
   7
     Assuming that the housing supply is fixed in the short-run, any improvement to a brownfield is assumed
to be completely capitalized into price and not in the quantity of housing supplied. Given that the Brownfields
Program is relatively recent, we would expect to still be in the ‘short-run’. As more time passes, researchers
will be able to study whether cleanups have had a discernible impact on new development.


                                                      6
the presence of house and neighborhood attributes that are unobserved by the researcher
but correlated with exposure. These unobservables have the potential to bias the results of
a simple cross-sectional specification. Empirical approaches that are used to deal with this
problem include (i) fixed effects, (ii) differences-in-differences, and (iii) matching estimators.
We briefly review the econometric theory behind each of these modeling strategies below.


3.1     Cross-Section and Fixed Effects
The simplest specification ignores any panel variation in the data, and compares houses
exposed to sites that have been awarded cleanup under the Brownfields program to those
that have not. Potential bias arises if brownfields that received treatment were systematically
different in unobservable ways from those that did not receive treatment. An inspection of
attributes by award status (available in Table A1 of the Appendix) suggests several reasons
to be concerned about the results of a cross-sectional comparison.8
    A common approach to dealing with unobserved house and neighborhood characteristics
that may be correlated with brownfield remediation is to exploit variation in panel data.
Considering houses in close proximity (e.g. within 5 kilometers) of awarded sites only, we
compare prices of houses sold before the nearby brownfield was cleaned to prices of those
sold after to control for any permanent unobservable differences between places that received
cleanup treatment and those that did not.9 We also introduce fixed effects at the brownfield
(or house) level to remove time-invariant differences across sites (or houses).


3.2     Difference-in-Differences (DID)
Let Pitk be the log of the price of house i in the neighborhood surrounding brownfield site k
at time t. At some point in time, site k is cleaned. Consider only houses in the vicinity of
brownfields that are cleaned (5 kilometers), and let the treatment group of houses be defined
by those that are close enough (i.e. closer than 5 kilometers) to be affected by that cleanup.
A specific definition and estimation of treatment is discussed in Section 4.3; The intuition is
that these houses are particularly close to the brownfield, while there may be other houses in
   8
     Table A1 compares houses surrounding cleaned brownfields from our sample to those surrounding
brownfields that have not been cleaned. There are statistically and economically significant differences in
house attributes by site award status - e.g., houses near an awarded site are less expensive, tend to be older
and have fewer bathrooms than those near a non-awarded site. These large differences in observables suggest
that there may also be differences in unobservable attributes of each of these groups of sites. Attribute
comparisons by exposure to a site versus not at all (Table A2) reveal even larger differences. For subsequent
methods, we thus limit the analysis to only using houses within 5 kilometers of brownfield sites.
   9
     We present estimates from using multiple distance buffers to demonstrate robustness.




                                                      7
the same local neighborhood that experience the same local public goods but are far enough
from the brownfield to not be ‘treated’ by it. We define this distance below.
     The dummy variable T REATik is equal to 1 if house i belongs to the treatment group
(i.e., is located within some buffer b, less than 5 kilometers, surrounding the brownfield),
and it is equal to 0 if it belongs to the control group (i.e., inside 5 kilometers but outside
the treatment buffer). Let P OSTtk indicate post-treatment, which equals 1 if a house lying
within 5 kilometers of site k (in either the treatment or control group) sells after site k is
cleaned. The model for the observed log price is then written as

           Pitk = β0 + β1 T REATik + β2 P OSTitk + πT REATik × P OSTitk + uitk             (1)

where π represents the expected change in log price for the treated group less the expected
change in price for the control group. π is equal to:
                                                             
                      1
                                            0
              π = E Pi1k | T REATik = 1 − E Pi0k | T REATik = 1                            (2)
                                                                
                           0
                                                0
                  − E Pi1k | T REATik = 0 − E Pi0k | T REATik = 0

where the superscripts on price denote the counterfactual cleanup status (=1 if cleaned and 0
otherwise) regardless of actual cleanup status. The main identifying assumption underlying
the DID model is that of common trends,
         0                      0                 
       E Pi1k | T REATik = 1 − E Pi0k  | T REATik = 1                                      (3)
                                  0                     0                 
                              = E Pi1k | T REATik = 0 − E Pi0k | T REATik = 0

In the case of brownfields, this assumption implies that, in the absence of cleanup, the
potential log prices of properties in the treated group would have followed the same trend as
log prices in the control group. Under this assumption, π identifies the Average Treatment
Effect on the Treated (ATT). Failing to control for observable covariates (Xik ) may invalidate
the common trends assumption. One can easily control for them by extending the regression
model used to recover π:

                                                                       0
       Pitk = β0 + β1 T REATik + β2 P OSTitk + πT REATik × P OSTitk + Xik δ + uitk         (4)

In practice this regression model can be expanded to include multiple groups and multiple
treatment periods. For our application to brownfield cleanup, we separate the period before
cleanup is complete into two periods, before cleanup commences and after, and make all
comparisons to prices before cleanup activities begin.

                                              8
3.3    Difference-in-Differences Nearest Neighbor Matching (DD-NNM)
In the previous two sub-sections, we discussed estimators where the distinction between
capitalization and MWTP is a potential issue. While we can take some comfort in the fact
that we are typically relying on variation in prices over just a few years (and, hence, the
hedonic price function may not have much time to evolve), we propose a strategy that deals
explicitly with this problem. In particular, we estimate a separate hedonic price function in
each year by exploiting variation in data across treated houses around cleaned and uncleaned
sites.
    Returning to the specification used to estimate the difference-in-differences model in
Section 3.2, but allowing all of the parameters of the hedonic price function to vary with
time, we index each observation by i (house), t (year) and k (site near to which house i is
located). Some of the sites have been cleaned by time t (CLEAN U Ptk = 1) while others
have not (CLEAN U Ptk = 0). Note that we include the set of sites that applied for, but were
denied funding (i.e., CLEAN U Ptk = 0 ∀ t). Finally, we include a flexible function of house,
brownfield, and neighborhood attributes (X). We consider only transactions that occur in a
particular year t; we therefore do not need to differentiate between pre- and post-treatment
periods. Instead, we only need to differentiate between sites that have and have not been
cleaned:

                   Pitk = β0t + β1t T REATik + β2t CLEAN U Ptk +                                   (5)
                              πt T REATik × CLEAN U Ptk + f (Xitk ; θt ) + uitk

Our DD-NNM method proceeds in the following two stages.

DD-NNM: Stage 1

We begin by considering only houses in a particular year t that are inside the treatment
buffers of either a cleaned or an uncleaned site. As such, T REATik = 1 for all houses in this
sample,
                Pitk = (β0t + β1t ) + (β2t + πt ) CLEAN U Ptk + f (Xitk ; θt ) + uitk      (6)

Using a nearest-neighbor matching algorithm, we pair each house inside the treatment buffer
in each neighborhood with CLEAN U Ptk = 1 with a set of J houses that are as similar as
possible in the covariate space and located inside the treatment buffer of a neighborhood
with CLEAN U Ptk = 0.10
  10
   The Mahalanobis metric is used to measure the distance between two sets of covariates. The number of
matches used may exceed J in the case of ties.


                                                  9
    Specifically, for a particular house i located in the treatment buffer of a cleaned site (price
designated by Pitk ), we find the J = 5 ‘nearest neighbors’ to i, t, k from houses located in
                                                                    (itk)
the treatment buffer of an uncleaned site (prices denoted by Pj ). We use these matches
to construct the counterfactual outcome for each house i had it not been cleaned, and save
individual treatment effects for Stage 2 into a vector PIn  t of length Nt . The treatment effect
averaged over all of the houses near awarded sites is given by

                                              Nt 
                                          1 X             1 X (itk) 
                            (β2t + πt ) =          Pitk −     P                                 (7)
                                          Nt i=1          J j j

Next, we repeat this process using only those houses transacted in year t that are located
outside the treatment buffer (i.e., T REATik = 0 for all of these houses). Denoting the prices
of houses located outside the treatment buffer with a P̃itk , the averaged treatment effect on
the houses located outside of the buffer of awarded sites is given by:

                                          Ñt 
                                      1 X               1 X (itk) 
                               β2t =            P̃itk −     P̃                                  (8)
                                     Ñt i=1            J j j

We similarly save the individual treatment effects into a vector POut t    of length Ñt .
    The success of this strategy, of course, depends upon being able to find high-quality matches
for houses in neighborhoods around cleaned sites from the set of houses around sites that
have not been cleaned. This is what assures that the unspecified function f (Xitk ; θt ) will be
differenced away. To do this, we match based on house and brownfield characteristics, restrict
matches to be amongst sites in the same state, and eliminate other forms of heterogeneity
at the neighborhood level by matching on attributes of the census tract in which sites are
located. Match variables are described in Section 4.1.
    Before proceeding to stage 2, we take an additional step to correct for potential bias in
our first stage estimates from inexact covariates matches from the set of ‘nearest neighbors’
(Abadie and Imbens, 2011). We use the bias-corrected matching estimator from Abadie and
Imbens (2011) to account for differences in covariate values between the treated observation
and its matched counterparts. Furthermore, this has an additional benefit of producing
estimates that are more robust to the number of matches used (Abadie and Imbens, 2011).
    Take a house i that is located within the treatment buffer of a cleaned site, and let µ0 (Xitk )
denote its conditional expected price, given attributes Xitk , had it been near an uncleaned
site,
                                                       0
                                      µ0 (Xitk ) = E[Pitk | Xitk ]                             (9)



                                                10
To implement the bias correction, we first approximate µ0 (Xitk ) with a linear model,

                                                          0
                                           µ̂0 (Xjtk ) = Xjtk θ̂w=0                          (10)

where the parameters (θw=0 ) are estimated with weighted OLS using only the observations
from the matched sample (i.e., the houses near uncleaned sites, indexed by j). The weight for
a house j is given by the number of times it is used as a match for properties near cleaned
sites. We then predict prices for houses near cleaned sites, with covariates Xitk , using θ̂w=0 ,
estimated based on those near uncleaned sites,

                                                          0
                                           µ̂0 (Xitk ) = Xitk θ̂w=0                          (11)

Finally, the bias-adjusted estimate for an individual i replaces the counterfactual from the
                               P (itk)          P (itk)
simple matching estimator, J1 j Pj , with J1 j P̂j

                        In,bcm              1 X (itk)
                      Pi,t     = Pitk −         P̂
                                            J j j
                                                                                       !
                                               1 X (itk)
                                 = Pitk −          P     + µ̂0 (Xitk ) − µ̂0 (Xjtk )         (12)
                                               J j j

where the adjustment accounts for the difference in the counterfactual outcome due to
covariate differences in the matched observation. The bias-corrected estimator is used to
recover treatment effects for houses near (PIn,bcm
                                            t      ) and far (POut,bcm
                                                               t       ) from awarded brownfields.
                                                                 bcm
We then stack these bias-corrected estimates into a vector Pt of length Nt + Ñt .

DD-NNM: Stage 2

We are able to recover an estimate of the average treatment effect on the treated for each
year t by simply differencing the average estimates from stage 1 in the following manner,

                           Nt                            Ñt 
                       1 X             1 X (itk)     1 X               1 X ˆ (itk) 
                  πt =          Pitk −     P̂j     −            P̃itk −     P̃               (13)
                       Nt i=1          J j           Ñt i=1            J j j

However, even after limiting houses to the immediate vicinity of brownfields, there may still
be reason to believe systematic differences exist between houses near and far from sites.11
Therefore, it will be important to control for observable differences in characteristics. As
such, we estimate the treatment effect on the treated, πt , by regressing Pbcm
                                                                           t    on a dummy
  11
       This will be evident from group mean comparisons in Section 4.3


                                                     11
variable for whether the house is located inside of the buffer while controlling for the same
set of characteristics used in matching and restricting comparisons to be within brownfield
sites (i.e. including site fixed effects).


4     Data
Brownfields, like many other disamenities (Superfund sites, TSDF’s, TRI plants) may have
very localized impacts on house prices. As such, it can prove difficult to recover these impacts
without access to high-resolution data. Cleanup of a brownfield, for example, may not be
perceptible in information about census tract median housing prices, while it may in fact
have large impacts on nearby houses. One solution to this problem is to use high-resolution
decennial census block-level data (Gamper-Rabindran, Mastromonaco, and Timmins, 2011).
That approach, however, introduces two potential problems. First, low-frequency decennial
data may confound brownfield cleanup with other unobserved events that occurred at some
other time during the same decade. Unlike Superfund remediation, brownfield cleanups can
be relatively quick, leaving a great deal of remaining time over a ten-year period for other
things to happen. Second, cleanups under the Brownfields Program have all taken place
in the last decade, and long-form decennial census data have not been collected since 2000.
These data are now collected as part of the American Community Survey, and are available
at high geographic resolution only on a ‘moving average’ basis (e.g., for the period 2005-2009).
Given that brownfield cleanup can be initiated and completed relatively quickly, we would not
know whether most of the cleanups in our data set occurred before or after the homeowner
valuations stated in the 2005-2009 ACS data.
    In light of all of these concerns, we employ housing transactions data from Dataquick,
Inc. that are both high-resolution (i.e., latitude and longitude) and high-frequency (i.e.,
day of transaction). This allows us to measure the impact of the cleanup with a great deal
of precision, both in space and time. In the following four subsections, we describe the
data, estimate the treatment buffer, provide summary statistics (based on our definition of
treatment), and describe neighborhood turnover in brownfield neighborhoods that additionally
motivate the concern for time-varying hedonic price functions.


4.1    Data Description
EPA provided non-public administrative data on all cleanup grant applicants and proposal
scores since passage of the Brownfields Law in 2002 through 2008, as well as public data on
the subset of brownfields that were awarded funding. The data provide characteristics of


                                              12
brownfields, including the exact location (latitude and longitude),12 property size (for awarded
sites only), dates of brownfield assessments, and types of grant application (i.e. targeted to
treat petroleum sites, sites with hazardous substances, or both). For the properties that were
awarded funding,13 the data include related award and cleanup progress information. Since
funding for brownfields varies each year and is awarded beginning with the highest scoring
applicant and working downward until funding runs out, there is not one score cutoff that
determines whether a property is cleaned. Moreover, because of changing scoring rules, the
raw scores are difficult to compare across competition years. To make scores comparable
across years, we standardize the scores to be between 0 and 100 by dividing the raw score
by the maximum score in its respective competition year. Where site-level fixed effects are
not included, the following brownfield characteristics are used as controls: the standardized
proposal score, and indicators for whether a site is assessed twice, a petroleum grant applicant,
and/or a hazardous substances grant applicant.
    There are a total of 1383 brownfield applications, 446 of which are awarded cleanup grants
and 937 are not. Applicants could reapply for a grant in another year following a rejection.
Taking into consideration re-applications, we identified 1178 unique brownfield properties.
After removing brownfields with missing or inaccurate longitude and latitude coordinates,
we are left with 797 sites (437 awarded and 360 non-awarded). Property locations were
individually verified with Google maps and checked to ensure that the background of the
reported location corroborated with the information from the grant proposal. Figure 1 plots
the brownfield sites in our sample against states in the continental U.S.
    Dates of different milestones in the process to remediate the brownfield exist starting from
site assessment and ending with cleanup. We consider all houses sold before any cleanup
activities commence to belong to a period, ‘Pre-cleanup.’ Next, we define an interim treatment
period that starts from the earliest recorded cleanup start date, and ends on the cleanup
completion date.14 We distinguish this interim period to control for expectations of future
development that potentially impact prices before cleanup is complete. Lastly, we define the
post-cleanup period during which properties have been fully treated with brownfield cleanup
as starting with the cleanup completion date and lasting for the duration of our sample.
    The time period dummy variables that will be used in all of the specifications are Interimtk
  12
      Available information describes the centroid of the brownfield property, but not property boundaries. This
is a common feature in data describing the geographic siting of locally undesirable land uses (i.e., LULU’s).
Like most of this literature, we use distance from the centroid as a measure of exposure. Obtaining more
detailed information that would allow us to measure the distance to a site’s boundary would be desirable.
   13
      Generally, one brownfield is tied to one cleanup grant, although there are a few cases where a brownfield
is tied to multiple grants.
   14
      Dates on which information are released to the public about cleanup, such as the public announcement
of grant awards, are also reasonable to consider.



                                                      13
and P osttk , which respectively equal to 1 if a house is sold during and after cleanup of the
nearby brownfield. For the DID specification, interactions between each of the above time
period dummies with the treatment dummy are included. In that specification, the coefficient
on T reattk × P osttk is the treatment effect on the treated, and should be interpreted with
respect to the houses in the pre-cleanup period, which is the omitted group.
    The second data source comes from Dataquick Information Systems, used under a license
agreement with the Duke Department of Economics, which provides housing transactions
data. These data contain the history of transactions and characteristics for houses (including
exact location) in a large number of U.S. counties. Dataquick does not have housing data
for all counties, therefore only a subset of the properties that are tied to cleanup grants are
included. Our final sample of houses near brownfield sites covers 176 counties across 38 states.
The data consists of information on the sale of newly constructed houses, re-sales, refinance
or equity dealings, timeshare sales, and subdivision sales. The data saves transaction-related
information such as price, date and associated loans, as well as structural characteristics
recorded from the most recent tax assessment. The attribute fields used as controls for
differences in structural characteristics include age, number of bathrooms, bedrooms, square
footage, and indicator variables for selling in the year built, being categorized as a condo,
multifamily, mobile, or an unknown/miscellaneous house type, and year-of-build for the years
1800’s, 1900-1950, 1950-2000, 2000-2005, 2005-2010, and after 2010.
    In addition to house-level attributes, we control for county level effective real estate tax
(RET) rates (Siniavskaia, 2011), as defined by the percentage of the property value that is paid
in taxes every year. The county-level RET rates are calculated using homeowner-reported
home values and annual real estate taxes from the Census Bureau’s 2005-2009 American
Community Survey.
    Our analysis limits transactions to house sales of owner occupied properties. Houses with
missing prices, bathrooms, bedrooms, or square footage are dropped. Furthermore, since only
housing characteristics from the most recent tax assessment are recorded, any house indicated
to have undergone major improvements is dropped, as its attributes may be incorrect for
previous transactions. To reduce possible errors in record-keeping and sales anomalies, the
analysis excludes houses that sold more than once per year or five times in the eleven year
window of house sales.15 Prices are normalized to December 2000 dollars using the monthly,
regional All Urban Consumers Housing CPI taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The
analysis excludes the 1st and 99th percentile of the observed price distribution. The window
  15
    The former often represent non-arms-length transactions that can sometimes lead to multiple transactions
on the same day. The latter (i.e., more than 5 transactions in 11 years) signals that the house may be used
as an investment property by a house ‘flipper’ (Bayer, Geissler, and Roberts (2011)).



                                                    14
of observations used for housing transactions starts in 1998 (four years before the start of the
Brownfields Program)16 and ends in 2012, which is the last available year for housing sales.
    Neighborhood characteristics used for matching are available through SimplyMap, a web-
based data application accessible with a license agreement with Duke University. SimplyMap
provides yearly data on tract-level attributes, and are only available starting in the year 2008.
The specific variables used include percentages for the following: race (White, Black, Asian,
Hispanic), blue collar workers, educational attainment (high school and college), families
with children under 18 years of age, native language (English, Spanish, Asian/Pacific Island,
and Indo-European), and U.S. citizens. We also use annual, tract-level median income. We
associate these neighborhood characteristics to individual housing transactions based on the
year of sale and tract in which the house is located.
    Knowing the exact locations of all properties allows us to calculate the distance between
each house and the nearest brownfield. This is our measure of brownfield ‘exposure’. Using
Graphical Information Systems (GIS), each property is first matched to the nearest brownfield
within a 5 kilometer radius. The distances to those brownfields are then recovered. Houses not
within 5 kilometers of any brownfield are dropped. Houses located near multiple brownfields,
in which case the effect of cleanup may be hard to measure, are dropped. Out of a total
of 797 unique brownfields from the EPA data with geocoordinates, this limits the number
of sites to 327, 197 of which are awarded with cleanup and 130 of which are not. While
restrictive, this ensures a clean exposure definition given that sites have different cleanup
timelines. The treatment and control groups are then defined using houses within this 5
kilometer radius to minimize the threat of any location-specific unobservable differences that
may affect price dynamics.
    An important note is that the available EPA data describe the set of brownfield sites
associated with applications for cleanup grants. This precludes analysis of brownfields that
did not apply for funding. Therefore, it is possible that there are brownfields (along with
other locally undesirable land uses) in neighborhoods that are not accounted for. Even though
the analysis cannot control for these sites, it is unlikely that the status of these brownfields
will have changed over the course of our analysis, making them time-invariant unobservables
that will be differenced out of our analysis using several of the methods described in the
previous section. Moreover, if they do change status over time, our DID estimator will control
for this to the extent that they equally affect treatment and control groups.
  16
    The extent of geographic coverage by Dataquick becomes much greater in 1998. Going back further in
time would require dropping more brownfield sites for lack of housing data.




                                                 15
4.2     Defining the Treatment Buffer
This paper follows the strategy employed by Linden and Rockoff (2008), using adjacent
neighborhoods around a brownfield to define treatment and control groups to alleviate the
problem of group- and time-specific unobservables.17 That is, houses located within a certain
distance of a brownfield are considered to be in the treatment group, while houses located
outside of that distance (where the site has no effect regardless of cleanup) are designated as
controls. As the effects of hazardous waste sites such as those on the National Priorities List
decrease very quickly with distance from the site (Adler et al., 1984; Kohlhase, 1991; Kiel,
1995), the price shocks that would affect the trend of the treated group would arguably affect
that of the control group as well. Ultimately, this common trend assumption is untestable.
However, this paper provides graphical evidence next and specification tests in the results
section that allow us to better assess its validity.
    We begin by estimating a pair of price functions over distance from the nearest brownfield
site - one for pre-cleanup transactions and one for post-cleanup transactions. The distance at
which the pre-cleanup and post-cleanup price functions converge is where brownfield cleanup
no longer impacts house prices; this is ideally where we would define the cutoff between
treatment and control groups.
    Rather than impose a functional form for the price functions, we use a local linear
polynomial estimator (Fan and Gijbels, 1996), which is described in detail in Appendix B.18
We make one modification to this procedure to account for the fact that the mix of houses sold
before and after cleanup changes with respect to distance. In particular, Figure 2 describes
the average square footage of houses sold at each distance from a brownfield site before and
after cleanup. It is clear from this figure that houses sold before cleanup of brownfield sites
within approximately 2 kilometers tend to be larger than those sold in that same buffer after
cleanup. We therefore control parametrically19 for house attributes before recovering the
non-parametric relationship between house prices and distance in Figure 3. Figure 3 also
controls parametrically for year effects to allow for general inflationary trends, and differences
in brownfield characteristics including the proposal scores, proposal type, and the number of
times the sites are assessed.20
  17
     Linden and Rockoff (2008) estimate the impact of sex offender arrival in Mecklenberg County, North
Carolina.
  18
     The bandwidth, determined by inspection, is three times Silverman’s Rule of Thumb. For the distance
gradient, this is about 308 meters. For the time gradient, it is approximately 381 days. A Gaussian kernel is
used for weighting.
  19
     In practice, we recovered residuals from a linear regression of housing price on house attributes, brownfield
attributes, and year fixed effects, and then used the residuals in a non-parametric regression on distance.
  20
     Under certain circumstances, additional testing may be advised by a Licensed Site Professional, and a
supplemental site assessment is conducted in addition to the required assessment. Recognizing those sites



                                                       16
    Figure 3 provides evidence in support of the assumption that houses that are far enough
from brownfields represent a valid control group. While we find that houses at all distances
have higher prices on average after cleanup, we find that this difference is no long statistically
significant outside of 2070 meters. Taking the treatment group to be defined by a 2070 meter
buffer, the DID estimator will compare the average change in prices before and after cleanup
inside the buffer with the similarly defined change outside the buffer.
    Given the definition of the treatment and control groups, a natural way to check whether
the common trend assumption is reasonable is to compare the price trends of the treatment
and control groups pre- and post-treatment. If the common trend assumption is valid, then
price trends should exhibit a few characteristics. First, if the relationship between cleanup
and price is causal, one would expect a significant price increase for treatment houses around
the time of cleanup, as opposed to a gradual upward trend in price. This would support the
claim that cleanup in fact leads to an increase in prices of houses near brownfields. Second,
the price trends of the two groups in the pre-cleanup period should be relatively similar (i.e.,
common trends before cleanup). Third, in the post-cleanup period, the prices of the control
houses should not change significantly, but rather should follow a path similar to that in
the pre-treatment period. The latter two characteristics would suggest that price trends for
houses near brownfields would have been the same as those far from brownfields had they
not been treated with cleanup.
    Figure 4 plots the prices of treatment (i.e., inside 2070 meters) and control houses against
time relative to the cleanup date.21 The trends pre- and post-treatment are similar for the
two groups. While both groups exhibit a jump at the point of treatment, suggesting that
some of the treatment may spill-out into the control group, the discontinuity for the control
group going from pre- to post-cleanup (-0.58%) is smaller than that in the treatment group
(6.67%). The differences-in-differences approach measures the jump in the treatment group
relative to that in the control group.


4.3     Summary Statistics
The tables in this section summarize our brownfields data set on multiple dimensions. This is
a useful exercise given that this is the first time a national level data set has been compiled
for the Brownfields Program. Table 1 provides summary statistics for brownfields by housing
data availability in order to examine the representativeness of the sample after data cuts
that demand additional testing may control for differences in the severity of contamination at sites.
   21
      As was the case when generating Figure 3, we parametrically control for housing attributes, year effects,
and brownfield characteristics before non-parametrically estimating price as a function of time relative to the
cleanup period.



                                                     17
and merges. Columns (1) - (3) and (4) - (6), respectively, summarize characteristics of the
subsets of brownfields with and without Dataquick housing data. Tests for the equality of
group means for the various attributes across these subsets are provided in columns (7) and
(8). Table 1 suggests that proposal scores are marginally higher for non-funded brownfields
in locations with Dataquick data, compared to non-funded brownfields in locations without
Dataquick data. The difference is not statistically significant for the set of funded properties.
Hazardous substances contamination is more common in the funded brownfields for which we
do not have housing data; since Dataquick does not provide data for many rural communities,
significant differences may reflect the more common occurrence of certain types of brownfields
in more urbanized areas. Table 2 also compares attributes of houses near multiple versus one
site only. It finds that houses near multiple brownfields are (mean difference in parentheses)
less expensive ($3,838), older (12 years), smaller (23 square feet), and are more likely to be
condominiums (4%) and multifamily homes (6%) than those near at most 1 site within 5
kilometers. While these differences are statistically significant, we make this trade-off for the
sake of cleanly identifying site exposure.
    Table 3 provides summary statistics for house attributes by treatment status. Columns
(1) - (2) and (3) - (4), respectively, summarize the housing characteristics for the treatment
group (within 2070 meters of a brownfield) and the control group (between 2070 meters and 5
kilometers of a brownfield). Columns (5) and (6) test for equality of group means. Although
we reject the equality of means for many attributes, we do take comfort in the fact that the
differences are far smaller than comparisons between houses within 5 kilometers to houses in
the rest of the county (Table A2 in the Appendix). We take Table 3 as evidence that there
are important differences between treatment and control groups that should be accounted for
parametrically in the DID specification.
    Table 4 provides a yearly breakdown of cleanup starts and completions for the brownfields
that were awarded cleanup grant funding.22 Since the Brownfields Law was only recently
enacted in 2002, many cleanup completions occur towards the end of the window of ob-
servations, which limits the number of post-cleanup transactions we have to work with.
The average cleanup duration for all brownfields for which we can calculate durations is
approximately 15 months (or 444 days) with a standard deviation of 451 days.23 These figures
imply that brownfield cleanups are relatively quick (e.g., in comparison to the cleanup of a
Superfund site); this requires that we use high-frequency housing data (i.e., daily transactions
information) for estimation.
 22
    There are 2 sites that began cleanup before the 2002 - one for areas with Dataquick coverage, and without.
These are likely from pilot programs that receive funding before the formal program began.
 23
    Table A3 reports cleanup duration by toxin-found and media of contamination.



                                                     18
    Even with the relatively short average duration of brownfield cleanup, right-censoring (i.e.,
cleanups that are not completed by the end of our sample) is still an issue - particularly for
cleanups begun in later years. Not surprisingly, cleanups begun later in the sample are less
likely to be completed. There is, however, a significant fraction of cleanups with petroleum
contamination begun early in the sample that have not been completed by 2012.24


4.4      Neighborhood Turnover
As suggestive evidence of neighborhood turnover that could alter the equilibrium hedonic
price function over time, we use a subsample of the data from Massachusetts for which we
can obtain the income and race of the primary homebuyer to examine changes in race and
income distributions before and after cleanup.25 Tabulations of the data (Table 5) show that
there are more minorities and low income households in areas close to brownfields (i.e. within
the treatment buffer), an outcome that is consistent with many studies in the environmental
justice literature.26 We find that neighborhoods that are cleaned experience a relative increase
of 1.61% in the share of white homeowners compared to nearby neighborhoods unaffected by
the presence of brownfield sites (Table 6, Panel A).27 With regards to income, Table 6, Panel
B shows increases in the middle and lower class (second and third quintiles) following cleanup.
Although we cannot explain these shifts in race and income,28 we can be more certain that
dynamic forces that alter the socioeconomic makeup of communities are at play, which can
signify preference shifts at the communities of interest, further motivating the use of our
DD-NNM estimator.


5        Empirical Results
5.1      Cross-Sectional Estimates
Table 7 reports the results of a cross-sectional specification, where exposure is based on
award status. We restrict the comparison to be between houses that are in the vicinity of
    24
     Table A4 of the Appendix describes the fraction of cleanups initiated in each year that were not completed
by 2012. There were no cleanups initiated in 2012 from the pool of awarded sites between 2002 and 2008.
  25
     Housing transactions in Dataquick are merged to data from the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
based on the Census tract, loan amount, and lender name of each property transaction. For details, see Bayer
et al. (2011).
  26
     See Been and Gupta (1997); Pastor, Sadd, and Hipp (2001); Baden and Coursey (2002); Wolverton (2009)
  27
     The fall in the share white homeowners in neighborhoods surrounding brownfields is smaller than the
same decrease in white homeowners in nearby neighborhoods far from brownfields.
  28
     The literature on gentrification also finds mixed evidence on the direction of demographic and income
change following improvements in environmental amenities.



                                                     19
brownfields - some of which have been cleaned, others of which have not. We find that the
value of cleanup is negative at -11.7%. The counterintuitive sign of this effect may be a result
of omitted variables bias if cleanup grants are targeted towards struggling neighborhoods.
Table 7 suggests that unobservable neighborhood attributes may be correlated with their
cleanup status, necessitating a different empirical approach.


5.2    Fixed Effect Estimates
Next, we use fixed effects to control for time-invariant unobservables, which may be the source
of bias that leads to the counterintuitive results found in the cross-sectional specifications. The
fixed effects specification uses all houses in a buffer; we consider buffers of 1000, 2000, 3000,
and 5000 meters to demonstrate robustness. We also include controls for year fixed effects,
house attributes, and the real estate tax rate. The results of the fixed effects specification,
described in Table 8, differ strikingly from the cross-sectional results, with statistically
significant increases in house prices from cleanup that range between 8.42% and 11.5%,
depending on the size of the buffer. Standard errors are clustered at the brownfield level.
Limiting the comparison to within-house differences with house fixed effects, we find that
cleanup yields a statistically significant increase in house values of 9.26% at the 5% level
using standard errors clustered at the brownfield site.


5.3    Difference-in-Differences Estimates (DID)
While it is able to deal with time-invariant unobservable neighborhood attributes, fixed
effects does nothing to control for time-varying unobservables that may be correlated with
brownfield cleanup. Estimates would still be biased if, for example, cleanup were systematically
directed towards locations that were considered bad neighborhoods, but were improving in
unobservable ways. The DID approach overcomes this problem with the ‘common trends’
assumption - namely, that the change over time in unobservables in the control group is the
same as it would have been in the treatment group in the absence of treatment. By assigning
the control group to be houses in the same neighborhood as those in the treatment group, but
far enough away from the site to not be impacted by cleanup, we address this assumption and
obtain estimates that account for any time-varying unobservables that are common to both
the treatment and control groups. Moreover, by differencing over time, the DID approach
also controls for time-invariant unobservables just as the fixed effects specification did.
    As described in Section 3, the average treatment effect on the treated is measured
by the coefficient on the interaction of the indicators for a house being in the treatment
group (T reat) and its transaction occurring after the cleanup has been completed (P ost).

                                                20
These estimates can be found in the fifth row of Table 9. With only year fixed effects and
brownfield-level controls, we find a treatment effect of 5.67% using the preferred buffer size
of 2070 meters. In a specification that includes year fixed effects, house-level and brownfield-
level controls, and controls for the real estate tax, this effect increases to 7.01%. Further
introducing brownfield fixed effects decreases this effect to 5.0%, which is significant at
10% after clustering standard errors at the brownfield level.29 The coefficients on the time
dummy variables, Interim and P ost, are both positive and significant in the specification
with brownfield fixed effects, which suggest that at the community level, broad neighborhood
improvements are simultaneously being made over time. This reinforces the importance of
controlling for time-varying unobservables through the use of a control group in order to
avoid overstating the impact of cleanup. The estimate for the cleanup interim interaction
in our main specification, Interim × T reat, is now statistically indistinguishable from 0,
compared to the -4.56% estimated price impact on treated houses before cleanup started
(T reat). We take this as evidence of expectations for neighborhood improvements to come
before completion of site cleanup.
    Before proceeding to our DD-NNM estimator, we include some robustness checks that
assess the validity of our control group, the presence of housing supply impacts, and any
evidence of reverse causality. We first re-estimate the DID model by moving the cleanup
completion date 180, 365, 720 and 1095 days prior to the date cleanup activities actually
began (Table 10). If the control houses served as a valid comparison group for the treated
houses, then one would not expect any impact based on these falsified cleanup dates. If
there were, then it would suggest that the treatment and control groups had differential
trends before cleanup commenced. Table 10 shows that the coefficients on the treatment
effect (P ost × T reat) are insignificant, providing some evidence that the current specification
successfully controls for temporal and spatial confounders.
    Another potential concern, even though time frames are relatively short, is that our
estimated impacts incorporate changes in housing supply as a result of cleanup. If housing
supply increases as a result of cleanup, then one should expect to see the estimated cleanup
impact decrease as we allow for a longer post-treatment period. To test for this, we limited
the post-cleanup transactions to being at most 1, 2 and 3 years after cleanup in the main DID
specification. The estimated treatment from these regressions are presented in columns (2) -
(3) of Table 11. ATT estimates are not statistically different and stable across specifications.
    Finally, if brownfield remediation was part of larger effort to revitalize the specific area
in which the site is located (i.e. the houses located within the buffer), then we should see
"anticipatory" effects before the site is cleaned. To test for this, we created additional time
  29
       See Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan (2004) for the importance of clustering standard errors.


                                                      21
dummy variables that correspond to 1, 2, and 3 years before cleanup starts. If there is
reverse causality, then the coefficients on leads of “treatment” impacts should be positive and
significant. The regression in column (5) of Table 11 shows that none of them are, lending
support that it is brownfield cleanup that yields house price increases, and not house prices
increases as a result of a general revitalization that led to brownfield cleanup.


5.4    Difference-in-Differences Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimates
       (DD-NNM)
Both the fixed effects and DID approaches rely on the strong assumption that the hedonic
price function remains stable over time. If cleanup activities initiate neighborhood turnover,
the identities of those living in close proximity to the site may change, and with them, marginal
willingness to pay may change as well. In fact, Kuminoff and Pope (2014) demonstrate
that estimates of the hedonic price function may provide no information about MWTP. As
such, one needs a method that both controls for unobservables that may be correlated with
cleanup activities while not relying on variation in cleanup status over time. The difference
in differences nearest neighbor matching estimator described in Section 3 is designed to do
this by controlling for brownfield, house, and neighborhood characteristics.
    Estimates of the average treatment effect on cleanup (π) are recovered in two stages. Stage
1 uses a bias-corrected nearest neighbor matching estimator to recover the effect of locating
near and far from awarded sites using the set of comparable houses around non-awarded sites.
In doing so for both houses inside and outside of the buffer, we can correct for any unobserved
differences between awarded and non-award sites. Panel A of Table 12 gives average estimates
from Stage 1 for our preferred buffer size of 2070 meters using J = 5 matches. The estimates
under ‘Inside Treatment Buffer’ of Panel A are derived by averaging over the treatment
effect from comparing houses inside the treatment buffer of cleaned sites to houses inside the
treatment buffers of uncleaned sites (β2 + π). Estimates under ‘Outside Treatment Buffer’
of Panel A are the averaged treatment effects derived from comparing houses in the control
groups of cleaned sites to houses in the control groups of uncleaned sites (β2 ). We cannot
consider results for the years 2004-2007, since yearly data on tract-level attributes, which are
used to control for neighborhood composition, are only available starting in the year 2008.
    The matching estimates for houses outside the treatment buffer are negative and significant
across all years, ranging from -8.82% to -21.9% for J=5 matches, which is consistent with
the idea that cleanup targets neighborhoods that are worse off. Several of the within-buffer
estimates are insignificant, as the sample sizes have been reduced by a fair amount after
limiting the data to post-cleanup sales by year. The percentage with exact matches assess


                                               22
the quality of the matches used for each year. These range from 50.11% to 60.92% for
the within-buffer estimates, and 63.28% to 69.84% for the outside-buffer estimates. This
highlights the importance of using a bias-corrected estimator and matching on measures of
neighborhood quality. Panel B of Table 12 gives average results from Stage 1 using J = 10
matches, and suggests that results are fairly robust to using matches of different sizes.
    Stage 2 then recovers the effect of cleanup on the treated from a regression of individual
treatment effects (Stage 1) on a buffer indicator and controls. We include brownfield fixed
effects to control for any unobserved factors that may be correlated with cleanup assuming
that these unobservables impact the entire neighborhood and not differentially by buffer
status. Stage 2 cleanup estimates find statistically significant impacts that range from 10.2%
to 13.3%.30 Estimates with J=10 matches are similar and range from 11.8% to 15.2%.31
    These results suggest that we can indeed interpret our results as implying a positive and
significant willingness to pay for brownfield remediation (i.e., a welfare interpretation). The
largest of our fixed effects estimators, which estimates an 11.5% increase in housing values, is
similar to the smallest of the statistically significant DD-NNM estimates of 10.2% in 2011 and
10.8% in 2008.32 Compared to the estimates in other years, the larger DD-NNM estimates,
which range from 13.2% to 15.2%, are between 16 and 32 percent higher than our largest
fixed effect estimate.
    Compared with the results of the fixed effects and DID specifications, these larger estimates
suggest that changes in the price function over time may have indeed had the effect of reducing
the estimated MWTP. Hence, caution must be exercised for assuming time-constant hedonic
price functions in policy evaluation if the policy under consideration induces large enough
changes such that the population considered before treatment is inherently different from the
one after.


6        Conclusion
6.1      Cost-Benefit Analysis
Finally, we can address the simple question, ‘is brownfield remediation worth it?’ In answering
this question, we take a conservative approach. First, we take our most conservative estimate
of the cleanup effect - the difference-in-differences estimate based on a 2070 meter treatment
buffer (5.0%), rather than the larger estimates generated by the fixed effect and DD-NNM
    30
     The year 2010 estimate of 6.03% is statistically insignificant with standard errors clustered at the
brownfield level.
  31
     The smallest estimates of 9.38% and 9.65% respectively in years 2010 and 2011 are statistically insignificant.
  32
     The estimate in year 2010 is lower, but comparable, at 6.33% is insignificant (s.e. 0.07)


                                                        23
specifications. Next, we take a conservative estimate of the value of housing that sold inside
the treatment buffer prior to cleanup. Ideally, we would like to measure the total value of all
housing units inside each buffer prior to the start of cleanup, but we do not observe every
house sell during that pre-cleanup period. Rather than try to impute values for houses that
we do not see transact during that period, we take the conservative approach of aggregating
the value of only the houses that do sell in the five years prior to the start of cleanup inside
the treatment buffer. We are able to construct this aggregate value for 51 of the brownfields -
$4,158,640,384. Multiplying by a cleanup impact of 5.0% yields an estimate of the aggregate
increase in housing value owing to cleanup of $207,932,016. This represents an average benefit
value of $4,077,098 per site, with a median of $2,291,315. Figure 5 plots the distribution of
benefits across sites. The Northeast Midwest Institute (NEMW) estimates an average cost of
brownfield cleanup to be $602,000 based on cleanup data provided by the EPA (Paull, 2008).
Although the smallest of our benefits estimate is below the estimated cleanup costs (17 of 51
brownfields have estimated benefits less than $600,000), the benefits for the majority of the
cleaned sites still far exceed the cost.33 Furthermore, brownfield remediation should easily
pass a cost-benefit test if we considered all the properties located inside the treatment buffer,
a larger treatment buffer, or one of our larger treatment effect estimates.


6.2     Discussion
The EPA Brownfields Program provides grants to assess and cleanup properties the ‘expansion,
re-development, or re-use of which may be complicated by the presence or potential presence
of a hazardous substance, pollutant, or contaminant.’ In this paper, we quantify the benefits
associated with these remediation activities using property value hedonic techniques. As is
typically the case in property value hedonic applications, omitted neighborhood attributes
have the potential to bias these estimates. Indeed, our evidence suggests that neighborhoods
that successfully clean brownfields under the program may be worse in other unobserved
dimensions. As such, we offer a slate of quasi-experimental approaches to overcome this
problem, including simple neighborhood fixed effects, a difference-in-differences approach that
relies on a treatment and control group defined by geographic proximity, and a difference-in-
differences nearest neighbor matching estimator that exploits the advantages of our treatment
and control group definitions while not requiring that the hedonic price function remain
stable over time. Furthermore, our paper offers the added benefit of external validity given
our unique data, as it is the first to use a nationally representative sample of brownfield sites
considered by the EPA federal Brownfields Program.
  33
     Although it is beyond the scope of this paper as we do not have data on planned use, it would be
interesting to see whether estimated benefits are systematically different depending on planned future use.


                                                    24
    Before concluding, we acknowledge a few limitations of our analysis. First, looking at the
price of housing in close proximity to brownfield sites will not capture equilibrium effects
that are realized elsewhere in the urban area - i.e., cleanup of brownfields may have impacts
on local labor markets and on particular housing markets far from the brownfield in question.
We will fail to capture these effects to the extent that they appear in other parts of the city.
Given the size of a typical brownfield (relative to the size of an urban area), this may not be
much of a practical issue. Still, we do note that new methods (i.e., estimable sorting models)
may be able to deal with these sorts of concerns (Kuminoff, Smith, and Timmins, 2013).
    Second, our approach will also not capture health benefits from remediation that people
are not aware of (and, hence, are not reflected in house purchase decisions and transactions
prices). In contrast to other nuisances (Superfund sites, TSDF’s, or other toxic waste
exposure), we do not expect this to be as much of an issue for brownfield sites, making
property value hedonics a good approach in this context.
    In light of these limitations, the alternative specifications explored yield a consistent
conclusion - averaging over the experiences at a nationally representative sample of brownfield
properties, cleanup leads to housing price increases between 5.0% and 15.2%. Taking the most
conservative estimate of the value of an average site cleanup, we find that it indeed passes
cost-benefit analysis by an order of magnitude based on the expenditures from the Brownfields
Program. Moreover, our estimate using a difference-in-differences matching estimator without
time variation is consistent with a willingness to pay (i.e., welfare) interpretation, not simply
a capitalization effect. Although only one part of the larger EPA Brownfields Program,
cleanup of brownfield sites alone yields large increases to nearby housing values and, given
the DD-NNM results, has unambiguously positive welfare impacts on communities nearby.




                                               25
References
Abadie, Alberto and Guido W Imbens. 2006. “Large sample properties of matching estimators for
  average treatment effects.” Econometrica 74 (1):235–267.

———. 2011. “Bias-corrected matching estimators for average treatment effects.” Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics 29 (1):1–11.

Adler, Kenneth J., Robert C. Anderson, Z. Cook, Roger C. Dower, Allen R. Ferguson, and Margo J.
  Vickers. 1984. “The benefits of regulating hazardous waste disposal: Land values as an estimator.”
  Public Interest Economics Center, Washington, DC.

Alberini, Anna, Alberto Longo, Stefania Tonin, Francesco Trombetta, and Margherita Turvani.
  2005. “The role of liability, regulation and economic incentives in brownfield remediation and
  redevelopment: Evidence from surveys of developers.” Regional Science and Urban Economics
  35 (4):327–351.

Baden, Brett M. and Don L. Coursey. 2002. “The locality of waste sites within the city of chicago:
  A demographic, social, and economic analysis.” Resource and Energy Economics 24 (1):53–93.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Esther Duflo. 2009. “The experimental approach to development economics.”
  Annual Review of Economics 74 (1):151–178.

Banzhaf, Spencer and Eleanor McCormick. 2007. “Moving beyond cleanup: Identifying the crucibles
  of environmental gentrification.” National Center for Environmental Economics Working Paper
  #07-02, US EPA, Washington, DC.

Bayer, Patrick, Christopher Geissler, and James Roberts. 2011. “Speculators and middlemen: The
  role of flippers in the housing market.” NBER Working Paper w16784, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, Alvin Murphy, and Christopher Timmins. 2011. “A dynamic
  model of demand for houses and neighborhoods.” NBER Working Paper w17250, National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Been, Vicki and Francis Gupta. 1997. “Coming to the nuisance or going to the barrios? A longitudinal
  analysis of environmental justice claims.” Ecology Law Quarterly 24:1–887.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How much should we trust
  differences-in-differences estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (1):249–275.

Bishop, Kelly and Christopher Timmins. 2011. “Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Estimating
  marginal willingness to pay for differentiated products without instrumental variables.” NBER
  Working Paper w17611, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

                                                26
Fan, Jianqing and Irene Gijbels. 1996. Local polynomial modelling and its applications: Monographs
  on statistics and applied probability, vol. 66. CRC Press.

Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, Ralph Mastromonaco, and Christopher Timmins. 2011. “Valuing the
  benefits of superfund site remediation: Three approaches to measuring localized externalities.”
  NBER Working Paper w16655, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Greenstone, Michael and Ted Gayer. 2009. “Quasi-experimental and experimental approaches to
  environmental economics.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 57 (1):21–44.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith R. and Laura O. Taylor. 2004. “Externality effects of small-scale hazardous waste
  wites: Evidence from urban commercial property markets.” Journal of Environmental Economics
  and Management 47 (1):117–139.

Kiel, Katherine A. 1995. “Measuring the impact of the discovery and cleaning of identified hazardous
  waste sites on house values.” Land Economics 71 (4):428–435.

Kohlhase, Janet E. 1991. “The impact of toxic waste sites on housing values.” Journal of urban
  Economics 30 (1):1–26.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V. and Jaren C. Pope. 2014. “Do ‘capitalization effects’ for public goods reveal
  the public’s willingness to pay?” International Economic Review 55 (4):1227–1250.

Kuminoff, Nicolai V., V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher Timmins. 2013. “The new economics of
  equilibrium sorting and policy evaluation using housing markets.” Journal of Economic Literature
  51 (4):1007–1062.

Leigh, Nancey Green and Sarah L Coffin. 2005. “Modeling the Relationship among brownfields,
  property values, and community revitalization.” Housing Policy Debate 16 (2):257–280.

Linden, Leigh and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2008. “Estimates of the impact of crime risk on property values
  from megan’s laws.” The American Economic Review 98 (3):1103–1127.

Linn, Joshua. 2013. “The effect of voluntary brownfields programs on nearby property values:
  Evidence from illinois.” Journal of Urban Economics 78:1–18.

Palmquist, Raymond B. 2005. “Property value models.” Handbook of Environmental Economics
  2:763–819.

Pastor, Manuel, Jim Sadd, and John Hipp. 2001. “Which came rirst? Toxic facilities, minority
  move-in, and environmental justice.” Journal of Urban Affairs 23 (1):1–21.

Paull, Evans. 2008. “The environmental and economic impacts of brownfields redevelopment.”
  Working Paper Northeast Midwest Institute, Washington, DC.

                                                 27
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. “Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure
  competition.” The Journal of Political Economy 82 (1):34–55.

Siniavskaia,   Natalia.   2011.         “Property    tax   rates   by    county    and    city.”
  url=http://www.nahb.org/generic.aspx?sectionID=734&genericContentID
  =163494&channelID=311. Assessed 2014-10-16.

Taylor, Laura O. 2003. “The hedonic method.” In A primer on nonmarket valuation, vol. 3, edited
  by Kevin J. Boyle Thomas C. Brown Champ, Patricia A. Springer Science+Business New York,
  331–393.

Wolverton, Ann. 2009. “Effects of socio-economic and input-related factors on polluting plants’
  location decisions.” The BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 9 (1).




                                              28
Tables

                 Table 1: Brownfield Attributes By Availability Of Housing Data

                                           With Dataquick                   Without Dataquick
     Variable                         Mean       St. Dev.       Obs.     Mean       St. Dev.       Obs.      t-stat    Reject?
     Funded and Unfunded
     Petroleum                          0.27        0.45         401       0.17        0.38         777      -4.02         Y
     Hazardous Substances              0.75         0.43         401      0.85         0.35         777       4.26         Y
     Proposal Score (std.)             78.38       11.88         401      76.03       11.38         512      -3.04         Y

     Funded Only
     Petroleum                          0.30        0.46         239       0.18        0.39         201      -2.76         Y
     Hazardous Substances              0.73         0.45         239       0.85        0.36         201      3.00          Y
     Proposal Score (std.)             84.54        4.71         239      84.85       4.68          201      0.69          N
     Property Size (acres)             10.83       31.29         239      12.91       44.53         197      0.57          N
     Ready for Reuse                   0.43         0.50         239       0.44        0.50         201      0.25          N
     Note: Compares average brownfield attributes by availability of housing data for both funded and non-funded sites, as well
     as for funded sites only. ‘Petroleum’ and ‘Hazardous Substances’ are dummy variables that refer to the cleanup application
     type (sites may apply for both types of grants).




                                                                 29
                 Table 2: Housing Attributes By Proximity To Number Of Sites

                                        Near 1 Brownfield              Near Multiple Brownfields
Attributes                              Mean      St. Dev.               Mean        St. Dev.                t-stat Reject?
Price                                 218,479.00 153,031.80            214,641.00   150,705.70               -17.97   Y
Real Estate Rate (County)               10.18       4.64                 10.20          4.31                  2.48    Y
Age                                     46.78      31.49                 58.85         34.22                259.07    Y
Square Footage                         1,565.92    684.63               1,542.84      757.77                 -22.53   Y
Bathrooms                                1.95       0.84                  1.83         0.93                  -92.87   Y
Bedrooms                                 3.04       1.05                  3.02         1.34                  -14.00   Y
Sold in Year Built                       0.04       0.19                  0.03         0.16                  -43.59   Y
Condominium                              0.15       0.35                  0.19          0.39                  83.12   Y
Multifamily                              0.05       0.21                  0.10         0.31                 153.83    Y
Single Family                            0.80       0.40                  0.70          0.46                -167.85   Y
Mobile                                   0.00       0.05                  0.00         0.03                  -27.75   Y
Misc.                                    0.00       0.05                  0.00         0.06                   24.55   Y

Obs.                                    876,693                         1,186,858
Note: Compares mean attributes of houses located within 8 kilometers of at most one brownfield site to those located near multiple
brownfield sites within 8 kilometers.




                                                               30
        Table 3: Housing Attributes By Treatment Status (Determined By Buffer)

                                         Treat ( ≤ 2070m)                  Control (>2070m)
Attributes                              Mean            St. Dev.          Mean           St. Dev.  t-stat             Reject?
Price                                 192,305.58       130,325.05       198,787.91      142,330.05 8.97                 Y
Real Estate Rate (County)                9.96             3.62            10.64            4.09     32.89               Y
Age                                     52.94            36.06            45.01           31.51    -47.50               Y
Square Footage                         1,559.49          689.47          1,560.25         690.73     0.21               N
Bathrooms                                1.83             0.78             1.88            0.81    12.05                Y
Bedrooms                                 3.09             1.19             3.00            1.01    -18.23               Y
Sold in Year Built                       0.04             0.19             0.05            0.21     8.41                Y
Condominium                              0.13             0.34             0.15            0.36      9.59               Y
Multifamily                              0.09             0.29             0.04            0.20    -44.27               Y
Single Family                            0.77             0.42             0.81            0.40     15.31               Y
Mobile                                   0.00             0.03             0.00            0.04     3.47                Y
Misc.                                    0.00             0.04             0.00            0.03     -1.72               N

Obs.                                     46,090                          204,719
Note: Compares mean attributes of houses by location inside versus outside of treatment buffer. Sample includes all houses within 5
kilometers of an awarded brownfield. Attributes are taken from houses selling before cleanup.




                                                               31
Table 4: Timeline of Brownfield Start And Completion Frequencies


                  With Dataquick              Without Dataquick
               Starts    Completions         Starts    Completions
      2000       1
      2001                                      1
      2002        1                             1
      2003        4                             2
      2004       23              6             17             5
      2005       37             12             23             13
      2006       35             35             36             18
      2007       23             24             28             26
      2008       30             17             34             27
      2009       30             23             17             33
      2010        8             22              8             14
      2011        1                             1              2
      Note: Table gives the cleanup start and completion frequencies by
      year for brownfields with and without housing data.




                                     32
         Table 5: Spatial Distribution Of Income Before Cleanup


                                     Panel A: Race
                Inside Buffer         Outside Buffer            Diff (in) - Diff (out)
 White              88.73                 89.36                        -0.63%
Asian/PI             3.78                  4.19                        -0.41%
 Black               4.37                   2.8                          1.57%
Hispanic              2.2                  2.86                         -0.66%
 Other               0.92                  0.79                         0.13%

                           Panel B: Income Quintiles†
                Inside Buffer         Outside Buffer            Diff (in) - Diff (out)
     1              25.86                 20.13                         5.73%
     2              18.86                 19.15                         -0.29%
     3              19.06                 20.22                         -1.16%
     4              19.08                 20.18                          -1.1%
     5              17.14                 20.32                         -3.18%
Note: Table reports the average differences in race and income (%) before cleanup for different
race categories and segments of the income distribution. † Quintiles are based on distribution
of household incomes of all houses sold before cleanup.




                                             33
              Table 6: Change In Race And Income Distribution After Cleanup


                                                     Panel A: Race
                    Inside Buffer                               Outside Buffer                                   Diff (in)
                Post = 0 Post = 1              Diff (In)      Post = 0 Post = 1              Diff (Out)        - Diff (out)
White            88.73        88.1              -0.63          89.36     87.12                 -2.24              1.61%
Asian/PI          3.78        1.74              -2.04           4.19      2.67                 -1.52             -0.52%
Black             4.37        6.24               1.87            2.8      4.98                  2.18             -0.31%
Hispanic           2.2        3.77               1.57           2.86      5.06                   2.2             -0.63%
Other             0.92        0.15              -0.77           0.79      0.16                 -0.63             -0.14%

                                                   Panel B: Income
                   Inside Buffer                                Outside Buffer                                   Diff (in)
                Post = 0 Post = 1              Diff (In)      Post = 0 Post = 1              Diff (Out)        - Diff (out)
1                20.57      20.17                -0.4          20.13      20.3                  0.17             -0.57%
2                 20.1      22.79                2.69          20.45     22.69                  2.24              0.45%
3                19.49      26.56                7.07          19.92     21.05                  1.13              5.94%
4                20.22      17.56               -2.66          19.55     20.33                  0.78             -3.44%
5                19.61      12.92               -6.69          19.95     15.63                 -4.32             -2.37%
Note: Table gives average changes in race and income (%) after cleanup in neighborhoods near brownfields relative to
neighborhoods far from brownfields over the same period. Relative differences are reported for different race categories and
segments of the income distribution.




                                                             34
               Table 7: Cross-Sectional Specification


VARIABLES                                              All within 5km

Cleanedup                                                  -0.117***
                                                           (0.00274)

Constant                                                   11.50***
                                                           (0.0103)

Observations                                                469,928
R2                                                           0.488

Controls
Year Fixed Effects                                             Yes
Brownfield Characteristics                                     Yes
House Controls                                                 Yes
Note: Cross-sectional specification compares houses near cleaned versus not cleaned brown-
fields (within 5km). Sample used includes only houses inside a 5km buffer around a funded
brownfield that has been cleaned or an unfunded brownfield. ‘Cleanedup’ = 1 if the house
is near a funded site has been cleaned. House attributes include county tax rate, age, num-
ber of bathrooms, bedrooms, square footage, and indicator variables for selling in the year
built, condo, multifamily, mobile unknown/misc. house type, and year-of-build for years
1800’s, 1900-1950, 1950-2000, 2000-2005, 2005-2010, and after 2010. Brownfield attributes
include whether a site is assessed twice, a petroleum site, a hazardous substances site, and
the standardized proposal score. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                           35
                                             Table 8: Fixed Effects


VARIABLES                      b= 1000           b= 2000           b= 3000           b= 5000               b= 5000

Interim × BF                   0.0718*           0.101**           0.0939**          0.101***               0.113**
                               (0.0401)          (0.0404)          (0.0432)          (0.0381)               (0.045)
Post × BF                      0.0984*           0.115**           0.0968**          0.0842**              0.0926**
                               (0.0551)          (0.0451)          (0.0418)          (0.0371)               (0.042)

Observations                    18,686            64,652            136,480           370,910               193,421
R2                               0.674             0.671             0.686             0.687                 0.254

Controls
Year Fixed Effects    Yes                         Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes
House Controls        Yes                         Yes               Yes                Yes
Fixed Effects      Brownfield                  Brownfield        Brownfield         Brownfield               House
Note: Fixed effects specification compares houses sold before and after cleanup. Sample used includes only houses (i) around
 awarded brownfields, and (ii) inside buffer ‘b’ meters. ‘Post’ = 1 if transaction occurs after nearby brownfield is cleaned.
‘Interim’ = 1 if transaction occurs during cleanup. House characteristics (for specifications with brownfield fixed effects)
 are the same as those used in Table 7. Standard errors clustered by brownfield in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
 p<0.1.




                                                            36
                      Table 9: Differences-In-Differences


VARIABLES                                                      b=2070 meters

Treat                                            -0.0496*** -0.0475*** -0.0456**
                                                   (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.018)
Interim                                           0.237***   0.112***   0.104***
                                                   (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.039)
Post                                              0.149***   -0.000276 0.0747**
                                                   (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.037)
Interim × Treat                                  -0.0747*** -0.0365*** -0.0161
                                                   (0.009)    (0.007)    (0.023)
Post × Treat                                      0.0567*** 0.0701***   0.0500*
                                                   (0.007)    (0.006)    (0.029)
Constant                                          13.97***   13.21***   11.08***
                                                   (0.022)    (0.018)    (0.166)

Observations                                        370,910            370,910           370,910
R2                                                   0.087              0.471             0.380

Controls
Year Fixed Effects                                     Yes                Yes               Yes
Brownfield Characteristics                             Yes                Yes
House Controls                                                            Yes               Yes
Brownfield Fixed Effects                                                                    Yes
Note: DID specification compares price differences before and after site cleanup for houses
located within a treatment buffer of 2070 meters to differences in prices for those houses
located outside of the treatment buffer. Sample used includes only houses (i) around awarded
brownfields, and (ii) within 5km of a site. ‘Treat’ = 1 if house is located within 2070 meters
of a site. ‘Post’= 1 if transaction occurs after nearby brownfield is cleaned. ‘Interim’ = 1 if
transaction occurs during cleanup. Brownfield and house controls (when included) are the
same those in Table 7. There are a total of 197 sites in the brownfield fixed effects specification.
Standard errors clustered by brownfield in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                 37
Table 10: Falsification Test - D Days Before Actual Cleanup Date


 VARIABLES                       D=180             D=365           D=730               D=1095


 Treat                        -0.0469*** -0.0462** -0.0448**                           -0.0468**
                                (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.018)                              (0.018)
 Post                         0.0845*** 0.0732**     0.0354                             -0.00747
                                (0.031)   (0.031)   (0.030)                              (0.029)
 Post × Treat                   0.0263     0.0221    0.0166                              0.0187
                                (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.022)                              (0.021)

 Constant                       11.08***          11.07***        11.07***             11.08***
                                 (0.166)           (0.166)         (0.164)              (0.162)

 Observations                    370,910          370,910          370,910              370,910
 R2                               0.253            0.251            0.248                0.248
 Number of Sites                   197              197              197                  197
 Note: The above falsification tests move the cleanup date D days before the actual date of cleanup,
 and re-estimates the DID specification with brownfield fixed effects. As it is unclear what an ‘In-
 terim’ period should be with the falsified dates, we do not separately identify cleanup interim effects.
 Controls used for falsification tests are the same as those used in Column 3 of Table 9. Standard
 errors clustered by brownfield in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  38
                                        Table 11: Robustness

                                                  At most Y years post cleanup                      Anticipatory
VARIABLES                 Main Estimate            Y =1            Y =2           Y =3                   Effect


Lead 3 years                                                                                             0.0171
                                                                                                        (0.020)
Lead 2 years                                                                                            -0.0119
                                                                                                        (0.021)
Lead 1 year                                                                                             0.00255
                                                                                                        (0.024)
Post × Treat                   0.0500*           0.0484**        0.0486*         0.0459*                0.0511*
                               (0.029)            (0.024)        (0.026)         (0.027)                (0.030)

Constant                      11.08***           11.04***        11.04***       11.05***               11.08***
                               (0.166)            (0.171)         (0.170)        (0.170)                (0.164)

Observations                   370,910            314,047        328,844         340,489                370,910
R2                              0.380              0.391          0.390           0.388                  0.381
Number of Sites                  197                193            194             195                    197
Note: Column (1) give the main estimate from the DID specification (from Column 3 of Table 9). Columns (2) - (4)
respectively estimate the ATT by limiting the post-treatment period to at most 1, 2, and 3 years after cleanup. Column
(5) includes leads in treatment impact of 1, 2, and 3 years to test for any anticipatory effects. Controls used are the same
as those used in Column 3 of Table 9. Standard errors clustered by brownfield in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.




                                                           39
Table 12: Stage 1 Difference-In-Differences Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimator


                                                       Panel A: 5 Matches

               Inside Treatment Buffer                                               Outside Treatment Buffer

Year           Est.            S.E.        Obs.      % Exact         Year           Est.             S.E.         Obs.       % Exact

Y2008      0.120***         (0.0443)      4,404        60.92        Y2008        -0.163***        (0.0254)      17,737          63.45
Y2009      0.150***         (0.0396)      5,131        59.88        Y2009       -0.0882***        (0.0226)      20,363          68.39
Y2010      -0.0883**        (0.0395)      4,341        50.11        Y2010        -0.212***        (0.0240)      17,273          63.28
Y2011       -0.0623         (0.0409)      3,967        55.73        Y2011        -0.219***        (0.0283)      16,065          69.84
Y2012       -0.0153         (0.0454)      3,317        60.66        Y2012        -0.163***        (0.0274)      13,400           67.1

                                                      Panel B: 10 Matches

               Inside Treatment Buffer                                               Outside Treatment Buffer

Year           Est.            S.E.        Obs.      % Exact         Year           Est.             S.E.         Obs.       % Exact

Y2008      0.170***         (0.0391)      5,131        57.82        Y2008        -0.131***        (0.0197)      17,737          59.63
Y2009      0.146***         (0.0351)      4,341        58.81        Y2009       -0.0988***        (0.0178)      20,363          64.14
Y2010       -0.0514         (0.0345)      3,967        49.29        Y2010        -0.210***        (0.0195)      17,273          58.76
Y2011      -0.0743**        (0.0333)      3,317        51.53        Y2011        -0.230***        (0.0237)      16,065          65.63
Y2012       -0.0516         (0.0387)      3,317        56.81        Y2012        -0.183***        (0.0213)      13,400          61.29
† Note: Table gives bias-adjusted nearest neighbor matching estimates using 5 and 10 nearest neighbors based on the Mahalanobis metric
at a buffer of 2070 meters. Matches are restricted to be in the same state. Column ‘% Exact’ gives the percentage of the observations
that match exactly on State. Match variables: House attributes include the county tax rate, age, number of bedrooms, bathrooms, square
footage, and indicator variables for selling in the year built, condo, multifamily, mobile, unknown/misc. house type, and year-of-build
for years 1800’s, 1900-1950, 1950-2000, 2000-2005, 2005-2010, and after 2010. Brownfield attributes include the standardized proposal
score, site longitude and latitude, and indicator variables for assessed twice, petroleum site, and hazardous substances site. Neighborhood
attributes at the tract-level include median income, % White, % Black, % Asian, % Hispanic, % Blue Collar, % High School Graduate, %
College Graduate, % With Child Under 18, % Speaks English, % Speaks Spanish, % Speaks Indo-European language, and % U.S. citizen.
Standard errors in parentheses and calculated according Abadie and Imbens (2006). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                   40
Table 13: Stage 2 Difference-In-Differences Nearest Neighbor Matching Estimator


                 A. 5 Matches                                             B. 10 Matches

   Year          Est.          S.E.          N             Year           Est.           S.E.           N

   Y2008      0.108**       (0.0437)      6,672            Y2008 0.152*** (0.0464)                   6,672
   Y2009       0.133*       (0.0685)      7,751            Y2009 0.144** (0.0699)                    7,751
   Y2010       0.0633       (0.0733)      7,925            Y2010 0.0938 (0.0670)                     7,925
   Y2011       0.102*       (0.0586)      8,033            Y2011 0.0965 (0.0581)                     8,033
   Y2012      0.132**       (0.0626)      6,662            Y2012 0.118* (0.0654)                     6,662

   Note: Stage 2 of DD-NNM first recovers individual treatment effects on all houses located around awarded
   sites from Stage 1, computed based on the nearest matches found from non-awarded sites. Treatment
   effects are then regressed on a dummy variable for locating inside the treatment buffer, house/neighborhood
   controls, and site-specific dummy variables. Standard errors clustered by brownfield in parentheses. ***
   p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      41
Figures




Figure 1: Brownfield Sites in the Continental U.S. from the Set of Cleanup Applicants Between
2003-2008




                                             42
Figure 2: Average Square Footage Of Houses Transacted By Distance From Brownfield Before V.
After Remediation With 99% Confidence Intervals




                                            43
Figure 3: Non-Parametric Price Function Estimates Before And After Remediation With 99%
Confidence Intervals




                                          44
Figure 4: Non-Parametric Price Function Estimates Relative To Cleanup Period For Treatment And
Control Houses With 95% Confidence Intervals




                                             45
Figure 5: Distribution of Benefits Across Brownfields: Aggregate Value of Houses Sold 5 Years Prior
to Cleanup Start




                                                46
Appendix A

     Table A1: House Attributes By Whether Brownfield Is Funded Or Unfunded

                                              Funded Brownfields                Unfunded Brownfields Equality of Means
      Attributes                               Mean      St. Dev.                 Mean      St. Dev.  t-stat  Reject?
      Price                                  197,596.68 140,223.30              228,864.38 153,341.36 82.56      Y
      Real Estate Rate (County)                10.51       4.01                    9.74       4.86    -66.55     Y
      Age                                      46.47      32.54                   45.76      30.95     -8.76     Y
      Square Footage                          1,560.11    690.50                 1,551.65    652.17    -4.97     Y
      Bathrooms                                 1.87       0.81                    1.99       0.83    56.55      Y
      Bedrooms                                  3.01       1.05                    3.03       1.01     6.42      Y
      Sold in Year Built                        0.04       0.20                    0.03       0.18    -18.85     Y
      Condominium                               0.15       0.35                    0.16       0.37     15.28     Y
      Multifamily                               0.05       0.22                    0.04       0.19    -22.74     Y
      Single Family                             0.80       0.40                    0.79       0.40     -6.48     Y
      Mobile                                    0.00       0.04                    0.00       0.06     13.32     Y
      Misc.                                     0.00       0.03                    0.00       0.06     17.12     Y

      Obs.                                     250,809                            395,756
      Note: Compares the mean attributes of houses located near funded brownfields to those located near unfunded brownfields. Sample is
      limited to houses within 5000 meters of a site. For funded brownfields, attributes are taken from houses selling before cleanup.




           Table A2: House Attributes By Within 5km Versus Rest Of County

                                                  Within 5km                         Rest of County     Equality of Means
      Attributes                              Mean       St. Dev.                 Mean        St. Dev.    t-stat   Reject?
      Price                                 230,426.57 1,377,013.13             263,210.91 1,266,378.88    37.04     Y
      Real Estate Rate (County)               10.94        4.78                    9.90         4.98     -307.13     Y
      Age                                     55.78        34.85                  31.62         27.98   -1,141.92    Y
      Square Footage                         1,495.73    6,482.25                1,814.20     19,809.96    26.33     Y
      Bathrooms                                1.70        6.85                    1.96         2.09      98.56      Y
      Bedrooms                                 2.30        1.98                    2.18         1.82      -88.12     Y
      Sold in Year Built                       0.03        0.16                    0.07         0.25     251.08      Y
      Condominium                              0.19         0.39                   0.16          0.37     -96.81     Y
      Multifamily                              0.09        0.28                    0.02         0.13     -549.31     Y
      Single Family                            0.71         0.45                   0.81          0.39     340.42     Y
      Mobile                                   0.00        0.05                    0.01         0.09     113.32      Y
      Misc.                                    0.01         0.08                   0.00         0.06      -45.89     Y

      Obs.                                   2,769,158                           9,288,332
      Note: Compares mean attributes of all houses within 5000 meters of a brownfield (funded or unfunded) to houses located outside 5000
      meters in the rest of the county. For funded sites, only houses before cleanup are used. All other houses that are not considered a
      condominium, multifamily, single family, or mobile dwelling are categorized as ‘Miscellaneous.’




                                                                       47
Table A3: Brownfield Cleanup Duration (In Days) By Contaminant


       Contaminant Funding Type Mean St. Dev.                                  Obs.
       Petroleum only            444.08 468.75                                  60
       Hazardous Substances only 442.72 449.64                                 210

       Contaminant Found
       Controlled Substances                    741.90       645.86              10
       Asbestos                                 493.62       476.18              86
       PCBs                                     489.58       468.92             45
       VOCs                                     501.88       464.46             108
       Lead                                     445.65       415.13             156
       Other Metals                             438.97       436.78             117
       PAHs                                     448.07       436.83             117
       Other                                    495.85       520.38              75
       Unknown                                  383.00       513.36               2

       Media of Contamination                   Mean           sd                N
       Soil                                     464.06       450.36             234
       Air                                      329.33       289.09              12
       Surface Water                            356.00       282.92              21
       Groundwater                              520.44       499.20             126
       Drinking Water                           634.00                            1
       Sediments                                422.45       441.28              11
       Unknown                                  456.00       359.05               7
       Note: Table gives overall duration of cleanup for petroleum and hazardous substances
       brownfield sites, as well as cleanup duration by contaminant type and the medium of
       contamation.




                                              48
     Table A4: Fraction of Proposals Initiated In Each Year (Column) That Did Not Complete Cleanup By 2012


         Contaminant Funding Type 2002                       2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
         Petroleum only                                      0.0000 0.1765 0.0952 0.2857 0.3333 0.4444 0.6000
         Hazardous Substances only 0.0000                    0.0000 0.0455 0.0541 0.1818 0.1905 0.2222 0.4865 0.4000 1.0000
                                                             0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000        0.0000        1.0000

         Contaminant Found                        2002       2003       2004        2005        2006        2007        2008       2009         2010       2011
         Controlled Substances                                          0.0000      0.0000      0.0000      0.0000                 0.0000
         Asbestos                                0.0000 0.0000          0.0769      0.0714      0.0000      0.1364     0.3684      0.5714      0.5000
         PCBs                                           0.0000          0.1667      0.0833      0.1000      0.2500     0.4444      0.5000      0.4286      1.0000
         VOCs                                           0.0000          0.1429      0.1429      0.2667      0.3000     0.2286      0.5556      0.5000      1.0000
         Lead                                           0.0000          0.0500      0.0345      0.1250      0.1563     0.2250      0.5517      0.4167      1.0000




49
         Other Metals                                   0.0000          0.1538      0.0400      0.2258      0.2609     0.2963      0.5000      0.3636      1.0000
         PAHs                                    0.0000 0.0000          0.0769      0.0800      0.1818      0.2000     0.2647      0.6800      0.4286      1.0000
         Other                                   0.0000 0.0000          0.0000      0.0000      0.1333      0.2857     0.0000      0.3000      0.3333
         Unknown                                                        0.0000                                         0.0000

         Media of Contamination                  2002 2003          2004 2005 2006 2007                                2008   2009 2010 2011
         Soil                                    0.0000 0.0000      0.1143 0.0600 0.2131 0.2222                        0.2857 0.5610 0.4000 1.0000
         Air                                                        0.2500 0.0000 0.0000                                      0.0000
         Surface Water                                              0.2500 0.1667 0.1429 0.0000                        0.0000 0.0000 0.5000
         Groundwater                                         0.0000 0.0909 0.1071 0.3030 0.3182                        0.2895 0.6154 0.5455 1.0000
         Drinking Water                                                    0.0000        1.0000                        1.0000
         Sediments                                                  0.3333 0.2500 0.5000 0.0000                        0.7500 0.5000 0.5000
         Unknown                                                    0.0000 0.0000        0.3333                        0.0000 0.5000 1.0000
         Note: Table reports the fraction of cleanups initiated in each year that were not completed by 2012. No cleanups were initiated in 2012 that submitted
         applications for the 2002-2008 fiscal years.
Appendix B
Local Polynomial Modeling of the Hedonic Price Gradient
Let (X01 , . . . , X0j , . . . , X0k ) be a set of k equally-spaced focal points on the support of the
variable defining distance from brownfield. Using k focal points divides the support of distance
into k + 1 intervals of length
                                                    distmax − distmin
                                               l=
                                                          k+1
where X0j = distmin + l × j for j = 1, 2, . . . k. We fit a linear function for each focal point:

                                    Pi | X0j = a + b · disti + i

where Pi is the price for house i and X0j is distance. The covariate and the focal points used
in the kernel weight are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. The problem
is to minimize the following weighted sum of squared residuals,

                       n
                                                                                   !
                       X                                 2          disti − X0j
                             Pi − [a + b(disti −   X0j )]     · Kh
                       i=1
                                                                          σ̂

where Kh (·) is a Gaussian kernel; i.e. Kh (z) = h1 Kh ( hz ) = h1 φ( hz ) , and σ̂ is the estimated
standard deviation of the covariate, Xi . The smoothing parameter h is chosen according to
three times Silverman’s Rule of Thumb, which states:

                                                   1.06σ̂
                                             h=
                                                    n1/5

Comparing the price gradients with respect to distance pre- and post- treatment, the estimates
find that the difference becomes close to 0 at a distance from the brownfield of about 2
kilometers. Price gradients with respect to time are estimated similarly where the X variable
is instead the days relative to cleanup initiation and completion.




                                                   50
