                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT POLICIES INCREASE PROSOCIAL BEHAVIOR? AN EXPERIMENT WITH
             REFEREES AT THE JOURNAL OF PUBLIC ECONOMICS

                                              Raj Chetty
                                            Emmanuel Saez
                                             László Sándor

                                         Working Paper 20290
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20290


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




This paper is in preparation for publication at the Journal of Economic Perspectives. We thank Nava
Ashraf, David Autor, Stefano DellaVigna, Hilary Hoynes, Damon Jones, Emir Kamenica, Lawrence
Katz, Henrik Kleven, Ulrike Malmendier, Monica Singhal, Timothy Taylor, and numerous seminar
participants for helpful discussions and comments. We thank Jenny Henzen and the Elsevier staff for
supporting the project and providing data and Liz Anderson for implementing the experiment. Greg
Bruich, Jessica Laird, Keli Liu, Alex Olssen, and Heather Sarsons provided outstanding research assistance.
Financial support from the Lab for Economic Applications and Policy at Harvard and the National
Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. A de-identified version of the referee-level dataset
used in this paper can be downloaded at http://obs.rc.fas.harvard.edu/chetty/jpube_experiment.zip
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez, and László Sándor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Policies Increase Prosocial Behavior? An Experiment with Referees at the Journal of
Public Economics
Raj Chetty, Emmanuel Saez, and László Sándor
NBER Working Paper No. 20290
July 2014
JEL No. H23,H41

                                               ABSTRACT

We evaluate policies to increase prosocial behavior using a field experiment with 1,500 referees at
the Journal of Public Economics. We randomly assign referees to four groups: a control group with
a six week deadline to submit a referee report, a group with a four week deadline, a cash incentive
group rewarded with $100 for meeting the four week deadline, and a social incentive group in which
referees were told that their turnaround times would be publicly posted. We obtain four sets of results.
First, shorter deadlines reduce the time referees take to submit reports substantially. Second, cash incentives
significantly improve speed, especially in the week before the deadline. Cash payments do not crowd
out intrinsic motivation: after the cash treatment ends, referees who received cash incentives are no
slower than those in the four-week deadline group. Third, social incentives have smaller but significant
effects on review times and are especially effective among tenured professors, who are less sensitive
to deadlines and cash incentives. Fourth, all the treatments have little or no effect on agreement rates,
quality of reports, or review times at other journals. We conclude that small changes in journals’ policies
could substantially expedite peer review at little cost. More generally, price incentives, nudges, and
social pressure are effective and complementary methods of increasing prosocial behavior.


Raj Chetty                                             László Sándor
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Harvard University                                     Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St.                                     1805 Cambridge St.
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                               sandorl@gmail.com
chetty@fas.harvard.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
        The peer review process familiar to all academic researchers offers a classic example of the
positive externalities from prosocial behavior: the reviewer bears the costs from submitting a high-
quality referee report quickly, while the gains to the authors of the paper and to society from the
knowledge produced are potentially large.           We evaluate the impacts of economic and social
incentives on peer review using an experiment with 1,500 referees at the Journal of Public
Economics. The specific aim of the experiment is to understand how to improve the speed and
quality of peer review, an issue of particular importance to the economics profession given the
slowdown of the publishing process (Ellison 2002). Our broader objective is to evaluate commonly
used methods of increasing prosocial behavior and to test the predictions of competing theories.
        In our experiment, we randomly assign referees to four groups: a control group with a six-
week (45 day) deadline to submit a referee report, a group with a four week (28 day) deadline, a cash
incentive group rewarded with $100 for meeting a four week deadline, and a social incentive group
in which referees were told that their turnaround times would be publicly posted. The experiment
yields four sets of results.
        First, shortening the deadline from 6 weeks to 4 weeks reduces median review times from 48
days to 36 days. Because missing the deadline has no direct consequence, we believe the shorter
deadline acts primarily as a “nudge” (Thaler and Sunstein 2008) that changes the default date at
which referees submit reports. Second, providing a $100 cash incentive for submitting a report within
four weeks reduces median review times by an additional eight days. Third, the social incentive
treatment reduces median review times by approximately 2.5 days – which is intriguing given that
the degree of social pressure applied here is relatively light. We also find that that social incentives
have much larger effects on tenured professors, but in contrast, tenured professors are less sensitive
to deadlines and cash incentives than untenured referees.
        Finally, we evaluate whether the treatments have an impact on other outcomes besides review
time.1 Economic models of multi-tasking (e.g., Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991) predict that referees
will prioritize the incentivized task (i.e., submitting a report quickly) at the expense of other aspects
of performance (e.g., the quality of reviews). We find that the shorter deadline has no effect on the
quality of the reports that referees submit, as measured by whether the editor follows their
recommendation or the length of referee reports. The cash and social incentives induce referees to

1
  The cash incentive increases the fraction of referees who agree to review a manuscript. The social incentive
reduces agreement rates, while the shorter deadline has no impact. We show that the selection effects induced by
these changes in agreement rates are modest and are unlikely to explain the observed changes in review times.

                                                       1
write slightly shorter referee reports, but do not affect the probability that the editor follows the
referee’s advice. We also find little evidence of negative spillovers across journals: the treatments
have no detectable effects on referees’ willingness to review manuscripts and review times at other
Elsevier journals.


       We conclude that small changes in journals’ policies could substantially improve the peer
review process at little cost. Shorter deadlines appear to be an essentially costless means of
expediting reviews. Cash and social incentives are also effective, but have monetary and psychic
costs that must be weighed against their benefits.
       A large body of evidence from the lab has considered the determinants of prosocial behavior
and altruism (for example, Ledyard 1995; Fehr and Fischbacher 2003; Vesterlund 2014). Our study
provides evidence from the field, which has been considerably more limited. Prior work concerning
prosocial behavior has often debated whether extrinsic incentives such as cash payments are effective
in increasing prosocial behavior because they may crowd out intrinsic motivation (Titmuss 1971;
Bénabou and Tirole 2003). In our application, if referees submit reviews to be recognized for their
service to the profession by editors, the provision of monetary incentives could potentially erode this
signal and have a negative impact on review times. However, our analysis shows that, at least in this
context, price incentives, nudges, and social pressure are all effective and complementary methods of
increasing prosocial behavior.



Experimental Design

       We conducted the experiment over a 20 month period, from February 15, 2010 to October 26,
2011. All referees for the Journal of Public Economics during this period were randomly assigned to
one of four groups. For simplicity, only referee requests for new submissions were included in the
experiment. These assignments were permanent for the duration of the experiment: referees never
switched groups. The co-editors in charge of handling each new submission chose referees to review
the paper without seeing the group to which the referee was assigned.




                                                     2
        Some key features of the four groups are shown in Table 1.2 All deadlines for the differing
groups were defined relative to the date at which the invitation was sent – not the date at which the
referee accepted the invitation – to eliminate incentives to delay agreement.
        The control or what we will refer to as the six-week group actually faced a 45 day deadline
for submitting a referee report, the deadline that was in place at the journal before the experiment
began. The deadline was described using the following language in the invitation letter: “If you
accept this invitation, I would be very grateful if you would return your review on or before July 21,
2010 (6 weeks from now).”
        The four-week group faced a 28 day deadline for submitting a report. The email they
received was identical to that sent to referees in the control group, except for the due date.
        The cash incentive group faced a 28 day deadline and received a $100 Amazon gift card for
submitting a report before the deadline. In addition to the standard text describing the deadline, the
invitation letters in the cash incentive group included the following text: “As a token of appreciation
for timely reviews, you will receive a $100 Amazon.com® Gift Card if you submit your report on or
before the due date. The Journal of Public Economics will automatically email you a gift card code
within a day after we get your report (no paperwork required).”
        Finally, the social incentive group faced a six-week (45 day) deadline and was told that
referee times would be publicly posted by name at the end of the calendar year. In addition to the
standard text describing the deadline, the invitation letters in the social incentive group included the
following text: “In the interest of improving transparency and efficiency in the review process,
Elsevier will publish referee times by referee name, as currently done by the Journal of Financial
Economics at this website. The referee times for reports received in 2010 will be posted on the
Journal of Public Economics website in January 2011. Note that referee anonymity will be preserved
as authors only know the total time from submission to decision (and not individual referee’s times).”
        One week prior to their deadlines, referees who had not yet submitted reports received emails
reminding them that their reports were due in a week. For the social and cash incentive groups, these

        2
           An on-line appendix available with this paper includes the details of the experiment. Appendix Figure 1
presents a flow chart for the entire experiment. Appendix A shows our invitation emails. Appendix B shows our
reminder and thank-you emails. Appendix C includes more detail on data sources and variable definitions. Appendix
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the primary experimental period (referee invitations between February 15,
2010 and May 9, 2011). Appendix D describes the reweighting methodology behind Figure 2b. Appendix E presents
the hazard model estimates of treatment effects on review times. Appendix F provides a list of other journals used to
assess spillover effects. Appendix G presents a summary of all the appendix tables and figures. A de-identified
version of the 3,397 observation dataset is available at http://obs.rc.fas.harvard.edu/chetty/jpube_experiment.zip.




                                                         3
emails included language reminding referees of the treatments they faced. We also sent overdue
reminders 5 days, 19 days, and 33 days after the due date. Referees in the cash, four-week, and six-
week groups were simply informed their reports were past due. Referees in the social incentive
group were again reminded that their referee times would be publicly posted. After the referees
submitted reports, they received a thank you email. Referees in the cash incentive group received an
Amazon gift card code in this thank you email if they submitted before the 28 day deadline. Those in
the social incentive group received information on the number of days it took for them to submit the
report.
          To study the impact of monetary payments on intrinsic motivation after cash incentives are
withdrawn, we stopped cash payments on May 9, 2011, roughly six months before we ended the
other treatments. Referees in the cash incentive group continued to face a four-week deadline after
this point, and received the same invitation and reminder emails as those in the four-week group. All
other treatments continued until the end of the experiment on October 26, 2011, at which point all
referees were reverted back to the six-week (45 day) deadline.
          We analyze the effects of the experiment using information from two sources. We obtain
information on referee assignments, review times, and other related outcomes at the Journal of
Public Economics, as well as other Elsevier journals from Elsevier’s editorial database. We obtain
information on referee characteristics – an indicator for holding an academic position, tenure status,
gender, and an indicator for working in the United States – from curricula vitae posted online.
          Each observation in our analysis dataset corresponds to a single referee invitation sent
between February 15, 2010 and October 26, 2011. During this period, 3,397 invitations were sent
out to 2,061 distinct referees. We include all observations in the referee report level dataset in our
analysis, so that referees who are invited multiple times contribute multiple observations.
          In our baseline analysis, we restrict attention to referee invitations sent between February 15,
2010 and May 9, 2011, the period when the cash reward was offered. We term this period the
primary experimental period. During this period we sent 2,423 invitations, of which 66.2 percent
were accepted. Among these referees, 93.7 percent submitted a report before the editor made a
decision. The median turnaround time for those who submitted reports was 41.0 days. Among the
1,157 referees who agreed to review a manuscript during the primary experimental period, 74.9
percent of referees agreed to review one manuscript during the experiment, 16.4 percent agreed to
review two manuscripts, and the rest agreed to review three or more manuscripts.
          To verify the validity of our experimental design, we calculated these summary statistics by
treatment group for referee assignments from November 1, 2005 to February 15, 2010, before the
                                                     4
experiment began. As expected, given randomization, we find no statistically significant differences
across the control group or the three treatment groups in these pre-determined characteristics (details
in Appendix Table 2a). Hence, differences in performance across the four groups during the
experimental period can be interpreted as causal effects of the treatments.


Four Sets of Outcomes

       We analyze four sets of outcomes: 1) agreement to submit a review, 2) time taken to submit
the review, 3) report quality, and 4) performance at other journals.


Outcome 1: Acceptance of Referee Invitation


       Table 2 shows the percentage of referee invitations accepted by treatment group.              We
structure this and all subsequent tables as follows.       The four columns correspond to the four
experimental groups: six-week, social, four-week, and cash. For each group, we report the point
estimate and associated standard error in parentheses. We cluster standard errors by referee to
account for the fact that some referees review multiple papers. We also report p-values for the null
hypothesis that agreement rates are the same in each treatment group and its corresponding control
group. For the social incentive and four-week deadline groups, the control group is defined as the
six-week deadline group. For the cash incentive group, the control group is defined as the four-week
deadline group, which is the relevant comparison because the cash incentive group also faced a four-
week deadline.
       Table 2 shows that 67.6 percent of the referee invitations are accepted in the six-week group.
The acceptance rate is slightly lower at 61.1 percent in the social incentive group, a difference that is
marginally statistically significant (p = 0.045). The acceptance rate in the four-week deadline group
is 64.1 percent, not significantly different from the acceptance rate in the six-week group. Lastly, the
acceptance rate in the cash incentive group is 72.0 percent, which is significantly higher than the
acceptance rate in the four-week deadline group (p = 0.010).
       Consistent with this statistical evidence, the journal received a few emails showing that the
treatments influenced the decisions by some referees to review papers. For example, a referee
assigned to the social incentive group wrote, “I was surprised to receive an email stating the journal
is posting referee times by names… I would like to withdraw my agreement to referee this paper.
Sorry about that. I would have been happy to send in a report on time under a different policy.”

                                                   5
Other referees’ emails explain why cash incentives increase acceptance rates. For instance, a referee
in the control group wrote, “I am sorry to have to decline this “invitation” to work for free… Can’t
Elsevier offer a better reward for the time they ask to devote to this screening?”
       Overall, these results allay the concern that pushing referees to submit reviews quickly will
make it difficult to find referees who are willing to submit reviews.


Outcome 2: Review Time


       We now turn to the central outcome our treatments were designed to change: the time that
referees take to submit their reviews. Naturally, we can only observe review times for referees who
agree to submit reviews. Because the referees who accept invitations may differ across the treatment
groups, differences in review times across groups reflect a combination of selection effects (changes
in the composition of referees) and behavioral responses (changes in a given referee’s behavior). For
instance, referees who expect to be unable to submit a review quickly might be less likely to agree to
review a paper under the shorter four-week deadline. This would reduce average review times in the
four-week group via a selection effect even if referee behavior did not change.
       Distinguishing between selection and changes in behavior is not critical for a journal editor
seeking to reduce average review times, because it does not matter whether improvements come from
getting faster referees or inducing a given set of referees to work faster. For the broader objective of
learning about how incentives affect prosocial behavior, however, it is important to separate selection
from behavioral responses. We therefore begin by assessing selection and then present estimates of
treatment effects on review times both with and without adjustments for selection.
       We evaluate the magnitude of selection effects in two ways. First, we compare pre-
determined referee characteristics, such as tenure status and nationality, across the four groups. We
find that these characteristics are generally quite similar across referees who accept invitations in the
four groups (details available in Appendix Table 2b).
       Second, we compare the pre-experiment review times of referees who agreed to review
papers in each of the four experimental groups. For this analysis, we focus on the 67 percent of
referees in our primary experimental sample who reviewed a manuscript for the journal before the
experiment began (from November 2005 to February 15, 2010). All of these pre-experiment reviews
were subject to a six week deadline. Figure 1 plots survival curves for review times according to the
treatment group to which the referees were later assigned, using data from the most recent review


                                                   6
before the experiment began. These survival curves show the fraction of reviews that are still
pending after a given number of days.3
        The survival curves in the cash, four-week deadline, and six-week deadline groups are all
very similar. Referees who agreed to submit a review under a shorter deadline or cash incentive
treatment are no faster than those in the control group based on historical data. Non-parametric
(Wilcoxon) tests for equality of the survival curves uncover no differences in review times across
these three groups. We find marginally significant evidence (p = 0.068) that referees who agree to
review papers in the social incentive group are slightly slower than those in the six-week control
group. Hence, if anything, the social incentive treatment appears to induce slightly unfavorable
selection in terms of referee speed. One explanation may be that diligent referees tend to be more
concerned and anxious about their reputation and are hence less likely to accept the invitation with
the social treatment. Overall, this evidence indicates that selection effects are modest and that
differences in outcomes across the groups during the experiment are likely to be driven primarily by
changes in referee behavior, with the possible exception of the social incentive group.
        Figure 2 presents our main results on the impact of the treatments on review times during the
primary experimental period. Panel A plots raw survival curves for reviews by treatment group. In
Panel B, we adjust for selection using propensity score reweighting as in DiNardo, Fortin, and
Lemieux (1996). We reweight the four-week, cash, and social incentive groups to match the six-
week group on pre-experiment review times (including an indicator for having no pre-experiment
data) using the procedure described in Appendix D. We report median survival times (the point at
which 50% of reports have been submitted) and non-parametric Wilcoxon tests for the equality of the
survival curves in each figure (see Appendix Table 3 for details).
        In contrast with the survival curves in Figure 1, the survival curves in Figure 2 diverge
sharply, showing that the treatments induced substantial changes in review times. Adjusting for
differences in prior review times (Panel B) does not affect the results substantially, indicating that
most of the change in review times is driven by changes in referee behavior rather than selection
effects. We discuss next the impacts of each of the treatments in detail, starting with the shorter
deadline and then turning to the cash and social incentives.
        Shortening the deadline from six weeks (45 days) to four weeks (28 days) reduces median
review times by 12.3 days, based on the baseline estimates in Panel A of Figure 2. Hence, we

3
  We include reviewers who do not submit reviews in these and all subsequent survival curves by censoring their
spells at the point when editors make a decision on the paper.



                                                      7
estimate that shortening the deadline by one day reduces median review times by 12.3/(45-28) = 0.72
days. The effect is so large because nearly 25 percent of referee reports are submitted in the week
between the reminder email and the deadline, and the shorter deadline simply shifts these reports
forward. Before week three (shown by the first dashed line in Figure 2), the number of pending
reports in the four-week and six-week groups is not very different; however, in week four, the
survival curve for the four-week deadline group drops sharply relative to the six-week group. The
four-week deadline thus appears to act as a nudge that makes referees work on their reports in the
fourth week rather than the sixth week.
        Providing a $100 cash incentive for submitting a report within four weeks reduces median
review times by an additional eight days relative to the four week deadline. The cash incentive has
powerful effects especially after referees receive the reminder email: nearly 50 percent of referees
submit a report in the window between the reminder email and the deadline for receiving the cash
payment. Missing the four week deadline simply postpones writing the report by a few weeks but
costs $100. Consistent with what one would predict based on a standard model of intertemporal
optimization, the survival curve is much flatter immediately after the four week deadline, as very few
referees submit reports immediately after the cutoff for the cash payment. Nevertheless, because so
many referees make an effort to meet the four week deadline, there are fewer reports pending even
10 weeks after the initial invitation in the cash incentive group relative to all the other groups.
        The strong response to the cash incentive in the week before the deadline also supports the
view that the cash incentive changes referee behavior, rather than the selection of referees who agree
to review, as selection effects would be unlikely to generate such non-linear responses. Indeed, the
response to the cash treatment is so large that one can show that selection effects account for very
little of the impact using a non-parametric bounding approach, as in Lee (2009). Recall from Table 2
that referees in the cash group are 12.3=(72.0/64.1-1) percent more likely to accept review invitations
than referees in the four-week group. Assuming that referees who accept the four week invitation
would also have accepted the (more attractive) cash invitation, we can bound the selection effect by
considering the worst case scenario in which the additional referees who accept the cash invitation
have the shortest spells. For example, 66 percent of referees in the cash group submit their report
within 28 days. If we exclude the 12.3 percent fastest referees in the cash group, we obtain a
selection-adjusted lower bound of (66-12.3)/(100-12.3) = 61 percent submitting within 28 days. This
remains well above the 36 percent of referees who submit a report within 28 days in the four-week
group, showing that the difference in review times between the two groups cannot be caused by


                                                     8
selection. A similar bounding exercise implies that the difference in review times between the four-
week and six-week groups also cannot be due to selection.
        Figure 2 demonstrates that the direct incentive effect of money outweighs any crowd-out of
intrinsic motivation to submit referee reports in a timely manner. To investigate the impact of
monetary incentives on intrinsic motivation more directly, we study the behavior of referees for the
six months after the cash incentive ended on May 9, 2011. A long literature in social psychology
starting with the classic work of Deci (1971) predicts that cash rewards have negative long-run
effects on prosocial behavior by eroding intrinsic motivation. Existing evidence for this effect is
based primarily on lab experiments (Deci et al. 1999; Frey and Jegen 2001; Kamenica 2012). Our
experiment offers a new test of this hypothesis in the field that complements earlier work on
economic incentives and prosocial behavior in other settings (for example, Gneezy and Rustichini
2000; Gneezy, Meier, and Rely-Biel, 2011; Lacetera, Macis, and Slonim 2013).
        In our application, the prediction from theories in which monetary payments crowd-out
intrinsic motivation is that referees who had previously received cash incentives should become
slower after they stop receiving cash payments—at least relative to referees in the four-week
deadline group, who never received cash payments. We test this hypothesis in Figure 3, which plots
survival curves for referees assigned to the four-week and cash incentive groups using data before
May 9 vs. after May 9, when cash payments ended.4 The survival curves for the four-week group are
similar for invitations before and after May 9, indicating that review times do not vary significantly
by invitation date. Referees assigned to the cash incentive group are much less likely to meet the 28
day deadline after May 9 than before May 9, when they were receiving cash rewards. However,
there is no evidence that these referees become slower than those in the four-week comparison group,
which is what one would expect if intrinsic motivation had been eroded. If anything, it appears that
the cash treatment leads to some persistent improvements even after the incentive is removed,
perhaps because referees have gotten in the habit of submitting reports slightly sooner. 5                        We

4
   Of the referees who were assigned to the cash incentive group and accepted a review invitation after May 9 (after
the cash rewards had ended), 47 percent did not receive an invitation to review a manuscript before May 9. To
minimize selection effects, we include these referees in Figure 3 even though they never received the cash incentive
treatment. The estimates in Figure 3 should therefore be interpreted as intent-to-treat estimates. Restricting the
sample to the selected subset of referees who received prior invitations yields very similar results.
5
  One might be concerned that referees did not recognize that the cash incentive had stopped after May 9, biasing
our comparisons in Figure 3. Two facts allay this concern. First, if referees mistakenly thought the cash reward was
still in place after May 9, one would expect to see the post-May cash survival curve in Figure 3 to drop steeply in the
week before the four-week deadline. This does not occur: the post-May cash survival curve tracks the four-survival
curves almost perfectly prior to the deadline. Second, the cash incentive increased agreement rates from 64.1 percent
(in the four-week group) to 72.0 percent prior to May 9, as shown in Table 2. This difference also disappears after

                                                          9
conclude that the temporary provision of monetary incentives does not have detrimental subsequent
effects in the case of peer review.
        Next, we turn to the social incentive treatment. We find a significant difference between the
social incentive and control group survival curves when reweighting on pre-experiment durations in
Figure 2b. The difference between the unweighted social and control survival curves in Figure 2a is
smaller and statistically insignificant. This is because the social incentive treatment appears to
induce slightly slower referees to accept review invitations, as shown in Figure 1. Once we adjust for
this selection effect, we find that the social incentive treatment induces referees to work significantly
faster, although the magnitude of the impact remains small. Based on the reweighted survival
curves, we estimate that the social incentive reduces the median review time by 2.3 days.6
        Finally, we explore the heterogeneity of the treatment effects by referee characteristics. We
find no significant heterogeneity in treatment effects by several of the referee characteristics we
collected: an indicator for holding an academic position, gender, and an indicator for working in the
United States. However, we do find substantial heterogeneity in treatment effects between tenured
and untenured referees, as shown in Figure 4. This figure replicates Figure 2a, dividing the sample
into referees who had tenure at the time they were invited to review the manuscript (Panel A) and
those who were not tenured at that time (Panel B). The shorter deadline has a significantly larger
effect on untenured referees than tenured referees. Untenured referees make a clear effort to submit
reports before the deadline, as evident from the sharp drop in the survival curve in Figure 4b just
before the deadline for the four-week group. In contrast, tenured referees are not very sensitive to the
shorter deadline.
        The cash incentive improves performance substantially in both groups, but again the impact
is larger among untenured referees: 78 percent of untenured referees submit reports before the
deadline to receive the cash reward, whereas only 58 percent of tenured referees do so. While the
cash incentive and shorter deadline have smaller effects on tenured referees, the social incentive has


May 9: 64.1 percent of referees previously assigned to the cash incentive group agree to do the review after May 9,
compared with 65.4 percent in the four-week group during the same period.
6
  We evaluate the robustness of the treatment effect estimates using semi-parametric Cox hazard models in
Appendix E. Consistent with the graphical evidence in Figure 2, we find that the cash incentive and 4 week
deadlines substantially increase hazard rates of report submission, particularly in the week before the deadline. The
social incentive treatment reduces review times significantly when controlling for differences in pre-experiment
review times. These results, which are reported in Appendix Table 4, are robust to changes in the control vector and
sample specifications. In Appendix Figure 2, we use all the data through the end of the experiment (October 26,
2011) rather than restricting the sample to the point at which cash treatments were stopped (May 9, 2011). The
point estimates remain similar, but we obtain more precise estimates when using all the data as expected.



                                                         10
larger effects on tenured referees. Figure 4b shows that review times are almost identical in the
social incentive and control groups for untenured referees. In contrast, tenured referees in the social
incentive group submit reports significantly earlier than those in the control group, as shown in
Figure 4a.
        One explanation for why the social incentive treatment is more effective among tenured
referees is that untenured referees are already concerned about their reputation with co-editors, who
are typically senior colleagues in their field. In contrast, tenured referees might become more
concerned about their professional reputation when they face social pressure.7 Regardless of whether
the heterogeneous effects are driven by this mechanism, the findings in Figure 4 suggest that social
incentives can usefully complement other policy instruments by improving behavior among groups
who are less responsive to cash incentives and nudges.


Outcome 3: Review Quality


        Models of multi-tasking predict that if an agent is given an incentive to perform better in one
aspect of a job (such as production speed), performance in other aspects of the job (such as quality)
might deteriorate. Might the treatments that induce referees to submit reports more quickly also lead
referees to submit lower-quality reviews?
        We measure the quality of reviews in two ways. The first is an indicator for whether the
editor follows the referee’s recommendation with regard to whether the manuscript should be
accepted, rejected, or revised and resubmitted. The second is the length of the referee report. While
length is not equivalent to quality, one natural way in which referees might submit a report more
quickly is by providing less detailed comments to authors, especially since only the editor knows the
referee’s identity.
        Table 3, which is constructed in the same way as Table 2, shows the fraction of cases in
which the editor follows the referee’s recommendation (Panel A) and the median length of the
referee report (Panel B) by treatment group. We find no statistically significant differences across
the groups in the rate at which editors follow the referee’s advice. We do, however, find that referees
write shorter reports to authors under the social and cash incentive treatments. The median report is
approximately 100 words (11 percent) shorter in the social and cash groups relative to the six-week


7
  Consistent with this explanation, we find that tenured referees are considerably slower than untenured referees in
the control group, but behave like untenured referees in the social incentive group, as shown in Appendix Figure 3.

                                                        11
and four-week groups. These findings suggest that referees who rush to submit a report earlier
because of explicit cash or social incentives might cut back slightly on the level of detail in their
comments to authors. Interestingly, referees do not write shorter reports to meet the four-week
deadline, consistent with the view that many referees begin writing reports only in the week after
they receive a reminder.
        Overall, we conclude that one can induce referees to submit reviews more quickly without
reducing the quality of reviews significantly. Shorter deadlines have no adverse effect on either
measure of quality, while cash and social incentives induce referees to write slightly shorter reports
but do not affect the quality of the review as judged by the editor’s ultimate decision.


Outcome 4: Spillover Effects on Other Journals


        A natural concern with interventions that improve referee performance at one journal is that
they may have negative spillover effects at other journals. Do referees who submit reviews more
quickly at the Journal of Public Economics prioritize them over other referee reports? In this case,
changes in journal policies might not improve the overall efficiency of the review process.
        We test for such spillover effects using data from 20 other Elsevier journals in related
subfields, such as the Journal of Health Economics and the Journal of Development Economics (see
Appendix F for a complete list). We analyze referee invitations from other journals that are received
(1) after referees have received an invitation from the Journal of Public Economics during the
primary experimental period and (2) before December 31, 2011.
        Specifically, we test whether referees’ propensities to review manuscripts and their review
times at other journals vary across our four treatment groups. Each observation in this analysis is a
referee invitation at another journal. The mean agreement rate is approximately 60% in all four
groups, with no statistically significant differences across the groups (see Appendix Table 5). Median
review times are approximately 56 days in all four groups, again with no statistically significant
differences across the groups (see Appendix Figure 4).8
        Of course, referees must postpone some activity to prioritize submitting referee reports. The
social welfare impacts of our treatments depend on what activities get postponed. If referees
postpone activities with pure private benefits such as leisure, social welfare may increase because

8
  The similarity across the four groups in performance at other journals supports the view that the treatment effects
at the Journal of Public Economics during the experimental period are driven by changes in referee behavior rather
than selection effects.

                                                          12
referee reports have positive externalities. If on the other hand referees postpone working on their
research or on other prosocial tasks, expediting referee reports could reduce welfare. If small delays
in these other activities have little social cost, the welfare costs from such delays would be modest.
Understanding the nature of crowd-out across different forms of prosocial behavior is an interesting
question that we defer to future research.


Lessons for the Peer Review Process

        Our results offer three lessons for the design of the peer review process at academic journals.
        First, shorter deadlines are extremely effective in improving the speed of the review process.
Moreover, shorter deadlines generate little adverse effect on referees’ agreement rates, the quality of
referee reports, or performance at other journals. Indeed, based on the results of the experiment, the
Journal of Public Economics now uses a four week deadline for all referees.
        Second, cash incentives can generate significant improvements in review times and also
increase referees’ willingness to submit reviews.9 However, it is important to pair cash incentives
with reminders shortly before the deadline. Some journals, such as the American Economic Review,
have been offering cash incentives without providing referees reminders about the incentives; in this
situation, sending reminders would improve referee performance at little additional cost.
        Third, social incentives can also improve referee performance, especially among subgroups
such as tenured professors who are less responsive to deadlines and cash payments. Light social
incentives, such as the Journal of Financial Economics policy of posting referee times by referee
name, have small effects on review times. Stronger forms of social pressure – such as active
management by editors during the review process in the form of personalized letters and reminders –
could potentially be highly effective in improving efficiency.              It would be useful to test this
hypothesis in future work using an experiment in which editors are prompted to send personalized
reminders to referees at randomly chosen times.
        More generally, our findings show that it is possible to substantially improve the efficiency of
the peer review process with relatively low-cost interventions, demonstrating the value of studying
the peer review process empirically (as in Card and DellaVigna 2012). Our results reject the view


9
  These findings contrast with the results of Squazzoni, Bravo, and Takacs (2013), who argue that monetary rewards
decrease the quality and efficiency of the review process based on a lab experiment designed to simulate peer
review. Our results might differ because the peer review process requires referees to invest considerable time to
read papers and write referee reports, unlike the investment game studied in this lab experiment.

                                                       13
that the review process in economics is much slower than in other fields, such as the natural sciences,
purely because economics papers are more complex or difficult to review.



Lessons for Increasing Prosocial Behavior

          Beyond the peer review process, our results also offer some insights into the determinants of
prosocial behavior more broadly.
          First, attention matters: reminders and deadlines have significant impacts on behavior.
Nudges that bring the behavior of interest to the top of individuals’ minds are a low-cost way to
increase prosocial behavior, consistent with a large literature in behavioral economics (Thaler and
Sunstein 2008).
          Second, monetary incentives can be effective in increasing some forms of prosocial behavior.
We find no evidence that intrinsic motivation is crowded out by financial incentives in the case of
peer review, mirroring the results of Lacetera, Macis, and Slonim (2013) in the case of blood
donations. While crowd-out of intrinsic motivation could be larger in other settings, these results
show that one should not dismiss corrective taxes or subsidies as a policy instrument simply because
the behavior one seeks to change has an important prosocial element.
          Finally, social incentives can be effective even when other policy instruments are ineffective.
This result echoes findings in other settings – such as voting (Gerber, Green, and Larimer, 2008),
campaign contributions (Perez-Truglia and Cruces 2013), and energy conservation (Allcott 2011) –
and suggests that social incentives are a useful complement to price incentives and behavioral
nudges.




                                                    14
Acknowledgements

         We thank Nava Ashraf, David Autor, Stefano DellaVigna, Hilary Hoynes, Damon Jones, Emir Kamenica,
Lawrence Katz, Henrik Kleven, Ulrike Malmendier, Monica Singhal, Timothy Taylor, and numerous seminar
participants for helpful discussions and comments. We thank Jenny Henzen and the Elsevier staff for supporting the
project and providing data and Liz Anderson for implementing the experiment. Greg Bruich, Jessica Laird, Keli Liu,
Alex Olssen, and Heather Sarsons provided outstanding research assistance. Financial support from the Lab for
Economic Applications and Policy at Harvard and the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. A
de-identified version of the referee-level dataset used in this paper can be downloaded from this website.




                                                       15
References

Allcott, Hunt. 2011. “Social Norms and Energy Conservation.” Journal of Public Economics, 95(9-
10): 1082-1095.

Andreoni, James, and Douglas B. Bernheim. 2009. “Social Image and the 50-50 Norm: A
Theoretical and Experimental Analysis of Audience Effects.” Econometrica, 77(5): 1607-1636.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior.” American
Economic Review, 96(5): 1652-1678.

Card, David and Stefano DellaVigna. 2012. “Revealed Preferences for Journals: Evidence from
Page Limits,” NBER Working Paper No. 18663.

Deci, Edward L. 1971. “Effects of Externally Mediated Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 18(1): 105-15.

Deci, Edward L., Richard Koestner, and Richard M. Ryan. 1999. “A Meta-analytic Review of
Experiments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.” Psychological
Bulletin, 125(6), 627-668.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism and
Social Pressure in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(1): 1-56.

DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica, 64(5): 1001-1044.

Ellison, Glenn. 2002. “The Slowdown of the Economics Publishing Process.” Journal of Political
Economy, 110(5): 947-993.

Fehr, Ernst, and Urs Fischbacher. 2003. “The Nature of Human Altruism”. Nature, 425(6960):
785-791.

Frey, Bruno S., and Reto Jegen. 2001. “Motivation Crowding Theory: A Survey of Empirical
Evidence.” Journal of Economic Surveys, 15(5): 589-611.

Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Cristopher W. Larimer. 2008. “Social Pressure and Voter
Turnout: Evidence from a Large-scale Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review,
102(1) : 33-48.

Gneezy, Uri, Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2011. “When and Why Incentives (Don't) Work
to Modify Behavior.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4): 191-210.

Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “A Fine is a Price.” Journal of Legal Studies, 29(1): 1-17.




                                                16
Holmstrom, Bengt., and Paul Milgrom. 1991. “Multitask Principal-agent Analyses: Incentives
Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7: 24-
52.

Kamenica, Emir. 2012. “Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives.” Annual Review of
Economics, 4(1) : 427-452.

Lacetera, Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2013. “Economic Rewards to Motivate Blood
Donations.” Science, 340(6135): 927-928.

Ledyard, John O. 1995. “Public Goods: A Survey of Experimental Research,” in Handbook of
Experimental Economics. John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, eds., Princeton: Princeton University
Press: 111-194.

Lee, David. S. 2009. “Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on treatment
effects.” Review of Economic Studies, 76(3): 1071-1102.

Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces. 2013. “Social Incentives in Contributions: Field
Experiment Evidence from the 2012 U.S. Presidential Campaigns.” Harvard University working
paper.

Squazzoni, Flaminio, Giangiacomo Bravo, Károly Takács. 2013. “Does incentive provision
increase the quality of peer review? An experimental study.” Research Policy, 42(1), 287-294.

Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Titmuss, Richard M. 1971: The Gift Relationship. London: George Allen and Unwin.

Vesterlund, Lise. 2014. “Voluntary Giving to Public Goods: Moving Beyond the Linear VCM,” in
Handbook of Experimental Economics. John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, eds., Volume 2, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.




                                               17
Online Appendices
Appendix A. Invitation Emails

                                                                Control Invitation Email
Subject: Reviewer Invitation from JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS

Dear REFEREE,

You are invited to review the above-mentioned manuscript for publication in the Journal of Public Economics. The manuscript's abstract is at the end of this email.

If you accept this invitation, I would be very grateful if you would return your review by July 21, 2010 (6 weeks from now).

Please choose one of the following options to proceed:

1) If you are willing to review this manuscript, please click: Agree to Review

2) If you are not able to review this manuscript, please click: Decline to Review

3) If you would like to view the manuscript before making a decision, please click: View Manuscript


To assist you in the reviewing process, I am delighted to offer you full access to Scopus (the largest abstract and citation database of research information) for 30 days.
With Scopus you can search for related articles, references and papers by the same author. You may also use Scopus for your own purposes at any time during the 30-
day period. If you already use Scopus at your institute, having this 30 day full access means that you will also be able to access Scopus from home. Access
instructions will follow once you have accepted this invitation to review.

Yours sincerely,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                             Four-Week Invitation Email
Subject: Reviewer Invitation from JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS

Dear REFEREE,

You are invited to review the above-mentioned manuscript for publication in the Journal of Public Economics. The manuscript's abstract is at the end of this email.

If you accept this invitation, I would be very grateful if you would return your review by July 4, 2010 (4 weeks from now).

Please choose one of the following options to proceed:

1) If you are willing to review this manuscript, please click: Agree to Review

2) If you are not able to review this manuscript, please click: Decline to Review

3) If you would like to view the manuscript before making a decision, please click: View Manuscript


To assist you in the reviewing process, I am delighted to offer you full access to Scopus (the largest abstract and citation database of research information) for 30 days.
With Scopus you can search for related articles, references and papers by the same author. You may also use Scopus for your own purposes at any time during the 30-
day period. If you already use Scopus at your institute, having this 30 day full access means that you will also be able to access Scopus from home. Access
instructions will follow once you have accepted this invitation to review.

Yours sincerely,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                                    18
                                                                  Cash Invitation Email
Subject: Reviewer Invitation from JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS

Dear REFEREE,

You are invited to review the above-mentioned manuscript for publication in the Journal of Public Economics. The manuscript's abstract is at the end of this email.

If you accept this invitation, I would be very grateful if you would return your review by July 4, 2010 (4 weeks from now). As a token of appreciation for timely
reviews, you will receive a $100 Amazon.com® Gift Card* if you submit your report before the due date. The Journal of Public Economics will automatically email
you a gift card code within a day after we get your report (no paperwork required).

Please choose one of the following options to proceed:

1) If you are willing to review this manuscript, please click: Agree to Review

2) If you are not able to review this manuscript, please click: Decline to Review

3) If you would like to view the manuscript before making a decision, please click: View Manuscript


To assist you in the reviewing process, I am delighted to offer you full access to Scopus (the largest abstract and citation database of research information) for 30 days.
With Scopus you can search for related articles, references and papers by the same author. You may also use Scopus for your own purposes at any time during the 30-
day period. If you already use Scopus at your institute, having this 30 day full access means that you will also be able to access Scopus from home. Access
instructions will follow once you have accepted this invitation to review.

Yours sincerely,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                  Social Invitation Email
Subject: Reviewer Invitation from JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS

Dear REFEREE,

You are invited to review the above-mentioned manuscript for publication in the Journal of Public Economics. The manuscript's abstract is at the end of this email.

If you accept this invitation, I would be very grateful if you would return your review by July 21, 2010 (6 weeks from now). In the interest of improving transparency
and efficiency in the review process, Elsevier will publish referee times by referee name, as currently done by the Journal of Financial Economics at this website.
The referee times for reports received between Jan 1, 2010 and Dec 31, 2010 will be posted on the Journal of Public Economics website in January 2011. Note that
referee anonymity will be preserved as authors only know the total time from submission to decision (and not individual referee's times).

Please choose one of the following options to proceed:

1) If you are willing to review this manuscript, please click: Agree to Review

2) If you are not able to review this manuscript, please click: Decline to Review

3) If you would like to view the manuscript before making a decision, please click: View Manuscript


To assist you in the reviewing process, I am delighted to offer you full access to Scopus (the largest abstract and citation database of research information) for 30 days.
With Scopus you can search for related articles, references and papers by the same author. You may also use Scopus for your own purposes at any time during the 30-
day period. If you already use Scopus at your institute, having this 30 day full access means that you will also be able to access Scopus from home. Access
instructions will follow once you have accepted this invitation to review.

Yours sincerely,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                                    19
Appendix B. Reminder and Thank You Emails

                                                        Control Group Reminder Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for agreeing to review this manuscript for the JPubE. I am writing to remind you that I would appreciate receiving your review by July 21, 2010, in a
week.

You may submit your comments online in our editorial system by clicking here. Please login as a Reviewer using the username and password I sent you in my first
email.

You may access the manuscript by selecting the "Pending Assignments" link on your Main Menu page. To submit your comments, please click on the "Submit
Reviewer Recommendation" link.

With kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                   Four-Week Deadline Reminder Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for agreeing to review this manuscript for the JPubE. I am writing to remind you that I would appreciate receiving your review by July 4, 2010, in a week.

You may submit your comments online in our editorial system by clicking here. Please login as a Reviewer using the username and password I sent you in my first
email.

You may access the manuscript by selecting the "Pending Assignments" link on your Main Menu page. To submit your comments, please click on the "Submit
Reviewer Recommendation" link.

With kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics

Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                                20
                                                         Cash Incentive Reminder Email
Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for agreeing to review this manuscript for the JPubE. I am writing to remind you that I would appreciate receiving your review by July 4, 2010, in a week.
As a token of gratitude for timely reviews, you will receive a $100 Amazon.com® Gift Card* if you submit your report before the due date. The Journal of Public
Economics will automatically email you a gift card code within a day after we get your report (no paperwork required).

You may submit your comments online in our editorial system by clicking here. Please login as a Reviewer using the username and password I sent you in my first
email.

You may access the manuscript by selecting the "Pending Assignments" link on your Main Menu page. To submit your comments, please click on the "Submit
Reviewer Recommendation" link.

With kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                        Social Incentive Reminder Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for agreeing to review this manuscript for the JPubE. I am writing to remind you that I would appreciate receiving your review by July 21, 2010, in a
week. In the interest of improving transparency and efficiency in the review process, Elsevier will publish referee times by referee name, as currently done by the
Journal of Financial Economics at this website. The referee times for reports received between Jan 1, 2010 and Dec 31, 2010 will be posted on the Journal of Public
Economics website in January 2011. Note that referee anonymity will be preserved as authors only know the total time from submission to decision (and not
individual referee's times).

You may submit your comments online in our editorial system by clicking here. Please login as a Reviewer using the username and password I sent you in my first
email.

You may access the manuscript by selecting the "Pending Assignments" link on your Main Menu page. To submit your comments, please click on the "Submit
Reviewer Recommendation" link.

With kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                        Control Group Thank You Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for your review of this manuscript.

You may access your review comments and the decision letter (when available) by logging onto the Elsevier Editorial System. Please login as a Reviewer.

Kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                                 21
                                                  Four Week Deadline Thank You Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for your review of this manuscript.

You may access your review comments and the decision letter (when available) by logging onto the Elsevier Editorial System. Please login as a Reviewer.

Kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                       Cash Incentive Thank You Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for your review of this manuscript. As a token of appreciation for timely reviews, here is your $100 Amazon.com® Gift Card* code: Claim Code. You are
able to use it any time to make purchases at Amazon.com without any paperwork. If you experience any problems with it, please do not hesitate to contact me at
jpubec@gmail.com.

You may access your review comments and the decision letter (when available) by logging onto the Elsevier Editorial System. Please login as a Reviewer.

Kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics



                                                      Social Incentive Thank You Email
Subject: Reminder to review for JPubE
Ref. No.: JPUBE-D-10-00001
Title: TITLE
Editor: CO-EDITOR
Author(s): AUTHORS
Journal of Public Economics

Dear REFEREE,

Thank you for your review of this manuscript.

You may access your review comments and the decision letter (when available) by logging onto the Elsevier Editorial System. Please login as a Reviewer.

As you may remember, Elsevier will publish referee times by referee name, as currently done by the Journal of Financial Economics at this website. Your time of
27 days for this review will be posted on the Journal of Public Economics website in January 2011. Note that referee anonymity will be preserved as authors only
know the total time from submission to decision (and not individual referee's times).

Kind regards,

Liz Anderson
Senior Editorial Assistant
Journal of Public Economics




                                                                               22
Appendix C. Data Sources and Variable Definitions

Data from the Journal of Public Economics. Our primary source of data is the Elsevier online
editorial system. We downloaded data from this system on July 22, 2012 for the analysis reported in
the paper. We use data on all referees invited to review a new submission between February 15, 2010
and October 26, 2011. We exclude 15 observations that were contaminated (e.g. by letters with
errors) and 5 observations in which the referee did not receive the email invitation. Referee requests
for revisions are excluded from the experiment and are always subject to the 6 week deadline.
        The Elsevier data system records time of invitation, agreement and submission of the report.
Using these data, we generate an indicator for accepting the invitation, the turnaround time in days,
and month of invitation. We obtain data on referees’ review invitations and turnaround times prior to
the start of the experiment from the same database, which contains information going back to
November 1, 2005. The online system uses a single numerical identifier for a referee; we consolidate
a few cases where referees have multiple ID’s manually using the reviewer’s name and affiliation.
        The editorial system also stores all referee reports, which are submitted either as file
attachments or as plain text via an online form. We define word counts for the referee reports as the
sum of the words in the online text forms and any attachments. We use a similar procedure to
measure the word count of manuscripts as well as the number of tables and equations in each
manuscript. Note that these automated counting procedures do not always deliver accurate counts,
but we expect such measurement error to be balanced across the treatment groups.
        Each referee must select a recommendation for the manuscript on an online menu (accept,
revise-and-resubmit, or reject). We use this information to define an indicator for whether the editor
follows the referee’s recommendation on whether or not to reject the submission, grouping the accept
and revise-and-resubmit categories into a single category.

Demographics. We collected demographic information by locating referees’ CVs online. We
downloaded these CVs during Fall 2010, with an update for new referees in November 2011. We
use these CVs to define indicators for gender, tenure status, working in the U.S., and working in an
academic position. Tenure status is defined as being a full professor at a university or mentioning
tenure on the CV for any other position. Working in the U.S. is based on the employer’s address and
an academic position is defined as having an affiliation with a university. We code these variables
as missing for referees for whom we were unable to locate CVs online or whose CVs did not contain
the relevant information. We located CVs for 92.9% of the 1,606 referee reports in our primary
(February 15, 2010 to May 9, 2011) sample.

Data from Other Journals. We obtain data from other Elsevier journals (listed in Appendix F) from
the Elsevier editorial system. We compiled the longest histories available in the system for each
journal. The available data vary across the journals, with the earliest records going back to
November 2005. We use data up to December 31, 2011 from other journals. Elsevier does not use a
unique identifier for referees across journals. We therefore linked referees to their performance at
other journals based on email addresses (after extensive manual cleaning to match text fields).

Appendix D. Reweighting Methodology

This appendix describes the reweighting procedure used to construct Figure 2b. We first discretize
each referee’s most recent pre-experiment review time into eight bins, b=1,…,8: seven monthly
indicators for the pre-experiment review time if available (<30, 30-59, 60-89, 90-119, 120-149, 150-
179, and ≥180 days) and an indicator for having no pre-experiment data.


                                                 23
        To reweight the social incentive group to match the six-week control group, we take the
referees assigned to those two groups and calculate the fraction of observations in bin b in the social
incentive group, which we denote by pb. The fraction of observations in bin b in the six-week control
group is 1-pb. We weight each observation i by (1-pb(i))/pb(i) when estimating the survival curve for
the social group, where b(i) denotes the bin to which observation i belongs.
        We reweight the cash and four-week groups to match the control group on pre-experiment
durations using the same approach. The survival curve for the six-week (control) group is unchanged
by definition.
        To adjust for differences in pre-experiment durations when testing for the equality of the
survival curves, we conduct unweighted Wilcoxon tests that are stratified by the bin variable b.


Appendix E. Hazard Model Estimates of Treatment Effects on Review Times

This appendix presents estimates of the impacts of the treatments on review times using Cox hazard
models. Let hit denote the hazard rate of submitting a referee report t days after the invitation (i.e.,
the probability of submitting a report on day t conditional on not submitting prior to day t). Let mt
denote the baseline hazard rate for referees in the six-week control group who receive an invitation to
review a paper in month m of the experiment. We stratify the baseline hazards by invitation month to
account for any differences over time in referee behavior. The Cox hazard model specification is

                   hit = mtexp(1fourweeki+2cashi +3sociali+4postcashi +Xi)

In this specification, the fourweek indicator is 1 for both the four-week and cash incentive groups,
who face four-week deadlines. Hence, the coefficients on the cash variables represent the effect of
the cash treatment over and above the four-week deadline effect. The cash variable is an indicator
for being in the cash incentive group while cash rewards were offered (prior to May 9); it is defined
as 0 for all review invitations after May 9. The social variable is an indicator for being in the social
incentive group. The postcash variable is an indicator for previously being in the cash incentive
group; it is defined as 0 for all review invitations before May 9. The vector Xi is a set of controls that
we vary across specifications. We censor spells that last for more than 20 weeks at 140 days to
reduce the influence of outliers and we cluster standard errors by referee.
        We report estimates from variants of this model in Appendix Table 4. We begin in Column 1
by estimating the hazard model with no additional controls (no X vector). We use the extended
sample, which includes all invitations from February 15, 2010 to October 26, 2011, in this
specification. Consistent with the results in Figure 2, we find that both the four week deadline and
the cash incentive substantially increase hazard rates of submitting reports, i.e. reduce review times.
The estimates j can be interpreted as the percentage impact of the variable on the baseline hazard
rate. For example, the coefficient of 0.266 on the four-week indicator implies that the hazard rate is
26.6% higher on average for referees facing a four-week deadline relative to those facing a six-week
deadline. The point estimate on the post-cash indicator is positive and marginally significant,
supporting the view that there is no crowd-out of intrinsic motivation for referees who previously
received cash incentives. The estimated impact of social incentives is small and statistically
insignificant. This is consistent with Figure 2a, which shows that we do not detect significant
differences between the social incentive and control groups when comparing raw distributions of
review times.
        Column 2 adds a rich set of controls for referee and manuscript characteristics to the
specification in Column 1. We control for a referee’s pre-experiment review times by including bi-
monthly indicator variables (up to 6 months) for the review time for each of the previous three

                                                   24
referee reports. We also include controls for tenure, working in the U.S., working in academia, and
referees’ agreement rates to invitations in the available history of the Journal of Public Economics,
as well as the number of words, tables, and equations in the article reviewed by the referee. The
covariates are set to 0 if they are missing and all specifications include indicators for the observation
having a missing value of the covariate. Hence, the sample is exactly the same as in column 1.
        The inclusion of the controls increases the estimated impact of the social incentive treatment
significantly. This result confirms the pattern in Figure 2b, showing that referees who agree to
review manuscripts under the social incentive treatment are slightly negatively selected in terms of
review times. Adjusting for these differences in pre-experiment turnaround times and other
observables, we find that the social incentive treatment increases hazard rates by approximately 18%
relative to the six-week deadline. The cash and four-week treatments continue to have highly
significant impacts on hazard rates with controls.
        Column 3 replicates Column 2 restricting the sample to the primary experimental period from
February 15, 2010 to May 9, 2011, when the cash reward was offered, as in the main text. We find
that the impacts of the shorter deadline, cash incentives, and social incentives are all very similar
when we restrict to this subset of referee reports.
        The preceding specifications all assume that the treatments have a constant percentage impact
on hazard rates throughout the spell. However, the non-parametric survival curves in Figure 2 show
that this proportional hazards assumption is not a good approximation. In particular, the four week
deadline and cash incentives have much greater effects before the deadline than after the deadline, as
one would expect. To account for these responses, in Column 4 we estimate a Cox model that
extends Column 2 to permit time-varying covariates. We include indicators for being near the
deadline and past the deadline, which represent the period one week before and after the due date,
respectively. We also interact these indicators with the cash and post-cash indicators to capture the
greater impacts of the cash treatment before the deadline.
        Consistent with the patterns in Figure 2, the time varying covariates are highly significant:
hazard rates are 86% higher in the week before the deadline and 119% higher in the week after the
deadline. The cash treatment increases hazard rates by 100% in the week before the deadline but
does not have a statistically significant effect in the week after the deadline. The post-cash treatment
has no time-varying effect, as one would expect. The estimated impact of the social incentive
remains similar to the other specifications. Overall, the model with time-varying covariates confirms
the results in Figure 2 and shows that all three treatments have significant effects on referee behavior.


Appendix F. List of Other Journals Used to Assess Spillover Effects

Economics & Human Biology
Economics Letters
Energy Economics
European Economic Review
European Journal of Political Economy
Games and Economic Behavior
Journal of Banking & Finance
Journal of Comparative Economics
Journal of Corporate Finance
Journal of Development Economics
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
Journal of Economic Psychology
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

                                                   25
Journal of Health Economics
Journal of International Economics
Journal of Monetary Economics
Journal of Urban Economics
Labour Economics
Regional Science and Urban Economics
Resource and Energy Economics


Appendix G. Summary of Appendix Tables and Figures.

Appendix Figure 1 depicts the timeline of the refereeing process during the experiment.

Appendix Figure 2 replicates Figure 2 from the text using the full experimental period from February
15, 2010 to October 26, 2011. This figure includes the period after May 9, when the cash reward was
stopped, for the four week, six week, and social incentive groups. For the cash group, we continue to
use data only up to May 9.

Appendix Figure 3 plots a subset of the survival curves reported in Figure 4 in the main text on a
single figure to show that tenured referees have longer turnaround times than untenured referees in
the control group, but behave like untenured referees when facing social pressure.

Appendix Figure 4 shows survival curves for review times at other Elsevier journals by the treatment
group to which referees were assigned at the Journal of Public Economics.

Appendix Table 1 presents the summary statistics for referee invitations sent between February 15,
2010 and May 9, 2011, the time period when the cash reward was offered.

Panel A of Appendix Table 2 presents randomization tests for the set of referees invited during the
primary experimental period. Panel B replicates Panel A in the subsample of referees who accept the
invitations to test for selection effects.

Appendix Table 3 presents estimates of treatment effects on median review times.

Appendix Table 4 presents Cox hazard model estimates of the effects of the treatments on review
times.

Appendix Table 5 reports estimates of the effects of the treatments at the Journal of Public
Economics on acceptance rates and review times at other Elsevier journals during the experimental
period.




                                                 26
                                               Table 1
                                  Description of Treatment Groups


        Group:       6 Week                  Social                 4 Week                   Cash
                       (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)

Deadline             6 weeks                 6 weeks                 4 weeks               4 weeks
                    (45 days)               (45 days)               (28 days)             (28 days)

                                         Review time                                    $100 Amazon
Incentives             None             posted online at              None                gift card if
                                          end of year                                   deadline met

Duration of      Feb 15, 2010 to        Feb 15, 2010 to         Feb 15, 2010 to        Feb 15, 2010 to
Intervention      Oct 26, 2011           Oct 26, 2011            Oct 26, 2011           May 9, 2011

Notes: This table describes the four treatment groups to which referees were randomly assigned. Every
referee was assigned permanently to one group; referees never changed groups. Referees were notified
about the conditions of the review request upon invitation and were sent a reminder 1 week before the
deadline. Examples of these invitation and reminder emails are shown in Appendices A and B. Cash
incentives were stopped for invitations after May 9, 2011; after that point, referees assigned to the cash
incentive group simply faced a 4 week deadline, with no incentives. The other treatments were
implemented without any changes for the full duration of the experiment, from February 15, 2010 to
October 26, 2011.
                                      Table 2
        Fraction of Referees who Accept Review Invitation by Treatment Group


                          Group:     6 Week          Social         4 Week          Cash
                                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)

Percent who accept invitation         67.6%          61.1%           64.1%          72.0%
                                      (2.14)         (2.43)          (2.23)         (2.17)

p-value for equality with control                     0.045          0.252          0.010

Observations                           639             568            626            590

Notes: This table shows the percentage of referees who accept invitations to review in each
treatment group. We restrict the sample to invitations sent between February 15, 2010 and
May 9, 2011, the time period when the cash reward was offered. Standard errors, clustered at
the referee level, are reported in parentheses. We also report p-values for the null hypothesis
that agreement rates are the same in each treatment group and its corresponding control
group. For the social and 4 week groups, the control group is defined as the 6 week deadline
group. For the cash incentive group, the control group is defined as the 4 week deadline
group, which is the relevant comparison because the cash incentive group also faced a 4 week
deadline. The number of observations (referee report invitations) is reported in the last row.
                                               Table 3
                             Measures of Review Quality by Treatment Group


                                           Group:      6 Week          Social         4 Week           Cash
                                                         (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)

              A. Agreement between Editor Decision and Referee's Recommendation
Editor Follows Referee's Recommendation       77.9%        76.2%       77.5%                          76.2%
                                               (2.00)       (2.34)     (2.20)                         (2.15)

p-value for equality with control                                       0.585          0.884           0.686

Observations                                             403             324            373             404

                                B. Length of Referee Report
Median Number of Words in Referee Report      877           757                         864             786
                                             (29.1)       (32.5)                       (30.3)          (29.2)

p-value for equality with control                                       0.006          0.757           0.064

Observations                                             401             321            369             399
Notes: This table shows the effects of the treatments on review quality. The sample includes all referees who
received invitations sent between February 15, 2010 and May 9, 2011 (the period when the cash reward was
offered) and submitted a report. In Panel A, the outcome is the fraction of reports in which the editor's decision
(reject vs. accept/revise-and-resubmit) matches the referee's recommendation. We report standard errors in
parentheses. Standard errors are clustered by referee in Panel A (but not Panel B). We also report p-values
for the null hypothesis that the percentages are the same in each treatment group and its corresponding
control group. For the social and 4 week groups, the control group is defined as the 6 week deadline group.
For the cash incentive group, the control group is defined as the 4 week deadline group, which is the relevant
comparison because the cash incentive group also faced a 4 week deadline. The number of observations
(referee reports submitted) is reported in the last row. In Panel B, the outcome is the median number of words
in the referee report. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and the p-values are for hypothesis tests
analogous to those in Panel A. The number of observations is the number of submitted reports for which we
were able to obtain automated word counts of report length.
                                        Appendix Table 1
                              Summary Statistics for Experimental Sample

Variable                                                             Mean          Std. Dev.       Median
                                                                      (1)             (2)           (3)

Invitation to Referee (N = 2,423)
  Agreed to submit review                                            66.2%          47.3%

Refereeing statistics conditional on agreement (N = 1,605)
 Reviews censored (not submitted)                                    6.3%           24.3%
 Review time conditional on submitting review (days)                  44.9           28.6            41.0
 New referee (no historical data)                                    32.7%          46.9%

Referee Characteristics (N = 1,157)
 Agreed to do 1 job during experiment                                74.9%          43.4%
 Agreed to do 2 jobs during experiment                               16.4%          37.1%
 Agreed to do 3+ jobs during experiment                              8.6%           28.1%
 Tenured                                                             54.6%          49.8%
 Academic                                                            92.4%          26.5%
 American                                                            52.5%          50.0%
 Female                                                              12.3%          32.9%
Notes: This table reports summary statistics for referee invitations sent between February 15, 2010 and May
9, 2011, the time period when the cash reward was offered. The first section of the table shows the fraction of
referee requests that were accepted. The second section reports statistics for the subsample of referee
requests that were accepted. A review is defined as censored if it is not submitted before the editor makes a
decision on the paper. The summary statistics for review times are based on the subsample of submitted
reviews. The third section of the table reports statistics on the referees who accepted the invitation and for
whom the relevant information is available. See Appendix C for the definitions of the variables used in this
table.
                                          Appendix Table 2
                                    Randomization and Selection Tests


                                                                                                 Equality test
                           Group:      6 Week          Social        4 Week          Cash
                                                                                                   p-value
                                         (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)

                      A. Randomization Tests: Full Sample of All Invited Referees

Has pre-experiment data                58.2%          63.6%           66.0%          66.6%            0.07
Prior agreement rate                   73.8%          70.3%           77.4%          73.8%            0.17
Prior median turnaround time            54.1           57.1            55.2           58.6            0.24
Tenured                                60.2%          68.4%           59.8%          65.9%            0.07
Academic                               90.2%          93.4%           93.0%          93.4%            0.51
American                               53.4%          58.6%           53.8%          51.2%            0.30
Female                                 12.2%          8.3%            13.4%          11.8%            0.20
Observations                            639            568             626            590

                   B. Selection Tests: Sample of Referees who Accepted Invitations

Has pre-experiment data                64.1%          65.1%           71.6%          68.2%            0.25
Prior agreement rate                   82.5%          79.2%           87.3%          81.5%            0.03
Prior median turnaround time            52.1           57.1            53.8           57.0            0.19
Tenured                                50.8%          59.9%           50.9%          59.4%            0.09
Academic                               91.0%          96.2%           91.8%          93.0%            0.09
American                               56.5%          57.9%           55.9%          51.1%            0.51
Female                                 14.1%          9.9%            16.1%          12.6%            0.30
Observations                            432            347             401            425
Notes: This table reports summary statistics of pre-experiment variables by treatment group. Panel A uses all
referees invited to review a paper between February 15, 2010 and May 9, 2011 (the period when the cash
reward was offered). Panel B replicates Panel A for the selected sample of referees who accepted the invitation
to review. Column (5) reports the p-value for a test of equality of the coefficients across all four groups,
clustering standard errors by referee (except for median review times). Has pre-experiment data is an indicator
for having information in the editorial system at some point between November 1, 2005 and February 15, 2010,
when the experiment began. Prior agreement rate is the fraction of reviews that the referee accepted during that
period. Prior median review time is the median review time for the three most recent manuscripts reviewed
before the experiment (among referees who reviewed manuscripts before the experiment). Tenured is an
indicator for having tenure (based on CV's posted online) when the referee received the invitation; academic is
an indicator for being in an academic position. American is an indicator for a US-based employer, and Female is
a gender indicator from data collected manually. The number of observations in Panel A is the number of
referee report invitations; in Panel B, it is the number of accepted invitations.
                              Appendix Table 3
                   Median Review Times by Treatment Group


                  Group:      6 Week         Social        4 Week           Cash
Sample                          (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)

Full Sample                     47.8          45.9           35.5           27.5
                               (1.02)        (0.84)         (1.60)         (0.24)
                                432           347            401            425

Tenured Referees                50.4          46.8           44.1           27.7
                               (1.58)        (1.62)         (2.67)         (0.49)
                                203           199            189            236

Untenured Referees              45.9          45.5           31.7           27.3
                               (0.83)        (0.75)         (1.70)         (0.27)
                                197           133            182            161

Notes: This table shows the effects of the treatments on median review times. These
estimates are reported in Figure 2a and Figure 4 and are reproduced here with standard
errors as a reference. The sample includes all referees who accepted invitations sent
between Feb. 15, 2010 and May 9, 2011 (the period when the cash reward was
offered). Standard errors and number of observations are reported below each
estimate. The first row of estimates uses the full-sample; the second and third rows
restrict the sample to referees who were tenured vs. untenured at the time of the
experiment. Tenure status was collected from CV's posted online and hence is not
available for all referees. See Appendix C for further details.
                                         Appendix Table 4
                   Cox Hazard Model Estimates of Treatment Effects on Review Times

                              Extended Sample         Extended Sample           Primary          Time-Varying
                                 No Controls            With Controls           Sample            Covariates
                                     (1)                     (2)                   (3)                (4)

4 week deadline                     0.266***               0.393***            0.418***             0.391***
                                    (0.0720)               (0.0720)            (0.0783)             (0.0738)
Cash                                0.388***               0.502***            0.485***              0.161
                                    (0.0969)               (0.0953)            (0.0968)             (0.113)
Social                               0.0769                 0.179**             0.152*               0.187**
                                    (0.0637)               (0.0657)            (0.0746)             (0.0693)
Post-cash                            0.185                  0.255*                                   0.242
                                    (0.111)                 (0.114)                                 (0.139)
Near deadline                                                                                       0.864***
                                                                                                    (0.0921)
Past deadline                                                                                       1.188***
                                                                                                    (0.0972)
Cash near deadline                                                                                  1.007***
                                                                                                    (0.169)
Cash past deadline                                                                                   0.362
                                                                                                    (0.216)
Post-cash near deadline                                                                             0.00595
                                                                                                    (0.231)
Post-cash past deadline                                                                              -0.109
                                                                                                    (0.269)

Controls                                                       X                   X                   X

Number of spells                     2,212                   2,212               1,605               2,212
Notes: This table reports coefficients from Cox proportional hazard models, with standard errors clustered by
referee in parentheses. The asterisks represent statistical significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. The
point estimates can be interpreted as the percentage impact of the variable on the baseline hazard rate (which
measures hazards in the 6 week control group). Columns 1, 2 and 4 report estimates from the extended sample,
which includes all invitations from February 15, 2010 to October 26, 2011. Column 3 reports estimates from the
baseline sample, which includes invitations from February 15, 2010 to May 9, 2011 (the period during which the
cash reward was offered). In all four columns, baseline hazards are stratified by invitation month and spells that
last for more than 20 weeks (140 days) are censored at 140 days. The 4 week deadline indicator is 1 for both the
four-week and cash incentive groups, who face four-week deadlines. The cash variable is an indicator for being
in the cash incentive group while cash rewards were offered (prior to May 9); it is defined as 0 for all review
invitations after May 9. The post-cash variable is an indicator for previously being in the cash incentive group; it
is defined as 0 for all review invitations before May 9. The social variable is an indicator for being in the social
incentive group. Columns 2-4 control for a referee's pre-experiment review times by including bimonthly indicator
variables (up to 6 months) for the review time for each of the previous three referee reports. They also include
controls for tenure, U.S. residence, working in academia, and the fraction of reviews the referee accepted prior to
the start of the experiment at the Journal of Public Economics , as well as the number of words, tables, and
equations in the article reviewed by the referee. See Appendix C for definitions of all of these variables.
Covariates are set to 0 if they are missing and all specifications include indicators for the observation having a
missing value of the covariate. Column 4 includes terms allowing for time-varying hazard rates. Near and past
deadline represent the period one week before and after the due date, respectively. These indicators are also
interacted with the cash and post-cash indicators.
                                     Appendix Table 5
                             Spillover Effects on Other Journals


                           Group:      6 Week           Social         4 Week            Cash
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)

            A. Reviewer Invitation Acceptance Rate at Other Journals
Percent accepting invitation     62.1%       58.8%         60.6%                        61.8%
                                 (2.31)       (2.55)       (2.38)                       (2.26)

p-value for equality with control                       0.344           0.654            0.702

Observations                             999              806             969             993

                        B. Review Times at Other Journals
Median review time (days)         56.2         54.0        56.5                          57.0
                                 (1.39)       (1.72)      (1.81)                        (1.71)

p-value for equality with control                       0.562           0.596            0.894

Observations                             620              474             587             614
Notes: This table reports estimates of spillover effects of the treatments on referee behavior at
other Elsevier journals during the experimental period. The sample includes all referees who
accepted invitations to review papers for the Journal of Public Economics between February
15, 2010 and May 9, 2011 (the period when the cash reward was offered). We use data from
other Elsevier journals in related fields (see Appendix F for a list) in this table, restricting
attention to reviewer invitations received after the first invitation during the experimental period
at the Journal of Public Economics and before December 31, 2011. In Panel A, the outcome is
the percentage of referees who accept invitations to review papers at other journals. We
report standard errors, clustered by referee, in parentheses. We also report p-values for the
null hypothesis that the percentages are the same in each treatment group and its
corresponding control group. For the social and 4 week groups, the control group is defined as
the 6 week deadline group. For the cash incentive group, the control group is defined as the 4
week deadline group, which is the relevant comparison because the cash incentive group also
faced a 4 week deadline. There is one observation for each review invitation that referees
received from other Elsevier journals. In Panel B, the outcome is the median number of days
taken to submit a review conditional on accepting the invitation to referee. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses and the p-values are for hypothesis tests analogous to those in Panel
A. The number of observations is the number of referee reports submitted to the other
journals.
                 Figure 1: Pre-Experiment Review Times for Referees
                      who Accept Invitations During Experiment




Notes: This figure plots survival curves that show the distribution of pre-experiment review
times by treatment group. The sample consists of referees who accepted invitations between
February 15, 2010 and May 9, 2011, the period when the cash reward was offered. Among
these referees, 67.3 percent accepted a review invitation before the experiment began (from
November 2005 to February 15, 2010); we use their data to construct this figure. For referees
who reviewed multiple papers, we use the most recent pre-experimental review. Each survival
curve plots the percentage of reports still pending vs. the number of days elapsed since the
referee received the invitation. The solid vertical lines depict the six week deadline (45 days)
and the four week deadline (28 days) that were used during the experiment. The dashed
vertical lines depict the reminders sent one week before each deadline. Before the
experiment, all referees faced the six week deadline and reminders were not sent
systematically. We report median review times, defined as the point at which the fraction of
reports pending is 50 percent, for each group. We also report p-values from non-parametric
Wilcoxon tests for the hypothesis that the pre-experiment review times are the same in each
treatment group and its corresponding control group. We compare the four-week and social
incentive groups to the six-week group. We compare the cash group to the four-week group
because the cash group also faced a four week deadline. We truncate the x-axis at 80 days in
the figure for scaling purposes, but use all available data for the hypothesis tests.
          Figure 2: Review Times by Treatment Group During Experiment
                                    A. Baseline Estimates




                                   B. Reweighted Estimates




Notes: This figure plots survival curves showing the distribution of review times by treatment
group during the primary experimental period, February 15, 2010 to May 9, 2011 (when the
cash reward was offered). In Panel A, each survival curve plots the percentage of reports still
pending vs. the number of days elapsed since the referee received the invitation. Panel B
replicates Panel A, reweighting the observations in the three treatment groups to match the
distribution of pre-experiment review times in the six-week group (see Appendix D for
details). The solid vertical lines depict the six week deadline (45 days) and the four week
deadline (28 days). The dashed vertical lines depict the reminders sent one week before each
deadline. We report median review times, defined as the point at which the fraction of reports
pending is 50 percent, for each group. We also report p-values from non-parametric Wilcoxon
tests for the hypothesis that review times are the same in each treatment group and its
corresponding control group. We compare the four-week and social groups to the six-week
group. We compare the cash group to the four-week group because the cash group also faced
a four week deadline. We truncate the x-axis at 80 days in the figures, but use all available
data for the hypothesis tests.
            Figure 3: Review Times Before vs. After End of Cash Reward




Notes: This figure plots survival curves showing the distribution of review times in the four-
week and cash treatment groups before vs. after May 9, 2011. On May 9, cash rewards were
stopped for those in the cash treatment group and referees in this group were subsequently
treated identically to those in the four-week group. Hence, the cash (after May 9) group
includes referees who previously received cash rewards but no longer do, while the cash
(before May 9) group includes referees receiving cash incentives. The four-week group faced
the same treatment both before and after May 9. Each survival curve plots the percentage of
reports still pending vs. the number of days elapsed since the referee received the invitation.
The solid vertical line depicts the four week deadline (28 days). The dashed vertical line
depicts the reminder sent one week before the deadline. We report median review times,
defined as the point at which the fraction of reports pending is 50 percent, for each group. We
also report p-values from non-parametric Wilcoxon tests for the hypothesis that review times
are the same in the cash and four week groups before and after May 9.
            Figure 4: Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects by Tenure Status

                                     A. Tenured Referees




                                    B. Untenured Referees




Notes: This figure replicates Figure 2a, splitting the sample between tenured referees (Panel
A) and untenured referees (Panel B). Tenure status is measured during the experiment based
on information from CVs posted online (see Appendix C for details); referees whose tenure
status could not be identified are excluded from this figure. In both panels, the sample
consists of referees who accepted invitations between February 15, 2010 and May 9, 2011,
the period when the cash reward was offered. Each survival curve plots the percentage of
reports still pending vs. the number of days elapsed since the referee received the invitation.
See notes to Figure 2 for further details.
             Appendix Figure 1: Timeline of Interventions and Outcomes




Notes: The figure depicts the timeline of the refereeing process during the experiment. Once a
submission is received, editors assign a co-editor in charge who then chooses referees. Invited
referees are randomly assigned to one of the four groups (six-week, four-week, cash, social)
and receive an email invitation tailored to their group (shown in Appendix A). Referees
accept or decline the invitation, which is the first outcome we study. If they accept, we send
group-specific reminders one week before the deadline (shown in Appendix B). We then
measure the time taken to submit a review, the second outcome we study. If a review is
submitted, we send a thank you letter with the cash reward (to eligible referees) and measure
the quality of the report, the third outcome we study.
    Appendix Figure 2: Review Times by Treatment Group in Extended Sample

                                    A. Baseline Estimates




                                  B. Reweighted Estimates




Notes: This figure replicates Figure 2 using the full experimental period from February 15,
2010 to October 26, 2011, including the period after May 9, when the cash reward was
stopped. The cash group in this figure still includes only referee invitations up to May 9,
2011. The other groups include all invitations during the full experiment. See notes to Figure
2 for details on the construction of this figure and Appendix Table 4 for Cox hazard model
estimates corresponding to these survival curves.
     Appendix Figure 3: Social Incentives and Tenured vs. Untenured Referees




Notes: This figure plots a subset of the survival curves reported in Figure 4 on a single figure
to show that tenured referees have longer turnaround times than untenured referees in the
control group, but behave like untenured referees when facing social pressure. We replicate
the series in Figure 4 for (a) untenured referees in the six-week group, (b) tenured referees in
the six-week group, and (c) tenured referees in the social group. The solid vertical line depicts
the six week deadline relevant for these groups. The dashed vertical line depicts the deadline
reminders sent one week before this deadline. We report median review times, defined as the
point at which the fraction of reports pending is 50 percent, for each group. We also report p-
values from non-parametric Wilcoxon tests for the hypothesis that review times are the same
in the untenured six-week group and the two tenured groups. We truncate the x-axis at 80
days in the figure for scaling purposes, but use all available data for the hypothesis tests.
        Appendix Figure 4: Spillover Effects: Review Times at Other Journals




Notes: This figure shows the effects of our experimental interventions at the Journal of Public
Economics on referees’ review times at other Elsevier journals (listed in Appendix F). The
sample includes all referees who accept a refereeing invitation at another Elsevier journal
(before December 31, 2011) after receiving an invitation to referee at the Journal of Public
Economics during our primary experimental period, February 15, 2010 to May 9, 2011. Each
survival curve plots the percentage of reports still pending vs. the number of days elapsed
since the referee received the invitation from the other journal. As a reference, the solid
vertical lines depict the six week deadline (45 days) and the four week deadline (28 days)
used at the Journal of Public Economics during the experiment. The dashed vertical lines
depict the reminders sent one week before each deadline. Other journals have different
deadlines and reminder policies. We report median review times, defined as the point at
which the fraction of reports pending is 50 percent, for each group. We also report p-values
from non-parametric Wilcoxon tests for the hypothesis that review times at other journals are
the same in each treatment group and its corresponding control group. We compare the four-
week and social incentive groups to the six week group. We compare the cash group to the
four-week group because the cash group also faced a four week deadline. We truncate the x-
axis at 80 days in the figure for scaling purposes, but use all available data for the hypothesis
tests.
