NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDUCING LEADERS TO TAKE RISKY DECISIONS:
DISMISSAL, TENURE, AND TERM LIMITS
Philippe Aghion
Matthew Jackson
Working Paper 20301
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20301
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from ARO MURI
award No. W911NF-12-1-0509. We thank Daron Acemoglu, Tim Besley, Renee Bowen, Andres Drenik,
Stephen Nei, Alessandro Pavan, Torsten Persson, Larry Samuelson, Guido Tabellini, Jean Tirole, and
seminar participants at CIFAR, Northwestern, Stanford, INSEAD and the IIES at Stockholm University,
for helpful comments and suggestions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Philippe Aghion and Matthew Jackson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Inducing Leaders to Take Risky Decisions: Dismissal, Tenure, and Term Limits
Philippe Aghion and Matthew Jackson
NBER Working Paper No. 20301
July 2014
JEL No. C72,D72,D82,D86,M12
ABSTRACT
In this paper we analyze the problem of whether and/or when to replace a leader (agent) when no monetary
rewards are available, and it is the leader's competence rather than effort that is being evaluated. The
only decisions that the leader takes over time are whether to undertake risky but potentially high payoff
projects, the choice of which can reveal the leader's competency. If the value of foregone projects
are observed, then the probability that a leader is replaced is bell-shaped and saw-toothed over time.
If the value of foregone projects are not observed, and the leader's competency is only indirectly inferrable
through the success or failure of projects that the leader undertakes, then the incentives of the leader
depend on the replacement strategy. If the principal can commit to a replacement strategy in advance,
then we show that (approximately) optimal mechanisms either involve a probationary period and then
indefinite tenure, or else a random dismissal strategy. If instead commitment is impossible, and for
instance voters regularly choose whether to replace the leader, then there are poor incentives and
inefficiently low payoffs, even below that of simply replacing the leader in every period. Incentives
can be improved via term limits.
Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Matthew Jackson
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and CIFAR, and also external faculty of the Santa Fe Institute
jacksonm@stanford.edu

If General McClellan isn’t going to use his army, I’d like to borrow it for a
time. Abraham Lincoln, Jan 10, 1862, before relieving George B. McClellan of
command (for the first time).

1

Introduction

How can we motivate individuals to take risky decisions in situations where there is limited
scope for using adjustable monetary compensation and the only lever providing incentives is
a threat of dismissal? Examples of such situations include the relationship between political
leaders and voters, as well as many employees in systems with fixed wages (including academics, bureaucrats, and some government employees), and even wealthy top level managers
for whom monetary incentives are secondary to reputation or power within a position.
These examples are not only such that firing/replacement is the main incentive device,
but also that the incentive issue is not so much one of inducing more effort as much as
one of inducing the agent to use her discretion to take risky decisions. Thus Abraham
Lincoln’s main concern with General McClellan was not so much that McClellan was not
putting enough effort, but rather the fact that McClellan was missing opportunities to act,
meanwhile the Confederate Army was dangerously close to Washington. Nor was the lack
of (higher) monetary incentives the reason for McClellan’s reluctance to act. Eventually,
Lincoln replaced McClellan in order to prompt action.
Similarly, the primary concern in motivating a high-ranking politician is not getting them
to work long hours, as they tend to already be driven to do so, but instead to motivate them
to make the “right” decisions. In many settings, the consequences of some decisions can
reveal how competent the decision-maker is at identifying good decisions from bad ones,
and this leads to an important but relatively under-studied set of incentive issues.1 . In this
paper, we investigate performance incentives in such environments, providing new insights
into contracts such as tenure and term limits, as well as the timing of replacement decisions,
and the effects on the resulting behavior of decision makers, abstracting from standard moralhazard effort considerations, and instead focusing on incentives regarding which decision to
make.
Our model is one where a principal can hire a new agent, henceforth called the ”leader”,
in any period at some fixed cost. The leader can be either competent or incompetent, and
whether or not she is competent is initially unknown to her and to the principal. Moreover,
the leader has discretion over a choice of actions. She can choose to take a ”conservative”
action which yields a sure payoff (normalized to zero) but does not reveal anything about
her level of competence. Or she can take a ”risky” action, which could lead to a positive
1

There are some important papers that consider competence and incentives, with the closest in terms of
the basic issue of motivating a decision maker being that of Scharfstein and Stein (1990), and some of the
literature that followed. However, they consider herding behavior among fund managers and so the ultimate
context and analysis is quite different from ours here.

1

or negative payoff. An incompetent leader receives uninformative signals about whether the
risky action is likely to lead to positive or negative payoffs, whereas a competent leader
receives informative signals about whether the risky action is more likely to lead to positive
or negative payoffs. Each day there is a new state of nature, new information, and a new
choice of action to be made, thus over time a leader’s competence can be learned by tracking
the payoffs on the days on which she took the risky action. Based on that information, the
principal decides each period whether to keep or replace the current leader.
We focus attention on settings in which the leader does not respond to monetary incentives and only draws benefits from being kept on the job. In this model in which wage
incentives have no bite, firing/replacement becomes the main incentive instrument, but it
involves subtle trade-offs. On the one hand, not replacing a leader may result into getting
stuck with an incompetent leader. On the other hand, a threat of replacing a leader may
induce leaders to avoid risky decisions that reveal competence. The question then to design
the sequence of replacement decisions over time in a way that incentivizes the leader to
take appropriate decisions, but still results in learning and the replacement of incompetent
leaders. We examine this question in three different contexts.
We first consider the case where the leader’s information and the eventual state are
eventually publicly observed: so even if the conservative decision is taken, the principal sees
what would have happened if the risky decision had been taken. In this case the model
delivers three main predictions. First, the probability that the principal replace the current
leader follows either an increasing, or a decreasing, or bell-shaped sawtooth pattern. The
intuition is that early on it is worth keeping the current leader on the job, even if she takes
the risky action unsuccessfully, as there is an option value of acquiring more information
about her level of competence; but then, as time goes on and the number of failed attempts
increases, so does the probability of dismissing the current leader; but eventually, leaders that
have survived longer are increasingly more likely to be competent, and therefore the dismissal
probability will start to decrease over time. The bell-shaped pattern is more likely to be
observed when actions are not very revealing, so that learning is slow; however, when actions
are very revealing, learning is fast and therefore in this case the replacement probability is
essentially decreasing over time. 2
We then move to the case where the signals are privately observed by the leader - and
therefore the state is only indirectly observable through the leader’s actions. If the leader
takes the conservative action, nothing is learned, while if the leader takes the risky action
some information is revealed. In this setting, the dismissal threat can lead to inaction, as
the leader is reluctant to choose the risky action and thereby risk future dismissal. How to
motivate the leader in this case?
2

The bell-shaped pattern appears to be in line with evidence on the dynamics of job separation, for
example as shown by Farber (1999) for the US labor market, and or more recently by Jia et al (2014)
when looking at the patterns of dismissals and promotions of provincial leaders in China. In this case, we
also get the surprising finding that the cumulative probabilities of replacing incompetent leaders, as well as
mistakenly replacing competent leaders, are non-monotonic in the leader’s actual degree of competence.

2

Here the results depend very much on whether the principal can commit in advance to a
specific mechanism for replacing the leader, or else acts based on her beliefs in every period.
We first analyze the case of commitment. We argue that there are essentially two main
mechanisms that emerge as optimal ways to motivate the agent, namely the ”carrot” and
the ”stick”. The ”carrot” consists in granting tenure to the agent after a finite number of
periods (sometimes immediately). The ”stick” consists in replacing the leader in any period
with positive probability if she chooses the safe action in the previous period, while at the
same not committing to any kind of tenure arrangement. The cost of choosing the carrot,
i.e the tenure strategy, is that the principal might get stuck forever with an incompetent
leader. The cost of choosing the stick, i.e the threat of dismissal strategy, is that you may
end up firing a competent leader for taking the safe action, even when it was the right thing
to do. We show that the stick strategy dominates when the replacement cost is sufficiently
low, otherwise the carrot strategy dominates. More generally, we show that it is optimal to
use the stick (dismissal) strategy in earlier periods and the carrot (tenure) strategy in later
periods, and that the lower the discount rate the later should tenure occur.
Finally, we consider the case in which the principal cannot commit in advance to keeping
or replacing the leader in future periods. A leading example of such a situation is that of
an elective democracy, where voters (the principal) choose whether or not to replace the
leader after each period, without any precommitment. We abstract from voter bias issues
to concentrate on voters’ decisions of whether to replace the leader as a function of the
information voters receive over time about the leader’s level of competence. A main result
in that case is that every (Markov Perfect) equilibrium results in a negative net payoff from
hiring a new leader, in particular a payoff that is lower than simply replacing the leader in
every period. The reason is that an incumbent leader’s best response in the no-commitment
case involves taking the safe action when they are faced with reelection probabilities: indeed,
doing so maintains voters’ belief about the leader’s competence at its initial level; this,
together with the fact that replacing the current leader by a new leader is costly but leads
to the same probability of competence, implies that the current leader will not be fired. On
the other hand, if current leaders are sure to be replaced then they are free to take risky
decisions. We also prove that something similar is true of a class of non-Markov equilibria:
no matter how successful the leader has been in the past the leader eventually stops taking
risky actions and is replaced. We then show that an optimal term limit can substantially
improve the leader’s incentives to take the risky action. The optimal term limit in turn
depends on the speed of learning and on the cost of replacement.
The paper relates to several strands of literature. First, there is the literature on job
matching and turnover (see Farber (1999) for a survey of that literature). Most closely
related to our paper in that literature is Jovanovic (1979). Jovanovic develops a continuous
time model of job matching between an employer and an employee, where the quality of
the match is initially unknown to all but progressively revealed over time through observing
successive output realizations. Jovanovic assumes that the worker responds to monetary
incentives and is paid her expected output each period. Under this assumption, the relevant
3

decision lies with the worker, and it to choose between staying on the job or quitting. The
main findings are that the expected wage increases with job tenure and that the probability
of quitting conditional upon having remained on the job follows a bell-shaped pattern over
time.
We contribute to this first literature by first characterizing the equilibrium dismissal
pattern in discrete time under symmetric information for various parameter configurations,
seeing more precisely when the bell-shaped pattern emerges. But more importantly, we
extend the analysis by moving from symmetric to asymmetric information situations.
Our paper also relates to a literature on tenure and ”up-or-out” contracts (e.g see Kahn
and Huberman (1988), Carmichael (1988), Waldman (1990), or Burdett and Coles (2003)).
A main argument in this literature is that tenure promotion serves as a commitment device
for the principal not to underreport the agent’s value ex post (if the agent’s value was truly
low then the up-and-out contract allows the principal to simply fire the worker), which
in turn preserves the worker’s ex ante incentives to provide effort. In Carmichael (1988),
granting academic tenure to current faculty helps ensure that good potential candidates to
become new faculty are not dismissed by current faculty because the former would represent
a threat for the latter. We provide a completely different perspective on tenure based on
three important features that such contracts provide: incentives to take risky actions during
the probationary period, ability to sort competent from incompetent, and incentives to take
appropriate actions during the tenure phase.
The paper also contributes to a political economy literature on term limits, and the more
general literature on career concerns. In particular, Besley and Case (1995) (see also Alt,
Bueno de Mesquita and Rose (2011)) build on Holmstrom (1982)’s career concerns model,
and more specifically on Banks and Sundaram’s (1993) model and analysis, to argue and
verify empirically that allowing for reelection improves political leaders’ incentives.3 These
models are built upon standard signalling structures: agents have costs of effort that are
decreasing in their type (competency). The equilibria that they focus upon (there can be
many) are such that more competent agents have incentives to work harder given the greater
marginal payoff to their effort. Agents are retained as long as they are successful and fired
once they fail. In that context, offering longer term limits (more chances for reelection)
increases incentives to put in effort - especially in early periods. 4
3

For other related signalling-based career concerns models, see Dewatripont, Jewitt, and Tirole (1999 a
and b) and Alesina and Tabellini (2007, 2008). More generally, a literature on reputations (Scharfstein and
Stein (1990), Allen and Gorton (1993), Tirole (1996), Tadelis (1999), Taylor (2000), Mailath and Samuelson
(2001,2006)) couples actions and some hidden type with outcomes.
4
More recently, Smart and Sturm (2013) developed a model where incumbent politicians may be either
”public-spirited” (i.e with payoffs that coincide with voters’ payoff) or ”biased” towards a particular choice of
action. By reducing her expected payoff from reelection, term limits reduces a ”public-spirited” politician’s
incentives to otherwise deviate from efficient decision making in order to signal her type so as to increase her
probability of reelection. Like in our model, seeking reelection induces inefficient decision making by current
leaders, and term limits help overcome this problem. However, once again, our analysis does not rely on any
standard kind of incentive problem (be it moral hazard or signaling) and moreover in our model politicians

4

We depart from these two literatures by focusing on situations where discretionary risktaking, not effort, is the main issue at stake. Our main question is: how can one induce
leaders to seize decision opportunities that are socially desirable but yet exposes them to a
higher risk of losing their job as this reveals information about their competency of making
choices. In that respect, a more closely related paper is Canes-Wrone, Herron, and Shotts
(2001). Canes-Wrone, Herron, and Shotts (2001) develop a model where, like in ours, leaders
can have high-quality or high-quality signals about the true state of nature, and worry that
being found out as incompetent they will be voted out of office. In their (two-period) model,
the fear of being found out as being incompetent may lead incumbent leaders to sometimes
”pander” to their current voters’ beliefs.5
A main contribution of our work, in this light, is to examine how repeated elections
compare to the case of commitment and mechanisms. If a voter/principal can commit to a
particular sequence of evaluations, and actors are sufficiently patient, then competent leaders
can be identified, kept, and appropriately incentivized. In contrast, if the voter/principal
cannot commit and repeatedly evaluates leaders, then incentives unravel and leaders inefficiently follow safe actions. Repeated elections biases leaders towards sitting on their laurels
and taking safe actions: much as the fear of failure that might have led to McLellan’s inaction and Lincoln’s frustration in finding a general who would act in the early parts of the
U.S. Civil War. In our setting, tenure contracts or term limits can alleviate fear and provide leaders with incentives to make choices that they would not make under the repeated
microscope of retention.

2
2.1

Basic model
The players

An organization is operated by an “agent” whom we often refer to as a “leader” , for reasons
that will become clear. A “principal” decides on keeping or replacing the leader.
We focus on settings in which the leader is paid a fixed wage and so the only relevant
decision is whether to keep or replace the leader.
A leader is either “competent” or “incompetent”, denoted by Comp and Incomp. The
prior probability that the leader is competent is λ0 ∈ (0, 1).
A given leader’s type does not change over time. If a leader is replaced, then the new
leader is competent with probability λ0 . This is also the prior about the initial leader’s
competence with which the principal begins at the start of period 1: in other words, there
is no asymmetric information ex ante about the leader’s level of competence.
are not a priori biased against voters’ preferences.
5
See also Rodriguez-Barraquer and Tan (2014), who examine students’ choices of fields to work on, which
then can reveal their abilities. Their model is quite different from ours and focuses on herding effects in
competitive settings, and not on dynamic incentives.

5

2.2

Time, states, and signals

Time proceeds in discrete periods t ∈ {1, 2, ..., T }. On occasion, we a case in which T = 2 or
T = 3 for illustrative purposes, but then look at the infinite period case T = ∞ for general
results.
In each period a state of nature, ω t ∈ {X, Y }, is realized. States X and Y occur with
equal probability, independently across periods.
In the beginning of each period t, the leader sees a signal st ∈ {X, Y } that may be
informative about the state of nature. If the leader is competent then the probability that
the signal is equal to the state is p > 1/2, and thus the signal is informative. If the leader
is incompetent then the two signals st = X and st = Y are equally likely in both states X
and Y , and so an incompetent leader’s signals are completely uninformative.
Thus,
Pr(st = ω t |Comp) = p > 1/2
Pr(st = ω t |Incomp) = 1/2.

2.3

Actions and replacement costs

We can think of the state being whether there some sort of “opportunity” (e.g., profitable
investment) available: in state Y there is such an opportunity and in state X there is not. If
the state is Y then it is best to invest: choosing action y then pays 1 to the principal, while
in state X it is better not to invest and then choosing y results in a loss of value, −v, to the
principal. Not investing (choosing action x) always leads to a payoff of 0 to the principal.
Thus, the principal’s payoff from the action as a function of the state in any period is:
X Y
x 0 0
y −v 1
Given that v > 1, if there is no information about the state, then action x offers a higher
expected payoff than action y, and so it is only competent leaders whom the principal would
ever want to take the action y.
Thus, we can think of y as ‘taking action’, while x can be interpreted as not acting or
sticking with a status quo. Foregoing actions is a safe alternative that might provide no
information of the value of the foregone opportunities.
Throughout what follows, we presume that p − v(1 − p) > 0. If this were violated, even a
competent leader could never lead to a positive expected payoff from action y, and so action
x is the only action that should every be taken.

6

2.4

The order of moves

The sequence of moves within each period is as follows. At the beginning of the period the
current leader sees her signal. Next, the leader takes an actionx or y. Subsequently, the
principal sees the the payoff and updates his beliefs about the leader’s competence. We also
consider a case in which the principal sees the state along with the payoff (we make the
information scenarios more explicit below). At the end of the period the principal decides
whether to keep the current leader or replace her by a new leader.
The system repeats itself with a new draw of signal and state at each time, but the type
of any given leader remains fixed over time. Once a leader is replaced that leader never
returns to the game. Replacing the leader leads to a cost of c ≥ 0 in that period for the
principal.

2.5

Payoffs

All players are expected payoff maximizers and discount time with the same discount factor,
δ, such that 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1.
Payoffs are as follows: (i) A leader gets private benefits b per period that she is on the
job,6 and (ii) The principal gets the per-period payoffs from the matrix above as a function
of the action taken and the state, less any costs of replacing leaders.

2.6

Two informational scenarios

We consider two informational scenarios. In one case the principal learns the state and
signal regardless of the action taken by the leader, while in the other case the principal only
observes payoffs and not the state or signal.7
Scenario 1: Observed States, Signals, and Payoffs
The state, signal, and payoff are observed by both parties at the end of each period
regardless of which action was taken in that period.
A t-period history is thus a sequence
ht = (ω 1 , s1 , a1 , d1 ; . . . ; ω t , st , at , dt ),
where ω t is the state, st is the leader’s signal, at ∈ {x, y} is the action that the leader took,
and dt ∈ {K, R} indicates whether the leader was Kept or Replaced at the end of the period
by the principal.
Let H be the set of all finite histories.
6

This isolates the incentive problem. We could also allow the leader to prefer to make successful decisions
without changing the main content of the results, as long as the payoff from being in office was large enough.
7
One could also consider an intermediate case in which only signals and payoffs are observed by both
parties. The incentives in that setting are similar to the complete information setting, and lead to little
additional insight and so we omit it.

7

Scenario 2: Observed Payoffs
The leader privately observes the signal and then chooses an action. The principal only
observes his payoff. Thus, if the leader chooses x then the principal’s payoff is 0 and the
principal does not learn the true state nor anything about the leader’s signal. If the leader
chooses y, then the principal’s payoff is either 1 or −v and therefore he can infer the state
from observing his payoff. Neither the leader nor principal sees the state except via inference
from the realized outcome of the action.
In this scenario, the histories differ for the leader and the principal, as they observed
different things.
A t-period history for the principal is a sequence
htP = (u1 , d1 ; . . . ; ut , dt ),
where ut ∈ {0, −v, 1} is the payoff and dt ∈ {K, R} indicates whether the leader was Kept
or Replaced at the end of the period by the principal.
Here the history for the leader also includes the signals she observed, but only since that
leader was in office. So, for a leader that was in place since time τ , a history is then
htL = (u1 , d1 ; . . . , uτ −1 , R ; sτ , uτ , dτ ; . . . ; st , ut , dt ).
So, the latest leader has the same information as the principal about past leaders and then
additional information about her own signals during her own reign from time τ through t. 8
So, a history in this second scenario is a pair ht = (htP , htL ) of related histories, and again
we let H t denote the set of possible histories.
We presume that a new leader begins with a prior λ0 on her own competence, although
as will become clear this is largely inconsequential in what follows.

2.7
2.7.1

Some useful preliminaries
Posteriors and updating

A useful expression is the posterior that a leader is competent if the leader is known to have
had m correct signals out of n total signals given a prior of λ0 , denoted Λ(m, n, λ0 ). This is:
λ0 pm (1 − p)n−m
Λ(m, n, λ0 ) =
λ0 pm (1 − p)n−m + (1 − λ0 )/2n

(1)

Note that Λ(m, n, λ0 ) is increasing in m and decreasing in n.
Generally, we let λt denote the posterior belief of the principal about the competence of
the current leader after t periods of observations, which moves randomly over time depending
on the leader’s type and the actions and realized states. This will also be dependent upon
the leader’s equilibrium strategy.
8

Note that ut fully reveals the action at , so we do not need to add that to the histories.

8

A relevant expression is the probability that the leader’s signal is correct when the leader
sees a Y (or equivalently an X), conditional on a current posterior probability λt :
f (λt ) = Pr(ω = Y |s = Y, λt ) =

1
(λt p
2

1
(λt p
2

+ (1 − λt )/2)
.
+ (1 − λt )/2) + 12 (λt (1 − p) + (1 − λt )/2)

(2)

or
f (λt ) = λt p + (1 − λt )/2.
A useful benchmark is the principal’s belief, λ, for which the expected current payoff
resulting from the leader taking action y when the leader sees signal Y is just equal to zero,
namely:
f (λt ) − (1 − f (λt ))v = 0,
which solves into:
λ∗ =

v/(1 + v) − 1/2
,
p − 1/2

which decreases in p and increases in v.
2.7.2

The principal’s expected payoff

The following lemma is direct but useful.
Lemma 1 Let λt denote the principal’s belief at the end of some period t about the current
leader’s competence. The principal’s expected payoff for the next period of the leader taking
an action that matches the signal is:
1
u(λt ) = [f (λt ) − (1 − f (λt ))v].
2
The lemma follows from noting that with probability 1/2 the signal is Y and that playing
y when the signal is Y yields expected payoff [f (λt ) − (1 − f (λt ))v] to the principal.9

3

Public information: an increasing, decreasing or bellshaped replacement pattern?

We begin with the case where the state and signal are publicly observed after each period.
The most interesting incentives issues arise in Scenario 2, thus we consider Scenario 1 as a
benchmark, mainly to understand some of the basics of what a replacement profile would
look like without any incentive issues.
Given this symmetric information, we examine a situation in which the leaders simply
follow the signal in each period. This is easily enforced simply by using a mechanism in
9

The two states are equally probable and the probability of a leader getting the correct signal is the same
no matter the state.

9

which a leader who does not follow signals is fired immediately. Thus, we simply examine
the principal’s optimal choice of how long to keep any given leader. This is a variation on a
standard “bandit problem”, and the optimal strategy for the principal can be expressed via
a simple cut-off belief such that the leader is replaced at the end of period t whenever the
posterior belief on her competence is lower than the cutoff.
Here, the “typical” replacement probability is bell-shaped over time, i.e., first increasing
and then eventually decreasing. The intuition is follows. Given that replacing the leader is
costly, unless signals are extremely accurate it will not be optimal for the principal to replace
the leader immediately. In other words, there is an initial ”honeymoon” period where the
leader is not replaced as there is some initial number and fraction of failures before the
leader’s competence could begin to be revealed. This is for the short run. As for the very
long run, if the leader survives for a long enough time, by the law of large numbers she is
very likely to be competent, in which case she is unlikely to be replaced. Hence, in the very
long run, the replacement probability also becomes small. It is in the middle range where
the substantial replacement probability falls, as enough information to identify competence
with some confidence has accumulated. Overall, we thus expect a bell-shaped replacement
probability of the incumbent leader over time.
We suppose that u(λ0 ) − c > 0. This guarantees that it is better to get a new leader
than to keep a leader who is thought sufficiently incompetent that the principal would rather
them not even try to take action y even with a good signal.
Let P (t) be the probability that a principal replaces a leader at time t (and kept the
leader in all periods before t). An optimal strategy for the principal is to retain the leader as
long as λt ≥ λ for some 0 < λ ≤ λ0 . We now show that the replacement probability follows
a sawtooth pattern for any threshold strategy (optimal or not).
Proposition 1 Suppose that the principal starts with some prior λ0 and retains the leader
at the end of period t if and only if λt ≥ λ for some 0 < λ ≤ λ0 . There exists t > 1 such
that P (t) > 0 while P (t + 1) = 0 and P (t + k) > 0 for some k ≥ 1.

The sawtooth pattern suggested in the proposition is illustrated in Figure 1. That P (t)
is strictly positive in period 7 but zero in period 8 can be explained as follows. A leader
who is fired in period 7 but not before necessarily had 7 failures in a row over the first seven
periods. This follows since a leader is not fired in any previous period regardless of the
number of failures, including six straight failures. So consider a leader who survived until
period 8. Such a leader could not have had eight failures and no success as in that case she
would already been fired at the end of period 7. Nor could she have had failures in all first
seven periods followed by one success in period 8 because once again she would have been
fired at the end of period 7. Thus the only possibility is that she had at most six failures and
at least one success over the first seven periods. But then even if she had another failure in
period 8 this is better than having had seven failures in a row over the first seven periods,
10

Figure 1: The probability of replacing a leader (for the first time) in various periods for
p = .55, λ0 = 1/2 and λ(c) = 1/3.
which was the threshold for replacing the leader, and having seven failures and one success
is closer to the posterior of having six failures and no successes than seven failures and no
success.10 This in turn implies that a leader who survived until period 8 will not be fired
in period 8. In a nutshell: a success over the first periods buys the current leader some
additional ”grace period” where she is not fired.
We can also examine just the positive probability dates as pictured in Figure 2. The fact
that successes and failures come in integers leads the curves to be non-monotonic even when
we look only at dates with positive probabilities.

We also see some interesting comparisons between situations where competent leaders
are “barely competent” so that p = .55 and so hard to tell apart from incompetent leaders,
compared to situations where competent leaders are “highly competent” so that p = .95 and
very different from incompetent leaders. In the left-hand panel where competent leaders are
10

Although our reasoning is particular to our discrete time setting, the sawtooth pattern will not fully
disappear if we move to continuous time. In the continuous time case, after any success there will still be
periods of time during which the leader is kept for sure. Again, a leader who makes it past some particular
time must have had some success, and so there can be periods in which the leader is fired with positive
probability followed by ones in which the leader is not fired at all.

11

(a) p = .55, λ0 = 1/2 and λ(c) = 1/3

(b) p = .95, λ0 = 1/2 and λ(c) = 1/3

Figure 2: The probability of replacing a leader (for the first time) in various periods, just
the dates positive probabilities.
barely competent, it takes time to sort out leaders, and so the probability of replacement is
growing over time. Also, the probability of making a “false-positive” or type I error (replacing
a competent leader) conditional on making a replacement starts out at roughly 1/2 and then
drops over time reaching about 1/8 by period 25. Notice also that the probability of replacing
a leader in any given period is quite small, less than .1 in all of the first 25 periods. Also,
the first period where any replacement occurs is not even until period 7. In contrast, when
competent leaders are “highly competent” then they are much easier to distinguish from
incompetent ones, and replacements begin in period 1, and have a much higher probability
(.5 for incompetent leaders in the first period). Moreover, the probabilities in that case
are decreasing over time. The relative probability a type I error conditional on making a
replacement starts out at 1/10 and then actually increases for a few periods.11

4

Privately informed leaders under full commitment:
tenure mechanisms

We now turn to our main concern: the case where the principal only observes his payoff and
does not directly see the signals. In particular, he learns nothing if the leader chooses action
x, but can infer the state from observing his payoff if the leader chooses y. We examine two
cases in order: a first in which the principal can commit to specific evaluation times and
decisions conditional on histories. Effectively, this becomes a mechanism design problem.
The second case, is one in which the principal cannot commit to specific evaluation patterns,
but instead can replace the leader at any time. The two different scenarios have different
applications and their contrast provides some of our central insights.
In either scenario, without proper incentives the leader will prefer to always choose action
x in order to avoid the risk of being replaced. In particular, under the mechanism analyzed
11

The cumulative probabilities of replacing incompetent leaders, as well as mistakenly replacing competent
leaders, also exhibit some interesting patterns as pictured in Figure 3 in the appendix.

12

in the previous section, for which the leader is replaced if the posterior belief falls below
some threshold, will no longer be optimal. Indeed, given such a mechanism, by choosing x
all periods the leader can guarantee not being replaced, and so any equilibrium must lead
to the leader not being replaced at any point.
To induce the leader to take the risk of choosing y when the true state of nature is Y,
there are a variety of mechanisms that can be used. In particular, the principal can randomly
dismiss the leader if he chooses action x : this we refer to as the stick. Or the principal can
provide incentives by simply guaranteeing to keep the leader, we refer to as the carrot.
We restrict attention to the case where the leader does not know her type, although this
has little impact on the results.

4.1

The two period case

To gain intuition on the commitment case, we begin by looking at the two period case,
in which we can fully characterize the optimal mechanism. In this scenario, immediate
tenure dominates if the replacement cost is sufficiently large as immediate tenure avoids
replacement altogether; while the stick of random replacement after safe actions dominates
if the replacement cost is small, as it avoids being stuck with a leader who turns out to be
incompetent. Let us examine this in more detail.
We presume that u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) > 0, so even after a failure in the first period, there is
no question of whether or not the principal would like the leader to follow the signal, so the
only issue is providing proper incentives.
More formally, a mechanism is characterized by two parameters: π be the probability of
retention if y is chosen and the leader fails in period 1; and q the probability of retention if
x is chosen in period 1. It is clear that any optimal mechanism (i.e., which maximizes the
principal’s expected payoff subject to incentive compatibility of the leader) involves keeping
the leader if the leader chooses y and is successful.
To induce the leader to choose the risky action y requires that the following incentive
compatibility constraint to be satisfied:
q ≤ f (λ0 ) + π(1 − f (λ0 )),
where the right-hand side is the overall probability that the leader is retained at the end of
period 1 if she chooses action y in that period (this is equal to the success probability f (λ0 )
times 1 plus the failure probability 1 − f (λ0 ) times π). Given the cost of replacement, it is
straightforward to see that this constraint is binding in equilibrium, and thus
q = f (λ0 ) + π(1 − f (λ0 )).
The overall ex ante expected profit of the principal is then


1
f (λ0 ) [1 + δu(Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))] +
U
(λ0 , π, q) =
2 (1 − f (λ0 )) [−v + πδu(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) + (1 − π)(−c + δu(λ0 ))]
1
+ [−(1 − q)c + δu(λ0 )] ,
2
13

(3)

Substituting from (3), maximizing the principal’s expected payoff with respect to π and
q is equivalent to maximizing:
(1 − f (λ0 )) [πδu(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) + (1 − π)(−c + δu(λ0 ))] + [f (λ0 ) + π(1 − f (λ0 ))] c.
If

δ
c > [u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))] = c(λ0 , p, v),
(4)
2
then it is better to set π = q = 1, and otherwise it is better to set π = 0 and q = f (λ0 ).
The above inequality (4) compares between the cost of replacing the leader and the
potential gain of having a more competent leader, and leads to the following propositions.
Proposition 2 There exists a cut-off value c(λ0 , p, v) such that the optimal mechanism for
the principal is: (i) if c > c(λ0 , p, v), then ”use the carrot” - grant immediate tenure and
retain the leader regardless of the outcome the leader; (ii) if c < c(λ0 , p, v), then ”use the
stick” - fire the leader if she takes the risky action and fails in the first period, keep the
leader if she takes the risky action and succeeds in the first period, and keep the leader with
probability q = f (λ0 ) if she chooses x in the first period.
Higher costs clearly favor non-replacement and so the tenure mechanism instead of the
random dismissal mechanism. We also note how the optimal mechanism varies with other
parameters.
Proposition 3 The cutoff value is given by


λ0 (1 − λ0 )(p − 12 )2
δ(1 + v)
c(λ0 , p, v) =
.
4
λ0 (1 − p) + (1 − λ0 )/2
Thus, the random dismissal mechanism is optimal for a wider set of costs as p increases and
as v increases. The set of cost values for which it is optimal is initially increasing in λ0 and
eventually decreasing in λ0 and so non-monotone in the prior probability of competence.
A higher accuracy of signals of competent leaders, and a higher v both increase the
relative value of having a competent leader compared to an incompetent one – this increases
the relative payoff from the dismissal mechanism compared to the instant tenure mechanism.
The comparative statics in λ0 are not monotone. If λ0 is near 0 there is no value in replacing
the leader as the replacement is likely to be incompetent. If λ0 is close to 1, then the leader
is likely to be competent and there is no reason to replace regardless of the first period
outcome. It is in intermediate cases in which it becomes worthwhile to replace the leader.
Proposition 3 follows directly from the fact that


λ0 (1 − λ0 )(p − 12 )2
δ
δ(1 + v)
[u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))] =
.
2
4
λ0 (1 − p) + (1 − λ0 )/2
Note that this two-period case does not capture all of the aspects of a tenure contract
– as it is essentially a guaranteed contract - there is no decision made after seeing some
output from the agent. The comparison between contracts is that of a carrot (guaranteed
employment) with a stick (firing for either decision) in terms of motivating the leader. In
order to get richer tenure possibilities, we move to three periods.
14

4.2

The three period case

Moving from two to three periods introduces the possibility that non-immediate tenure
dominates immediate tenure or no tenure for suitable parameter values.
In this case we now see more flexibility emerging. If costs of replacement are sufficiently
high, then it makes sense to keep the leader in place forever. If costs are low, then it makes
sense to constantly evaluate the leader, with some threat of random replacement for a choice
of x in order to maintain incentives to choose action according to signal. For intermediate
costs, it can become optimal to conditionally evaluate the leader: if the leader performs well
in early periods then the leader is tenured and kept in later periods without any fear of
replacement.
More formally, we now compare the following three mechanisms.
(i) A Random Retention Mechanism whereby at the end of each period the leader is replaced if she takes action y and fails, and is randomly replaced with positive probability
if she takes the safe action x.
(ii) A Probationary Tenure Mechanism whereby the leader is kept for sure after the first
period, and then is kept after the second period if: she took action y and was successful
in the first period, if she took action x in the first period and y in the second period
and was successful, is kept with probability f (λ0 ) if she took action x in both the first
and second periods. The leader is fired after the second period in all other cases. 12
(iii) An Immediate Tenure Mechanism whereby the leader is never replaced regardless of
her actions and the outcomes.
These three mechanisms do not comprise the full space of mechanisms, as there are some
hybrids. But the full exploration of the space yields little additional insights, and so for
the purpose of exposition we compare on these three, which can each be optimal for some
parameter values.13
We presume that u(Λ(0, 2, λ0 )) > 0, so that even after two failures it is better to have
the leader follow signals than to stop taking the risky action, as that simplifies some of the
12

Thus, the leader is tenured immediately after being successful on the first attempt; and also with some
random probability if both choices in the first two periods were x, and is replaced otherwise, but only replaced
after the second period. She cannot be replaced immediately after failure in the first period, or that will
distort incentives. The random probability of tenuring after two x’s keeps the leader from being forced to
take action y regardless of signal in the second period.
13
More formally, let x denote an x choice, 1 denote a successful y attempt an 0 a failed y attempt and
then p1 , p0 , px be the corresponding retention probabilities after the first period. So px = .7 indicates that
if x was chosen in the first period then the leader is fired with probability .3 and retained with probability
.7. Let px0 (resp. px1 ) denote the probability of retention in the second period if an x was played in the first
period and then a y was played and failed (resp. succeeded) in the second period. Let p00 (resp. p01 ) denote
the probability of retention in the second period if y was chosen in the first period and failed and then a y
was played and failed (resp. succeeded) in the second period. And let p10 (resp. p11 ) denote the probability
of retention in the second period if a y was successfully played in the first period and then a y was played

15

calculations.14 We also consider the case in which δ = 1 to simplify calculations, as with the
finite horizon, the discounting case adds little insight and the calculations already involve
many subcases.
The following proposition follows from comparison of payoffs of the principal.
Proposition 4 There exist cut-off values cIP > 0, cP R > 0, and cIR > 0 of the replacement
cost, such that:
• the immediate tenure mechanism leads to higher payoffs for the principal than the
probationary tenure mechanism if c > cIP , with the reverse if c < cIP ,
• the probationary tenure mechanism leads to higher payoffs for the principal than the
random retention mechanism if c > cP R , with the reverse if c < cP R , and
• the immediate tenure mechanism leads to higher payoffs for the principal than the
random retention mechanism if c > cIR , with the reverse if c < cIR .
Thus, for high costs, the immediate tenure mechanism is optimal and for low costs the random retention mechanism is optimal. For some parameter values (combinations of p, v, λ0 ),
cIP > cP R , in which case the probationary tenure mechanism is optimal for intermediate
costs.
Intuitively, when the replacement cost c is very large, then it is optimal to never replace
the leader and then immediate tenure is optimal. When the replacement cost is very small,
it is optimal to re-evaluate the leader in each period, but then random dismissal following
action x must be used as otherwise the leader would never take action y since it could lead to
failure and dismissal. Tenuring the leader after a success in the first two periods, but firing
after a failure (after the second period), emerges as an optimal solution for intermediate
values of the replacement cost - as then it is worthwhile to replace a leader who has failed,
but to provide incentives by guaranteed employment to a leader who has demonstrated
sufficient competence via success.

4.3

The infinite horizon case

Moving to the infinite-period case, we say that a principal uses a tenure mechanism if:
and failed (resp. succeeded) in the second period. So, a contract is a specification of
p1 , p0 , px , p11 , p10 , p1x , p01 , p00 , p0x , px1 , px0 , pxx .
There are various incentive constraints tying these together, but the full variations of potential mechanisms
extend beyond the three considered for our illustration.
14
More generally, under the immediate tenure mechanism, it could be optimal to incentivize the leader to
only take action x in some circumstances, but that case adds little insight to the analysis.

16

• The principal sets a date τ and a nonnegative integer M and a fraction f .
• The principal commits to:
- keep the leader forever if the leader chooses y exactly M times15 and is successful at
least a fraction f of the time by date τ , and
- replace the leader otherwise.
Note that we could also define a class of mechanisms which require the principal’s posterior be at least some λ by time τ . These are not exactly equivalent, but would provide a
result similar to the one that we now state.16
Proposition 5 For any ε > 0 there exists δ < 1 and a tenure mechanism such that if δ ≥ δ
and principal employs that mechanism, then in all equilibria of the mechanism (in which a
leader follows signals once tenured)17 the principal’s discounted stream of expected utilities is
at least (1 − ε) times the utility the principal would have from having a competent leader in
all periods who always chooses based on the signal.
The implication is that there exists a tenure mechanism that does two things:
• ends up firing all incompetent leaders and eventually keeping a competent leader with
an arbitrarily high probability, and
• giving the leader the correct incentives to choose actions consistent with signals in
subsequent periods.
Intuitively, with long horizons and sufficient patience, the principal can prolong the test
period during which the leader is assessed before deciding whether to tenure her or not,
without damaging the overall long run expected utility. This allows him to make sure
that incompetent leaders are fired while competent leaders are kept with arbitrarily large
probability. The advantage of probationary tenure over the random replacement mechanism
is that the former saves on replacement costs, while still providing good incentives for risktaking both during the test period and then during the post-tenure period.
15

If the leader allows a choice of at least M choices of y, this motivates an incompetent leader to try y
more than M times which is costly for the principal.
16
Working only off of the posterior can lead an incompetent leader to try action y excessively following
failures in order to try to boost the posterior, which is both costly for the principal and can lead to higher
chances of incorrectly passing incompetent leaders. This is related to the literature on “calibration”and the
literature that followed (e.g., Dawid (1982), Foster and Vohra (1998), Sandroni, Smorodinsky, and Vohra
(2003), Dekel and Feinberg (2006)). Our more general replacement strategy avoids the negative results from
that literature (that any checking rule in some class can be passed) by allowing restrictions on the strategies
and enriching the way in which outcomes can be checked. Here, competent and incompetent agents can be
statistically distinguished with high accuracy.
17
It would be enough to have the leader have lexicographic preferences for following signals, after maximizing total benefits. The proposition is also true if a tenured leader only follows signals as long as that leads
to positive expected payoffs, but stops if it is eventually revealed that she is likely enough to be incompetent
enough to lead to negative expected continuation values. So, one could have the leader value the principal’s
payoff lexicographically.

17

4.4

Lessons from the commitment case

The take away from our analysis of commitment by the principal is that in the case in which
the state and signal are privately observed by the leader but yet the principal can commit
in advance to a dynamic replacement strategy contingent upon past payoff history: (i) when
the replacement cost is sufficiently low, the principal will use the stick: fire the leader with
positive probability at the end of some periods if the leader either chose the safe action or
chose the risky action but failed in that period;18 (ii) when the replacement cost is high,
he will grant immediate or early tenure to the leader; (iii) when the replacement cost is
intermediate, and there is sufficient patience it is (always at least approximately) optimal
to resort to conditional tenure: during a trial period the leader’s performance is evaluated
and the principal decides whether to keep or replace the leader, and then the leader is kept
forever if thought to be competent with sufficient probability.

5

Privately informed leader without commitment

The mechanisms that we have considered up until now presume that the principal can fully
commit to firing a leader in specific situations. In this section we consider the case where the
principal cannot commit to a mechanism and can always decide whether or not to keep the
current leader. The principal makes the choice that maximizes his expected future discounted
stream of payoffs at each such time.
In this case, we refer to the principal as a “voter” as a central application of this scenarios
is to voting settings. Here, we need only one voter since we only consider the leader’s
competence and abstract from partisan policies.19

5.1

A benchmark

A useful benchmark is that of the one-period term limit institution whereby the current leader
is replaced every period no matter her past achievement. The payoff to this benchmark is
V1 =

u(λ0 ) − δc
.
1−δ

(5)

Note that this is a highly inefficient benchmark as successful leaders are replaced immediately and so there is no opportunity to take advantage of any learning about a leader’s
competence. Beyond the lack of learning and optimal retention, the cost of replacing a leader
is incurred in every period. The only advantage to such a system is that the leader has an
incentive to choose according to signal since the leader will be replaced regardless of the
outcome.
18

In the fully optimal mechanism, these firing probabilities, both for failures and safe actions, can depend
in complex ways on the history and current beliefs.
19
See Canes-Wrone, Herron, and Shotts (2001) and Kartik and McAfee (2007) analyses of how a quality/competence dimension can interact with a policy dimension.

18

5.2

The inefficiency of unlimited democracy

We begin by an analysis of general forms of equilibria, and then specialize to Markovian
equilibria for further results.
5.2.1

Definitions and Preliminary Results

Strategies are defined for the leader, σ L : HL → ∆{x, y} and the principal, σ P : HP →
δ{K, R}, as a function of possible histories, where HL and HP are the sets of all finite
histories for the leader and principal, respectively.
We consider perfect Bayesian equilibria of the game.
Let Vσ (htP , λtP ) denote the value function to the principal in the continuation of a perfect
Bayesian equilibrium σ if the leader is kept after a history htP and a corresponding posterior
λtP .
It is possible for the beliefs of the voter and leader to differ, but this can only happen
when the leader takes action y conditional upon an X signal. If the leader only takes action
y in cases in which a Y signal has been observed (but might also be taking action x in such
cases), then the beliefs will not differ. Thus, in most equilibrium settings the beliefs will be
the same, but it is conceivable that they will differ after some histories.
For some, but not all, results we consider Markov strategies that condition only upon
the beliefs. In this case, the principal can only condition upon his beliefs, while the leader
knows both beliefs, and so can condition upon both her beliefs and the principal’s.
So, Markov strategies for the principal are functions σ P : [0, 1] → ∆({K, R}); while
Markov strategies for the leader are functions σ L : [0, 1]2 × {X, Y } → ∆(x, y), with σ =
(σ P (λtP ), σ L (λtP , λtL , St )) representing a generic strategy.20
We first note that there always exists an equilibrium and in fact there always exists a
Markov perfect equilibrium.
Lemma 2 There exists a (Markov perfect) equilibrium in which a leader is never voted out
of office and all leaders choose x in all situations if elected.
The proof of Lemma 2 is obvious and so omitted.
5.2.2

Non-Markovian equilibria

There are many equilibria of the game, but they can be sorted into two broad classes as we
now show.
First, there is a class of equilibria in which, through threats of future leaders always
choosing x, some sort of current behavior is enforced. Effectively, this allows the principal
20

The principal could be inferring something from the time period about the leader’s beliefs in some out
of equilibrium conditions. So, the Markov assumption is actually that the strategy conditions only upon the
posterior belief, but we allow that belief to be derived from the full history. So, to be careful, a Markov
strategy σ is actually a function of ht , but depends on ht only through the corresponding induced λtP , λtL .

19

an arbitrary degree of commitment. The basic idea is that all leaders must act as they would
under some mechanism as if that mechanism was committed to, and if a leader deviates from
how he should act under that mechanism then all leaders resort to playing the equilibrium
in which x is chosen forever by all leaders regardless of history. This can enforce many (but
not all) mechanisms as if the leader could commit to the mechanism. The reason that it
cannot enforce arbitrary mechanisms is that it can only motivate actions by current leaders
that provide nonnegative continuation values to each leader at each point on the equilibrium
path.
Proposition 6 For any ε > 0 there exists δ < 1 and a tenure mechanism (τ , M, f ) as
described above, such that if δ ≥ δ there is an equilibrium in which the principal and leaders
act as if the tenure mechanism was in place, and if any player ever deviates from behavior
that would be consistent with the tenure mechanism then all players in the future resort to
the equilibrium described in Lemma 2.
The proof of Proposition 6 is straightforward, and so omitted.21 Essentially, it points out
that arbitrarily efficient equilibria exist, via threats of reversion to a bad equilibrium. This
is a way of enforcing commitment by the principal.
On the one hand, such equilibria are somewhat natural: the principal states that he will
find a certain pattern over time, but if the principal deviates from that then he is no longer
trusted and leaders revert to the equilibrium of never taking action y, which is self-enforcing.
On the other hand, this sort of construction relies heavily upon the ability of future leaders to
see the full play of the game, and thus would be ruled out for example if the model were such
that leaders do not see or pay attention to the history of payoffs before their appointment.22
Also, if there are new voters over time, and current voters are not punished for the actions
of past generations, then such constructions would be precluded.
More generally, there is a fundamental difficulty with motivating the current leader that
stems from the fact that in any situation where the leader is guaranteed not to be replaced,
the leader has an incentive to “sit on her laurels” and stop taking the risky action, and this
leads to a contradiction.
21

The play is as follows, which can be directly checked to be an equilibrium. On the equilibrium path,
the principal’s actions are as in a tenure mechanism. The leader’s actions are such that any leader who is
tenured then takes action y if and only if there is a Y signal and the current belief λLt = λP t is such that
u(λLt > 0. Leaders who are not tenured try y the first M times they get a Y signal and otherwise choose
action x, unless τ − t = M − m where t is the current period and m is the cumulative number of y actions
taken by the leader to date, in which case they take action y for each remaining period. If the principal
ever deviates from prescribed play, then all players play as described in Lemma 2. If a tenured leader ever
deviates from prescribed by play, then all players play as described in Lemma 2 in the continuation. If a
non-tenured leader deviates from prescribed play, then the play continues as in the tenure mechanism (note
than the only detectable deviations would be such that the leader takes action y too many times, or too few
times, to reach exactly M after τ periods, in which case the leader will already be fired after the τ periods).
In any other situation, all players play as described in Lemma 2.
22
Refinements that impose some sort of renegotiation-proofness can also rule out such constructions, but
can be difficult to work with in such settings.

20

In particular in cases where there is no reversion to a 0 equilibrium, then the approximate
efficiency achieved under Proposition 6 is precluded, as we now show.
Let us say that an equilibrium σ is has non-trivial continuations if a new leader always
provides a net positive expected continuation payoff of at least some γ > 0 to the principal.23 .
Theorem 1 Consider any perfect Bayesian equilibrium, σ that has nontrivial continuations.
For any λ that is reached on the equilibrium path (no matter how high), there is some
(htP , λtP ) reached with positive probability such that λtP = λ, Vσ (htP , λtP ) ≤ Vσ (∅, λ0P ) − c,
and the leader is replaced with positive probability conditional upon that history.
Theorem 1 implies that regardless of how high the posterior is that the leader is competent, the leader cannot avoid being eventually replaced with positive probability - provided
future leaders provide some positive payoffs. This underscores the fundamental difficulty in
motivating any leader with any history to take the risky action y in the absence of term
limits.
The intuition is as follows. If conditional upon some history, the leader was never replaced
for any continuation that had the same belief, then by taking action x indefinitely, the leader
would be guaranteed to never be fired. Thus, the leader cannot expect to be fired in any
continuation that lies on the equilibrium path. Then in the (nonzero probability) case in
which she is incompetent, the leader must eventually stop taking the risky action in order to
be kept and not replaced. However, this leads to a continuation value of 0 for the principal,
and since this is less than the value of a new leader she must be replaced at that time, which
is a contradiction. Thus, there must be some histories with the original belief under which
the leader is replaced with positive probability.
We point out an important corollary of Theorem 1.
Let us say that an equilibrium is weakly efficient if there exists some λ such that for any
t
(h , λtL , λtP ), if λtP > λ, then σ is such that the leader follows signals.
Thus, weak efficiency is a minimal sort of requirement in terms of having the leader take
appropriate actions. It merely requires that there is some high enough belief, such that
whenever beliefs of the leader’s competency are above that high enough level, the leader
follows signals. It does not require that the leader always feel compelled or secure in following
signals, only that this happen at least while beliefs are close enough to 1 that the leader is
competent. As the following corollary states, there is no weakly efficient equilibrium.
Corollary 1 There do not exist any weakly efficient perfect Bayesian equilibria that have
non-trivial continuations.
The corollary is derived from Theorem 1 as follows. If an equilibrium is weakly efficient,
then there are some high enough levels of λtP , for which the leader always follows the signal.
This then implies that the leader will not be fired by the principal in the next period,
23

(htP

That is, Vσ (htP , λ0P ) − c ≥ γ for some γ > 0 whenever htP has a new leader at the end of period t
= (. . . , R)).

21

conditional upon such histories.24 Thus, the leader will not be replaced if she takes x an
arbitrary number of times in a row since beliefs do not change and she is known to be
following signals. This contradicts the Theorem.
5.2.3

Markov Perfect equilibria

Theorem 1 shows that motivating a leader to follow signals when believed to be competent
with arbitrarily high probability is impossible. That does not necessarily imply that there
is not some complicated mixing so that the leader follows the signal often. Although the
full set of nontrivial equilibria are difficult to characterize, we can obtain strong bounds and
show a strong form of inefficiency for a subclass of them: Markov perfect equilibria.
Let Vσ (λtP ) denote the expected discounted payoff of the principal/voter conditional
upon starting a period with a belief that the leader is competent with probability λtP and
given Markov strategies σ.
Theorem 2 The entire present discounted value to the principal of any Markov perfect
equilibrium, σ, is no more than the one-period cost of replacement: Vσ (λ0P ) ≤ c. Thus, if
the value of constant replacement exceeds the cost of replacement (V 1 > c), then the value
of any Markov perfect equilibrium is worse than simply replacing the leader in every period.
Theorem 2 makes a strong statement about the inefficiency of all Markov perfect equilibria in a democracy. In particular, if V 1 > c, then the ex ante discounted expected value
value Vσ (λ0 ) of unlimited democracy (as well as the value in any possible continuation, as
shown in the proof) is strictly less than the value of the benchmark one-term institution
whereby the current leader is replaced in every period.
A basic intuition or heuristic proof for this result (see the appendix for the full proof)
is as follows. First, given the cost of replacement, any leader who has the same probability
of being competent as a replacement must be kept with probability one. This then implies
that a new leader can keep taking action x and never be replaced. Thus, for the leader
to take continue to take action y, it must be that she has the assurance of never being
replaced thereafter no matter the sequence of successes and failures that ensues. However,
with positive probability the leader is incompetent, in which case if she continues to take
action y, by the law of large numbers the principal’s belief about her ability will end up
dropping to a point where she will have to stop taking action y in order to avoid being
24

The careful argument is more subtle that it appears, as the principal can expect the posterior to drop
in the next period with some probability, and if he knows that he will replace the leader in the next period
with some probability, he may also be willing to replace her today. The argument that for high enough λtP
he will keep her for at least one period is as follows. Consider any number of periods T > 0. If the leader
follows signals, then there must then exist some level λ0tP > λ which is reached with positive probability on
the equilibrium path (simply by hitting a sequence of successes given that the leader follows the signals),
and such that starting from that level of at least λ0tP , beliefs are guaranteed to stay above λ for at least T
periods. Thus, the principal is guaranteed at least u(λ) for at least T periods. By choosing T large enough,
this exceeds the value of replacing the leader, and so the leader will be kept.

22

replaced (as otherwise she result in a negative utility for the principal). However, at that
point the continuation value of keeping her on the job is simply zero (as she must take action
x forever after) whereas the continuation value of hiring a new leader is Vσ (λ0P ) − c. For
the current leader not to be fired in equilibrium even at that point, it must be the case that
Vσ (λ0P ) ≤ c.

5.3

The costs and benefits of longer term limits

Given that unlimited democracy may be incapable of providing proper incentives for choosing risky actions indefinitely, we now investigate whether term limits can provide better
incentives. This is a limited form of commitment, where the principal/voter cannot commit
to any particular decision in each period, but can commit to an absolute limit on re-elections.
For this analysis, we consider the case in which V 1 > c, so that there is some benefit
in having the leader make appropriate choices, even if that involves frequent replacement.
Under this condition, we know that at a minimum, setting a term limit of one period, already
improves over the unlimited equilibrium. We compare short versus longer term limits.
5.3.1

Choice between one-period and two-period term limits

On the one hand longer term limits lower the leader’s incentives since the leader has more
to lose in terms of foregone future private benefits if she chooses the risky action early and
is consequently voted out of office in case she failed: in other words, the longer the term
limit, the more one has to wait before the leader takes the risky action. On the other hand,
a longer term limits lowers the aggregate inter-temporal replacement cost. The higher the
replacement cost, the longer the optimal term limit should be.
To get some first intuition of how this trade-off plays out, suppose first that only oneperiod and two-period term limits are available and also suppose that V 1 > c. Theorem 2
implies that some term limit dominates unlimited terms, and in particular dominated by
one-period term limits. Let V 2 denote the expected utility to the principal of replacing a
leader every two periods and having leaders follow signals in all periods.
The following cases may occur:
Case 1: The replacement cost c is sufficiently large so that:
V 2 − c ≤ u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) + δ(V 2 − c).

(6)

In this case, under a two-period term limit it is always optimal to keep the current leader no
matter her performance on action y in her first period of employment. In this case, the leader
has proper incentives to take action y in both periods, as she does not fear replacement.
This lead to an equilibrium payoff to the principal under a two-period term limit equal
to
u(λ0 )
δ2c
2
V =
−
.
(7)
1−δ
1 − δ2
23

This equation allows us to reexpress condition (6) as
c>e
c(λ0 , p, v) = (1 + δ)[u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
or, using our analysis in Section 3.1 above:
(1 + δ)(1 + v)
c>e
c(λ0 , p, v) =
2



λ0 (1 − λ0 )(p − 12 )2
λ0 (1 − p) + (1 − λ0 )/2


.

Equation (7) also implies that
V2 >V1 =

u( λ0 ) − δc
.
1−δ

Hence in this case a two-period term limit dominates a one-period term limit whenever
condition (6) is satisfied.
Case 2: The replacement cost is sufficiently low that under a two-period term limit it
would be optimal to dismiss the current leader if she took action y and failed in her first
period of employment. Without commitment, the principal cannot commit to randomly
firing the leader if x is chosen in the first period, and then that leads the leader to no longer
want to choose y in the first period for fear of failure. In this case a one-period term limit
becomes optimal.
5.3.2

Longer Term Limits

The above logic extends to term limits of greater lengths.
Let V T be the present expected discounted value starting at λ0 of having a leader follow
the signal in all T periods and replacing the leader every T -th period, but not sooner. This
is given by
u(λ0 )
δT c
T
V =
−
.
1−δ
1 − δT
Let T ∗ be the largest number of periods T for which it is better to keep the current leader
after T ∗ − 1 periods even if she failed in all periods rather than replace her, but not after
T ∗ . That is,
∗
∗
V T −1 − c ≤ u(Λ(0, T ∗ − 1, λ0 )) + δ(V T −1 − c),
but
∗

∗

V T − c > u(Λ(0, T ∗ , λ0 )) + δ(V T − c),
where
Proposition 7 The term limit that maximizes the principal’s ex ante expected discounted
utility is at least T ∗ .

24

The proof is straightforward, and so we just point out the obvious extension from the
case of T = 2. Just as in the two-period example, the T ∗ -period term limit provides the
leader with correct incentives, and leads to higher expected utility ex ante than any shorter
term limit, as the per period cost is lower but the expected utility in every period is the
same irrespective of the term limit (provided it is not more than T ∗ ).
Once one moves beyond the T ∗ expressed above, the equilibria become more complicated,
as they can involve mixing or non-signal following in some periods by leaders with some
probability. Whether the payoffs to such equilibria actually exceed the T ∗ -period term limit
depends on the circumstances, but it could be optimal to have a term limit longer than T ∗ .
Note that in term limit with a limit not exceeding T ∗ , the leader is never replaced except
by the limit. Under the optimal term limit, which could exceed the T ∗ discussed above,
there would still be a strong incumbent advantage.

5.4

Wrapping-up

In this section we have shown hat if the signal of the leader is private information and the
principal only observes payoff realizations and dismissals are decided at the end of each
period, then the equilibria that have nontrivial continuations lead to poor incentives for
risk-taking by leaders. This contrasts with the commitment case, in which tenure contracts
achieve (approximate) efficiency.

6

Summary and discussion

We have analyzed the problem of how to motivate individuals who have discretion over
decision making in situations in which firing/replacement threats are the main motivation.
There are many settings where this sort of decision making rather than effort really is the
main source of hidden action: many high level management, political and judiciary positions
(e.g., supreme court justices). In contrast to models where effort rather than discretion
interacts with competence, we find that contracts involving commitment to specific periods
of evaluation (tenure contracts) or without commitment but then with limited horizons (term
limits) are optimal. We have seen that in this world a marked contrast between the case in
which the principal can commit to keep the leader from cases in which he cannot.
Undoubtedly, there are settings in which both discretion and effort are both at play, and
given that we are finding different results from the effort-based literature, it makes sense to
examine how the two interact when effort does not satisfy the usual signaling assumptions.
The analysis in this paper can be extended in several other potentially interesting directions. Two such extensions are straightforward. First, what happens if job separation also
occurs exogenously with positive probability? Second, what about if a new leader inherits
bad outcomes from previous leaders, which impacts on the probability of failure this period?
On the former (exogenous job separation): suppose that no matter the past history of

25

success and failures, in each period there is some probability the current leader leaves the job
for some exogenous reason. Effectively, this does acts like a decrease in the discount factor
for the leader, and a random cost and restart for the principal. In the case of the tenure
result, it means that the patience of the principal must now also include a low probability
of exogenous separation, otherwise a random retention mechanism will now dominate and a
long tenure evaluation period becomes obsolete since leaders are never expected to stay long
enough to be properly evaluated.
Now moving to the case where past failures affect current failure: in our model so far we
have assumed that the occurrence of successes and failures is uncorrelated across successive
leaders. But suppose instead that the occurrence of a failure last period increases the likelihood of a failure this period (even) when action y is chosen in state Y. This naturally occurs
in various settings such as coaching or managing (where a past coach or manager’s athletes
still comprise the team, and it may take some time to evaluate the new coach/manager’s
ability to choose good athletes), as well as politician’s who inherit various economic or political crises (as well as successes) from previous administrations. This has an interesting
effect as it can provide a lag before any real updating can take place. Thus, with complete
or incomplete information, it can lead to some time periods where the leader is kept for sure,
before we return to a setting where the decisions lead to informative signals, and then to the
analysis as we have conducted it here.
Other extensions are equally interesting to investigate. One would be to introduce the
possibility of promotions rather than just hiring and firing. A conjecture is that as long
as there is a limited set of possible promotions, many of the underlying insights would still
remain, but that requires a careful analysis.
Another extension would be to allow for multiple leaders or to multiple principals. Having
several leaders and one principal would allow the principal to observe the outcome from
the challenger’s actions over time, not just the outcome from the incumbent’s action. A
conjecture is that under the current setting this should enhance the leaders’ motivation to
take risky actions, as it results in a sort of contest. One the other hand, having several
principals compete for a limited number of leaders might increase the likelihood of early
tenure, with probationary periods that would be shorter than what would be the optimal
mechanism from any single principal’s perspective. This emerges from the fact that once a
leader begins to have success, a principal can entice that leader away from other principals by
offering early tenure. More generally, we conjecture that having more leaders than principals
should lead to excessive risk-taking by current leaders, whereas having more principals than
leaders should lead to earlier tenure - in either case leading to increased inefficiencies.
Another extension is to analyze the case where the principal and the leader do not
discount the future at the same rate. Here, we conjecture that the higher the leader’s discount
factor, the higher the probability of retention under the random retention mechanism, and
also the larger the range of replacement costs for which tenure dominates random retention

26

as this will increase the leader’s expected discounted return from currently following signal.25
One could analyze the implications, in the no-commitment case, of having elections being
held every X periods instead of being held every period, where X > 1. However, the basic
inefficiency issues underlying Theorems 1 and 2 would still hold in that case.
Finally, the model delivers empirical predictions, in particular on the efficiency of tenure
or term limit arrangements, which should be confronted with the evidence on the performance
of firms and countries with differing contractual practices, corporate charters or political
constitutions. These and other extensions await further research.

References
[1] Alesina, A., and Tabellini, G. (2007) ”Bureaucrats or politicians? Part I: a single policy
task,” American Economic Review, 97, 169–179.
[2] Alesina, A., and Tabellini, G. (2008) ”Bureaucrats or politicians? Part II: Multiple
policy tasks,” Journal of Public Economics, 92, 426–447.
[3] Allen, F. and Gorton, G. (1993) ”Churning Bubbles” Review of Economic Studies, 60:4,
813-836.
[4] Alt, J, Bueno de Mesquita, E, and Rose, S (2011) ”Disentangling Accountability and
Competence in Elections: Evidence from US Term Limits. Journal of Politics, 73, 171186.
[5] Banks, J, and Sundaram, R (1998), ”Optimal Retention in Agency Problems”, Journal
of Economic Theory, 82, 293-323.
[6] Besley, T (2006), Principled Agents? The Political Economy of Good Government,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[7] Besley, T, and Case, A (1995a), ”Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy
Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110, 769-98.
[8] Besley, T, and Case, A (1995b), ”Incumbent Behavior: Vote-Seeking, Tax-Setting, and
Yardstick Competition.” American Economic Review, 85, 25-45.
25

Recall that early tenure in the two-period case dominates whenever
c > c(λ0 , p, v, η) =

δ
[u(λ0 , η) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ), η)],
2

whereas two-period term limits dominate one- period term limits whenever:
c>e
c(λ0 , p, v) = (1 + δ)[u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))].

27

[9] Besley, T, and Case, A (2003), ”Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence
from the United States”, Journal of Economic Literature, 41, 7-73.
[10] Burdett, K, and Coles, M (2003), ”Equilibrium Wage-Tenure Contracts”, Econometrica,
71, 1377-1404.
[11] Canes-Wrone, B, and Shotts, K (2007), ”When Do Elections Encourage Ideological
Rigidity?”, American Political Science Review, 101, 273-288.
[12] Canes-Wrone, B, Herron, M, and Shotts, K (2001), ”Leadership and Pandering: A
Theory of Executive Policymaking”, American Journal of Political Science, 45, 532-50.
[13] Carmichael, L (1988), ”Incentives in Academics: Why Is There Tenure?”, Journal of
Political Economy, 96, 453-472.
[14] Dawid, A. P. (1982), ”The Well Calibrated Bayesian,” Journal of the American Statististical Association, 77, 605-613.
[15] Dekel, E. and Feinberg, Y. (2006) “Non-Bayesian testing of a stochastic prediction,”
Review of Economic Studies 73:4, 893 - 906.
[16] Dewatripont, M, Jewitt, I, and Tirole, J (1999a), ”The Economics of Career Concerns,
Part I: Comparing Information Structures”, Review of Economic Studies, 66, 183-198
[17] Dewatripont, M, Jewitt, I, and Tirole, J (1999a), ”The Economics of Career Concerns,
Part II: Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies”, Review
of Economic Studies, 66, 199-217
[18] Farber, H (1999), ”Mobility and Stability: The Dynamics of Job Changes In Labor Markets”, in Handbook of Labor Economics, Ashenfelter, O, and Card, D (Eds) , Elsevier:
North-Holland
[19] Fearon, J (1999), ”Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians” In Democracy, Accountability and Representation, Przeworski, A, Stokes, S, and Manin, B (Eds)
New York: Cambridge University Press, 55-97.
[20] Ferejohn, J (1986), ”Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control”, Public Choice 50,
5-26.
[21] Ferraz, C, and Finan, F (2009), ”Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence
from the Audits of Local Governments”, NBER Working Paper No 14937.
[22] Foster, D. P., and Vohra, R. (1998) “Asymptotic Calibration,” Biometrika, 85:2, 379 390.
[23] Gordon, S, Huber, G, and Landa, D (2007), ”Challenger Entry and Voter Learning”,
American Political Science Review,101, 303-20.
28

[24] Harrington, J (1993), “Economic Policy, Economic Performance and Elections,” American Economic Review, LXXXIII, 27-42.
[25] Holmstrom, B (1982) “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,” in
Essays in Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck, Helsinki: Swedish
School of Economics.
[26] Jackson, M, and Lazear, E (1991) “Stock, Options, and Deferred Compensation,” Research in Labor Economics, 2, 41–62.
[27] Jia, R, Kudamatsu, M, and Seim, D (2014), ”Political Selection in China: Complementary Role of Connections and Performance”, Working Paper, IIES, Stockholm University.
[28] Jovanovic, B (1979), ”Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover”, Journal of Political
economy, 87, 972-990.
[29] Kahn, C, and Huberman, G (1988), ”Two-Sided Uncertainty and Up-or-Out Contracts,
Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 423-444.
[30] Kartik, N. and McAfee, R.P. (2007) “Signaling Character in Electoral Competition,”
American Economic Review, 97(3), 852-870.
[31] Mailath, G. and L. Samuelson (2001), “Who Wants a Good Reputation?” Review of
Economic Studies 68(2): 415-441.
[32] Mailath, G.J., and Samuelson, L. (2006), Repeated Games and Reputations. Oxford
University Press.
[33] Mattozzi, A, and Merlo, A (2008), “Political Careers or Career Politicians?” Journal of
Public Economics, 92 , 597-608.
[34] Padro i Miquel, G, and Snyder, J (2006), ”Legislative Effectiveness and Legislative
Careers”, Legislative Studies Quarterly, 31, 347-81.
[35] Rodriguez-Barraquer, T, and Tan, X (2014), “A Model of Competitive Signaling,” Unpublished Working Paper, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona.
[36] Sandroni, A., Smorodinsky, R. and Vohra, R. (2003) “Calibration with many checking
rules,” Mathematics of Operations Research, 28:1, 141 - 153.
[37] Scharfstein, D, and Stein, J (1990) ”,Herd Behavior and Investment”, American Economic Review, 80, 465-479
[38] Smart, M, and Sturm, D. (2013), ”Term Limits and Electoral Accountability”, mimeo
London School of Economics.
29

[39] Tadelis, S. (1999), “What’s in a Name? Reputation as a Tradeable Asset,” American
Economic Review, 89(3), 548-563
[40] Taylor, C. (2000), “The Old-Boy Network and the Young-Gun Effect,” International
Economic Review, 41(4), 871-891
[41] Tirole, J. (1996), “A Theory of Collective Reputations (With Applications to the Persistence of Corruption in the Firm Quality),” Review of Economic Studies, 63, 1, 1-22.
[42] Waldman, M (1990), ”Up-Or-Out Contracts: A Signaling Perspective”, Journal of Labor
Economics, 8, 230-250.

Appendix: Proofs
Consider the case in which states are observed as well as signals. In that case, let ot = 1
if the leader is correct (a “success”) and ot = 0 if the leader is incorrect (a “failure”). A
sufficient statistic for λt given λ0 is the cumulative number of successes through time t:
X
Ot =
ot .
t0 ≤t

As noted above, the posterior probability of having a competent leader λt = Λ(Ot , t, λ0 ) is
increasing in the number of successes through a given time, Ot .
Let
Ot (λ0 , λ) = {O ∈ N : Λ(O, t, λ0 ) < λ}
denote the set of possible cumulative successes through time t for which the posterior falls
below the threshold λ. Given that Λ(O, t, λ0 ) is increasing in O, there exists
Ot (λ0 , λ) = max Ot (λ0 , λ).
Thus, O ∈ Ot (λ0 , λ) if and only if O ≤ Ot (λ0 , λ) and O ∈ N.
Proof of Proposition 1:
The proof makes use of the following two lemmas.
Lemma 3 Suppose that the principal starts with some prior λ0 and continues to retain the
leader as long as λt ≥ λ for some 0 < λ ≤ λ0 . Then Ot (λ0 , λ) is the unique value of Ot for
which the principal fires the leader at period t and not before t (if P (t) > 0).
Proof of Lemma 3:
If Ot (λ0 , λ) = 0, then this holds since this is the maximum value out of Ot (λ0 , λ) and
since there are no lower values, it must be unique. So, suppose Ot (λ0 , λ) > 0, and also that
30

to the contrary o = Ot (λ0 , λ) − k, with k > 0, is another value for which the follower stops
at period t and not before t. Note that since k > 0
Λ(o, t − 1, λ0 ) < Λ(o + k, t, λ0 ).
Since Llambda(o+k, t, λ0 ) < λ (noting that o+k = Ot (λ0 , λ)), it follows that Λ(o, t−1, λ0 ) <
λ. This implies that Ot−1 ≤ o would lead to the follower stopping at time t − 1 (or possibly
before), and so o could not lead to a first stopping at time t since Ot = o implies Ot−1 ≤ o
which would lead to stopping by t − 1.
Lemma 4 Suppose that the follower starts with some prior λ0 and continues to retain the
leader as long as λt ≥ λ for some 0 < λ ≤ λ0 . Let P (t0 ) > 0 and P (t) > 0. Then
Ot0 (λ0 , λ)) > Ot (λ0 , λ)) whenever t0 > t, and Ot0 (λ0 , λ)) = 1 + Ot (λ0 , λ)) if t0 = t + 1 .
Proof of Lemma 4:
First, note that Ot0 (λ0 , λ)) ≥ Ot (λ0 , λ)). To see this, suppose to the contrary that
o = Ot0 (λ0 , λ)) < Ot (λ0 , λ)). However, if Ot0 = o then Ot ≤ o < Ot (λ0 , λ)) which implies
that the follower would have stopped by t.
Next let us show that Ot0 (λ0 , λ)) 6= Ot (λ0 , λ)). This follows since Ot ≤ Ot0 and so then
the principal would have fired the leader by t if the two were the same. Next, let us show
that Ot+1 (λ0 , λ)) = Ot (λ0 , λ)) + 1. Note that Ot (λ0 , λ)) ≥ Ot+1 (λ0 , λ)) − 1 since
Λ(o, t, λ0 ) < Λ(o + 1, t + 1, λ0 ),
for any o. So if Λ(o + 1, t + 1, λ0 ) < λ ), it follows that Λ(o, t, λ0 ) < λ.
To show the proposition, let t be the first t for which P (t) > 0.26
We now invoke the two lemmas above. They imply that if P (t) > 0 for all t > t, then it
would have to be that
Ot = Ot + t − t.
This would imply that Ot /t → 1, and so λt → 1, which contradicts the fact that the leader
would be followed. Thus, there is some finite t for which P (t) = 0. Note also, that P (t) > 0
infinitely often: it is possible that the leader is correct for any arbitrary initial number of
periods and then incorrect thereafter for any given number of periods. Thus, for any τ and
ε > 0 it is possible to have λt > λ0 for all t < τ , and then λt < ε for large enough t > τ .
This implies that P (t) > 0 for some t > τ . Since this is true for any τ , it is true infinitely
often.
Proof of Proposition 4: We begin by characterizing the principal’s payoff from each of
the mechanisms.
Recall that δ = 1 and that u(Λ(0, 2, λ0 )) > 0, so that it is optimal for a leader to follow
signal in any period regardless of history.
26

There exists such a t since a long enough string 0’s will lead λt into any given neighborhood of 0. Any
long enough string of 0’s has positive probability.

31

The principal’s payoff from the immediate tenure mechanism It follows directly
that the ex ante expected utility from the immediate tenure mechanism is
U IT = 3u(λ0 ).
The principal’s payoff from the probationary tenure mechanism Recall that tenure
is offered with probability f (λ0 ) in the case of two x actions in order to satisfy the incentive
compatibility condition to induce the leader to follow the signal in the first two periods.
Then, careful calculation (considering each possible realization of signals and actions) shows
that the ex ante expected utility from the probationary tenure mechanism is


f (λ0 )(1 + 2u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))
PT
1
U =
2
+(1 − f (λ0 ))(−v + u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) − c + u(λ0 ))
+ 41 [f (λ0 )(1 + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))) + (1 − f (λ0 ))(−v − c + u(λ0 ))] + 41 [u(λ0 ) − c(1 − f (λ0 ))] .
The principal’s payoff from the random retention mechanism The leader is kept
after a success and fired after a failure, so to characterize the payoffs from this mechanism,
we first need to solve for the various retention probabilities following x actions in both the
first and second period.
There are two different versions of this mechanism. In one case px = 1 and pxx =
f (λ0 )−2+2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) = g(λ0 ); and in the other case px = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) and pxx = f (λ0 ).
To see this, note that the last period incentive compatibility (IC) constraint implies that
f (λ0 ) ≥ pxx ≥ 1 − f (λ0 ).
Also,
f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) ≥ p1x ≥ 1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )).
Next there is a first period incentive constraint. If the leader takes action y conditional
on a Y signal, then the expected payoff is
1
b[1 + f (λ0 ) + (f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + p1x ))].
2
If the leader instead chooses x in the first period (and acts according to signal in the second
period) then the payoff is
1
b[1 + px + (f (λ0 ) + pxx )].
2
Setting p1x = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) is optimal to guarantee that the leader will want to take action
y when seeing a Y signal.
Then the first period constraint becomes
1
f (λ0 ) + f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) ≥ px + (f (λ0 ) + pxx ).
2
32

A solution to this involves pushing at least one of px or pxx to its maximum constrained
value (or else it does not matter): So, one possibility is to set px = 1 = p1x and then
1
f (λ0 ) + f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) = 1 + (f (λ0 ) + pxx )
2
or
pxx = f (λ0 ) − 2 + 2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )).
The other possibility is to set pxx = f (λ0 ) and then
f (λ0 ) + f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) = px + f (λ0 )
and so
px = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )).
Both of these lead to the same behavior by the leader, and no difference in the posterior
beliefs regarding any retained leader since it only conditions on sequences of x behaviors and
so the only difference comes in expected replacement costs. It is straightforward to check
that the overall replacement costs are identical, and so the two mechanisms lead to identical
payoffs.
Thus, we focus on the mechanism with px = 1 and pxx = f (λ0 )−2+2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) as that
leads to the easiest comparison with the other two mechanisms. Also, p1x = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )).
Given these three probabilities, we then have the following expression for the random
retention mechanism (the first part is what if the principal gets if there is failure in the first
period, the second part is what he gets if there is success in the first period; the third part
is what the principal get if x is chosen in the first period):

U

RR



1
1
=
(1 − f (λ0 )) −v − c + u(λ0 ) + [f (λ0 ) (u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + u(λ0 )) + 2 (1 − f (λ0 )) (u(λ0 ) − c)]
2
2

1
1
+ f (λ0 ) 1 + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + [f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) (u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))
2
2
+ (1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))) (−v − 2c + 2u(λ0 ))]
.

1
1
+ 0 + [f (λ0 ) (1 + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))) + (1 − f (λ0 )) (−v − c + u(λ0 ))]
2
2

1
+ [0 + u(λ0 ) − (1 − f (λ0 ) + 2 − 2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))c] .
2

We now prove the result by direct comparison of the expressions.
A) Comparison between Immediate Tenure (IT) and Probationary Tenure (PT):
The difference between Immediate Tenure (IT) and Probationary Tenure (PT) is that
PT involves firing the current leader after period 2 either if she chooses x twice in a row or
if she chooses y in period 1 and fails or if she choose x in the first period followed by a failed
y in the second period.
33

Thus PT dominates IT if and only if:27
1
(1 − f (λ0 ))[−c + u(λ0 )]
2
1
+ (1 − f (λ0 )[−c + u(λ0 )]
4
1
+ {(1 − f (λ0 ))[−c + u(λ0 )]
4
+f (λ0 )u(λ0 )}
1
(1 − f (λ0 ))u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))
>
2
1
+ (1 − f (λ0 )u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))
4
1
+ u(λ0 )
4
or equivalently
3
[u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))] = cIP .
4
B) Comparison between Probationary Tenure (PT) and Random Retention (RR):
These two mechanisms lead to the same outcomes whenever there are two successes, or
an x followed by either a success or a failure; but differ in all other cases.
Thus PT will dominate RR if and only if:
c<

1
1
(1 − f (λ0 )) [u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) + u(λ0 ) − c] + f (λ0 ) [2u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))]
2
2
1
+ [u(λ0 ) − (1 − f (λ0 ))c]
4


1
1
>
(1 − f (λ0 )) u(λ0 ) − c + [f (λ0 ) (u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + u(λ0 )) + 2 (1 − f (λ0 )) (u(λ0 ) − c)]
2
2

1
1
+ f (λ0 ) u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + [f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) (u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))]
2
2

1
+ [(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))) 2 (u(λ0 ) − c)] .
2
1
+ [u(λ0 ) − (1 − f (λ0 ) + 2 − 2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))c]
4
which boils down to
c > cP R ,
27

This ignores the exact indifference. In the left hand side of this inequality, the first term corresponds to
the principal’s payoff under PT conditional upon action y being chosen and failed upon in the first period,
the second term corresponds to the principal’s payoff conditional upon choosing x in the first period followed
by a failed y in the second period, and the third term corresponds to the principal’s payoff conditional upon
x being chosen twice in a row; the right hand side of the inequality is the sum of the corresponding principal’s
payoffs under IT.

34

where
c=

2(1 − f (λ0

))2

f (λ0 )E + (1 − f (λ0 ))F
,
+ 2f (λ0 )(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + 2(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))

where
E = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))[u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) + u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )]
+(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))2u(λ0 ) − 2u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))
and
F = f (λ0 )[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + u(λ0 )]
+(1 − f (λ0 ))2u(λ0 ) − 2u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))
Note that
u(λ0 ) = f (λ0 )u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) + (1 − f (λ0 ))u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )),
and so
u(λ0 ) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) = f (λ0 )[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))].

(8)

This then helps us simplify E and F , so that
E = f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 ))[u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) − u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )]
−2(1 − f (λ0 ))(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
and
F = f (λ0 )(3 − f (λ0 ))[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
Therefore,
cP R = f (λ0 )[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
·

[u(Λ(2,2,λ0 ))−u(Λ(1,1,λ0 )]
+ (1 − f (λ0 ))(1 − f (λ0 ) + 2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))
f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) [u(Λ(1,1,λ
0 ))−u(Λ(0,1,λ0 ))]

2(1 − f (λ0 ))2 + 2(1 + f (λ0 ))(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))

.

C) Comparison between Immediate Tenure (IT) and Random Retention (RR):
The existence of the cost threshold cIR follows along similar lines. Here is sufficient to
note that U RR is decreasing in c and U IT is independent of c, and that U RR > U IT for c = 0.

c

IP

To complete the proof we need only verify that there exist parameter values for which
> cP R .
Note that by (8) we can rewrite
3
cIP = f (λ0 ) [u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))].
4

Thus, to show that cIP > cP R it is sufficient to show that there exist parameter values
for which
[u(Λ(2,2,λ0 ))−u(Λ(1,1,λ0 )]
+ (1 − f (λ0 ))(1 − f (λ0 ) + 2f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))
f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) [u(Λ(1,1,λ
3
0 ))−u(Λ(0,1,λ0 ))]
>
.
4
2(1 − f (λ0 ))2 + 2(1 + f (λ0 ))(1 − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )))

35

(9)

It is useful to consider the limit case where p = 1, as the calculations simplify dramatically
and it is then easy to see that the results hold in a neighborhood of that case. When p = 1
(and λ0 ∈ (0, 1)):
Λ(0, 1, λ0 ) = 0,

Λ(1, 1, λ0 ) =

2λ0
,
λ0 + 1

Λ(2, 2, λ0 ) =

4λ0
,
3λ0 + 1

and
1
f (Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) = ,
2

f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) =

λ0
1
+ ,
λ0 + 1 2

f (Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) =

2λ0
1
+ .
3λ0 + 1 2

Then noting that
[u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) − u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )]
(f (Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) (1 + v)
=
;
[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
(f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − f (Λ(0, 1, λ0 )) (1 + v)
it follows that
[u(Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) − u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )]
f (Λ(2, 2, λ0 )) − f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )
1 − λ0
=
=
.
[u(Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − u(Λ(0, 1, λ0 ))]
f (Λ(1, 1, λ0 )) − f (Λ(0, 1, λ0 )
1 + 3λ0

(10)

Next, in the limit in which λ0 → 0, we find that all of the f (·)s tend to 1/2, and that the
right hand side of (10) tends to 1. Thus, after some algebra, the right hand side of (9) tends
to 5/8. Therefore, for parameters near p = 1 and λ0 = 0, (9) is satisfied. This completes the
proof of the proposition.
Proof of Proposition 5:
Choose f halfway between 1/2 and p, so f = 14 + p2 .
Also choose M = τ /2. Let us show that if τ is large enough to satisfy the above.
The proposition is established via the following claims.
1. For any ε0 ∈ (0, 1/2) there exists a large τ such that a competent leader will have at
least a fraction of f successes out of any number of more than τ /2 choices of y from
Y signals with probability at least 1 − ε0 and an incompetent will have a fraction of f
successes under y choices from τ /2 choices of y (regardless of signals) with probability
less than ε0 .
2. For any λ0 and ε00 ∈ (0, 1) there exists some number K such that the probability of at
having at least one competent leader out of K tries is at least 1 − ε00 .
2. follows directly from setting K such that (1 − λ0 )K < ε00 .
1. follows from the law of large numbers. Choose τ large enough so that the probability
of a fraction of f successes out of τ /2 tries is no more than 1 − ε0 when the coin has a
probability of 1/2 but is more than 1 − ε0 when the coin has a probability p.

36

By following a strategy of choosing according to signals, a competent leader will successfully pass the tenure with a probability that is above 1 − 2ε0 for large enough τ . Regardless
of the strategy followed an incompetent leader will pass with probability less than 1 − ε0 .
Let us now argue that in all equilibria competent leaders will pass the test with probability
at least 1 − 2ε0 and the incompetent leaders will fail the test with probability at least 1 − ε0 .
If the leader is competent (and is aware of this), then she can pass the test with
By 2 applied to ε00 = ε/4, we can find K such that within K draws of leaders the
probability of having a competent leader is at least 1 − ε/4.
Find ε0 such that (1−ε0K > 1−ε/4. It then follows from 1, using 2 to set K as above, that
there exists τ such that within K periods there is a probability of at least (1−ε/4)2 > (1−ε/2)
of having a competent leader pass the test and not having any incompetent leader pass the
test. This follows since there is a probability of at least (1 − ε/4 of having at least one
competent leader in the first K draws. Then under 1, the probability that all incompetent
leader in the first K draws fail and any competent leader in the first K draws (if that many
are needed) passes the test is at least (1 − ε0K . By the selection of ε0 , this later probability
is at least 1 − ε/4.
Thus, for any ε we can find τ and K such that there is a probability of at least 1 − ε/2
that a competent leader will pass the before time Kτ and such that the probability of having
an incompetent leader pass the test is less than ε/2.
Kτ
Set δ such that δ > 1 − ε/2.
Thus, for any ε ∈ (0, 1/2) we can find a tenure mechanism such that there is a probability
of at least 1 − ε/2 that a competent leader will pass the test (an no incompetent leader will)
within Kτ periods, and then lead to the truthful and competent payoffs for all time after
Kτ . For δ > δ this leads to a total payoff of at least 1 − ε/2 of the payoff as if truthful and
competent payoffs were obtained in all periods. Thus, the ex ante expected discounted sum
of payoffs from this mechanism are at least (1 − ε/2)2 of the fully competent and truthful
payoffs, which establishes the proposition.
Proof of Theorem 1:
Suppose the contrary of the proposition. Let htP , λtP be reached with positive probability
and suppose that a leader is never fired in any continuation ht0P , λtP that has the same
posterior λtP that is reached with positive probability. This implies that the leader is never
fired in any continuation that is reached with positive probability on the equilibrium path,
since the leader can guarantee a payoff of b in perpetuity by simply choosing x forever (as
any finite sequences of x choices occurs with positive probability and leaves the principal’s
belief unchanged). Next, note that with some positive probability the leader is incompetent,
conditional on the principal’s observations (or, actually, under any other observations of
history to date). Let us then consider the case in which the leader is actually incompetent.
Consider any ε > 0, and let A be the set of all sequences of possible payoffs (for which
all finite truncations have positive probability in equilibrium) for the principal that have
the limsup of the fraction of successes divided by failures not exceed 1 + ε. Then, if the
37

leader is incompetent, the probability that the continuation sequence lies in A is 1 regardless
of the strategy. It follows from Kolmogorov’s 0-1 law, the beliefs of the principal on the
event A (which is a tail event) converge to 1. For small enough ε > 0 this implies that the
continuation value of the principal must lie below γ with positive probability (where γ is as
defined the in the statement of the theorem). This is a contradiction, since the principal will
then replace the leader.
Proof of Theorem 2: First note that VσD (λ0 ) > VσD (λ0 ) − c. This implies that P (λ0 ) = 1,
as keeping a leader with λ0 is better than paying the cost of replacement and getting a
leader with the same probability of competence who would follow the same strategy. This
implies if a leader takes action x in perpetuity the principal’s belief about her competence
will remain equal to λ0 and the leader will be kept in perpetuity. This implies that since the
leader has a strategy that guarantees being kept forever response to a Markovian strategy of
the voter, the leader must be kept with probability 1 under the leader’s best response since
the leader values only being in office. Note that since λ0 < 1, there is a positive probability
that the leader is incompetent (namely, 1 − λ0 ). For an incompetent leader, either there
is a positive probability that the leader hits some λt after which the leader no longer takes
action Y , and then V (λt ) = 0, or else the there probability one that the leader continues
to take action Y an infinite number of times, in which case λt converges to 0 by the law of
large numbers. In that second case, it must be that V (λt ) ≤ 0 for some λt reached with
positive probability on the path, since an incompetent leader has a negative expected payoff
from taking action Y . Thus, in either case, there is a positive probability of hitting some
λt such that V (λt ) ≤ 0. Yet, as we argued above the leader is never replaced. This implies
that 0 ≥ V (λt ) ≥ VσD (λ0 ) − c, which implies that VσD (λ0 ) ≤ c.

Cumulative Firing Probabilities in the Complete Information Case
In Figure 3 we see that the cumulative probabilities are not ordered with respect to how
competent a competent leader is. Although the replacement curves in the case of incompetent
leader are ordered by the p’s (see Panel 3a), those for competent leaders are not ordered
monotonically (see Panel 3b). The highest probability of replacing a good leader starts out
highest for the case of p = .8 and lowest for p = .55, with p = .95 and p = .65 in between.
The two cases of .65 and .55 eventually overtake the others, but start out lower because
information is slow to accumulate in those cases and so replacement probabilities are low
initially.

By the law of large numbers, incompetent leaders will be recognized with a probability
1 (so λt → 0 with probability 1 in the case of an incompetent leader), and so eventually any
incompetent leader will be replaced as long as the cost of replacement is not so high that
one would not replace a incompetent leader even if known to be incompetent. There are
38

(a) λ0 = 1/2 and λ(c) = 1/3

(b) λ0 = 1/2 and λ(c) = 1/3

Figure 3: The cumulative probability of replacing a leader (for the first time).
two main differences for what happens as a function of the cost of replacement: how quickly
incompetent leaders are replaced, and with what probability competent leaders are replaced.
These present a trade-off.

39

