                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE IMPACT OF MEDICARE'S
                    PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM
                      ON PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS
                      TREATED IN SCATTERBEDS




                         Richard 0. Frank

                          Judith R. Lave

                          Carl A. Taube

                            Agnes Rupp

                        Howard H. Goldman




                      Working Paper No. 2030




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                           September 1986




We are grateful to Thomas McGuire, David Salkever and Stephen
Jencks for helpful comments on earlier drafts and to Paul Henderson
for programming assistance. Frank, Goldman, Lave and Rupp's work
was supported by contract from NIMH. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Health Economics. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER 4orking Paper #2030
                                                  September 1986




                   The Impact of Medicare's Prospective Payment
              System on Psychiatric Patients Treated in Scatterbeds




                                     ABSTRACT

      Medicare's Prospective Payment System (PPS) for hospitals was phased—in

during the 1984 Federal Fiscal Year. While many providers of psychiatric in-

patient care were exempted from PPS patients treated in general hospital beds

outside of psychiatric units (scatterbeds) were not. This allows for an initial

assessment of the impact of PPS on psychiatric patients. We use a single

equation model of hospital length of stay to estimate the impact of PPS. We

allow for the possibility of both anticipating behavior and slow adjustment to

the new payment scheme. The results indicate a substantial response to PPS over

the first year of implementation. The estimated response includes sizable anti-

cipatory and slow adjustment components. The findings suggest that policy

discussions may be weighted too heavily in the direction of concern over hospi-

tal   financial status given the ability of hospitals to change their behavior.

Richard G. Frank, Ph.D.                               Judith R. Lave, Ph.D.
Health Services R & D Center                            School of Public Health
Johns Hopkins University                              University of Pittsburgh
624 North Broadway           0
                                                      Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Baltimore, MD 21205



                        Carl Taube, Ph.D.
                        Agnes Rupp, Ph.D.
                        Howard H. Goldman, M.D., Ph.D.
                        National Institute of Mental Health
                        5600 Fisher Lane
                        Rockville, MD 20857
I. Introduction

         On October 1, 1983 the phase-in of the Medicare Prospective Payment

System (PPS) began. Although the general impression is that providers treating

Medicare psychiatric cases were exempted from PPS, that impression is

misleading. Only free standing psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric units in

general hospitals (which met certain qualifying conditions and applied for and

received an exemption) were exempted from PPS; other providers were not.' In

fiscal year 1984, 41 percent of psychiatric discharges which accounted for 29

percent of total charges for psychiatric Medicare cases, were paid for under

PPS. These patients received their care from general hospitals, either in the

so called "scatterbeds" or in nonexempt psychiatric units.

         The overall objective of PPS was to stem the growth in hospital costs

while continuing to ensure the access of beneficiaries to quality health care

(Gutterman and Dobson, 1986). The system was designed to encourage the effi-

cient production of quality care. Clearly, the intent of PPS was to stimulate

significant behavioral changes (which could be called supply response) from the

providers of hospital services. However, a number of analysts (Goldman et al,

1984 McGuire et al, 1985 and Frank and Lave, 1986a) have raised concerns about

the nature of the supply response of mental health providers to the incentives

contained in a per case payment system. They have raised the possibility that

providers may undertreat mentally ill patients or transfer them inappropriately

to State mental hospitals. This concern is enhanced by the fact that the

Medicare outpatient benefits for psychiatric cases are more limited than those

for the general population.

         In this paper we begin to evaluate the effect of PPS on psychiatric

care by examining the PPS associated changes in hospital lengths of stay of

Medicare psychiatric patients treated in scatterbeds. This represents but a
                                        —2-




beginning of a complete evaluation. An evaluation of the overall impact would

include an analysis of the factors leading to a psychiatric unit's exemption

from PPS, a systematic analysis of the distribution of Medicare patients across

types of facilities and any health effects associated with the changed beha-

viors. An examination of the more complete set of impacts must await future

research.

            The paper is organized into six sections. The second section briefly

reviews recent contributions to the analysis of PPS applied to psychiatric

patients. The third section addresses some theoretical considerations that

arise in specification and interpretation of the empirical model of length of

stay. This is followed by a description of the empirical implementation of the

length of stay model. The last two sections present results and a discussion of

the implications and limitations of the research.


II. Recent Contributions to the Analysis of PPS and Psychiatric Patients

            The introduction of the Medicare prospective payment system has stimu-

lated a significant amount of research by social scientists. PPS related

research can be classified into three categories: (1) studies which are con-

cerned with patient classification systems and their strengths and weaknesses

as the basis of a payment system; (2) simulations of the impact of changing the

structure of hospital payment systems and (3) analyses of the effect on hospital

length of stay, of hospital reimbursement systems which are similar to PPS.

Here, we discuss only behavioral and payment system related research. We do riot

review the research on classification systems. It has been reviewed elsewhere

(for example, McGuire et al. 1985), and the incentives and responses at issue

here would be substantially similar under any classification system so long as

payment is prospective.
                                       —3—




          Two recent studies have attempted to simulate financial effects of PPS

on various types of hospitals which provide inpatient mental health care.

Freiman and colleagues (1986) assessed the financial implications of PPS

payments on exempt and non-exempt psychiatric units of general hospitals in

four states (Michigan, North Carolina, Washington, and New Jersey). The

simulations compared the revenues that a hospital would receive under the fully

phased in prospective payment system (that is the individual hospital payment

rates would be based on national costs as opposed to depending, in part, on the

hospital's own costs or the costs of the region in which it was located) with

the revenues it would receive under a cost based payment system. Freiman,

et al.(1986) found that exempt psychiatric units, assuming no supply response,

would incur losses in three of the four states. They also found that

psychiatric units which did not obtain an exemption would fare systematically

better under PPS than the exempt units. The implication of these results is not

entirely clear. Under PPS, the units would be expected to their change beha-

vior. Although total revenue from Medicare would decrease, it is possible that

costs could be reduced more than proportionately. Thus, the assumption of no

supply response to changed payment incentives makes any conclusion about the

effect of PPS on the hospital's financial status difficult to draw with

confi dence.

         The study by the National Association of Private Psychiatric Hospitals

(NAPPH) sought to address some of the same issues as the work by Freinian et al.

The NAPPH study was primarily concerned with whether private psychiatric hospi-

tals would be systematic winners or losers under the PPS system. The NAPPH

performed a variety of simulations of the financial impact of the fully phased

in PPS, as well as some potential modifications, on their member hospitals. The
                                         -4-




results of the simulations led the NAPPH to conclude that there would be

substantial redistribution of Medicare dollars among their sample hospitals.

This conclusions is difficult to interpret because the characteristics of the

winning and losing hospitals were not reported. As in the Freiman et al.

analysis, no behavioral responses to new incentives were permitted in the

analyses.

            The second type of evidence on possible impacts of PPS on inpatient

psychiatric care is based on observations of hospital behavior under reimburse-

ment systems which contain some incentives similar to PPS. Rupp, Steinwachs,

and Salkever (1985) estimated the impact of a per case prospective payment

system on length of stay of psychiatric patients. Using data from the state of

Maryland the authors compared the length of stay of psychiatric patients

discharged from general hospitals paid under Maryland's Guaranteed Inpatient

Revenue (GIR) method with those discharged from the hospitals paid under a

prospective per service scheme. The GIR system put into place a projected case

mix adjusted revenue cap per case for all live discharges. If hospital revenues

either exceeded or fell short of the projected revenues, the hospital's rate was

adjusted in the following year. The Maryland GIR system is therefore a mix of

per case prospective payment and a budget review system. Thus, the incentives

to shorten length of stay are weaker under GIR than under PPS. The authors

estimated multiple regression models for roughly 11,000 discharges from Maryland

hospitals for the years 1977 through 1980. Their results indicate that lengths

of stay fell by from 5 to 7 per cent in hospitals under the per case system.

Rupp, Steinwachs and Salkever conclude that even under modest financial incen-

tives a decrease in length of stay was observed and therefore more stringent

policies might produce larger responses.
                                      —5—


         A payment system which sets limits on reimburseable days per hospital

episode has incentives similar to PPS. Under such a system, the hospital

receives a fixed daily payment until the day limit is reached and then its

marginal revenue falls to zero. Under PPS, a hospital receives a fixed sum for

taking care of a patient. Thus, (unless the patient is classified as an

outlier), the hospital receives no marginal revenue, but does incur additional

costs, for each day of care provided. Frank and Lave (1986 b) analysed the

effect of setting limits on the number of reimburseable days by State Medicaid

programs. Using national data on Medicaid discharges from the psychiatric units

of general hospitals, they found that the imposition of a 25 day per episode

stay limit reduced length of stay by approximately 30 per cent. This is a very

large response. However, since the study population was based on a small sample

of Medicaid patients (976) discharged from psychiatric units (where the lengths

of stay tend to be quite long), the results should be considered only

suggestive of what might be found under PPS.


III. Theoretical Considerations


         Under the Medicare propective payment system, a hospital receives a

fixed amount for providing services to a given patient. The payment varies with

the patient's DRG classification. If the patient is an "outlier patient", that

is, if he/she has, compared to the average patient in a DRG, either a significantly

longer length of stay or higher incurred costs, the hospital can receive addi-

tional payments. The revenues received under the fixed payments (plus the

outlier payments) are to cover the operating costs of treating Medicare

patients. Capital costs and most of the costs associated with graduate medical

education are paid for on a cost basis. Thus, compared to cost based reim-

bursement, PPS shifts some of the risk from Medicare to the hospital.
                                      -6-




         Under PPS, the hospital receives a fixed dollar sum for taking care of

a patient regardless of the actual costs incurred in treating that patient. The

setting of a prospective payment means that net revenues are systematically

reduced for each unit of service provided the patient, where the reduction in

net revenues will depend on the marginal cost of producing the services. The

hospital has strong financial incentives to reduce the number of services pro-

vided. Since treatment costs have a strong positive relation to the patient's

length of stay, hospitals consequently have a strong motivation to reduce the

length of stay. However, other factors will moderate the incentives to decrease

length of stay that would result from the simple pursuit of profit maximization.

Some minimum level of quality must be maintained. In addition, some administra-

tors may want to provide care of slightly higher quality either for altruistic

purposes or to decrease the chances of being cited for malpractice. In addi-

tion, physicians are usually paid on a per visit basis and, therefore, have an

incentive to advocate for longer stays.

         Sloan and Steinwald (1980), Ellis and McGuire (1986), and Seidman and

Frank (1986) have developed theoretical models of hospital behavior which have

incorporated factors other than the maximization of net revenue into the hospi-

tal's objective function. They have used these models to analyze how hospitals

would respond to the implementation of a per case prospective payment system.

The qualitative predictions of all the models are the same: relative to a cost

based payment system, the average length of stay will fall.

         However, in the empirical analysis to be discussed below, we compare

the length of stay of Medicare psychiatric patients for whom the hospitals

were paid under PPS rules not with that of patients for whom hospitals were paid

under cost based rules but rather with that of patients for whom the hospitals
                                        -7-




were paid under TEFRA rules. Under TEFRA (the Tax Equity and Fiscal

Responsibility Act of 1982), hospitals' payments were based on the historical

cost of each hospital, an inflation adjustment, and hospital cost performance

relative to cost per admission targets. The provisions under TEFRA offer

incentives to reduce costs and length of stay by offering hospitals a share of

the savings. Hospitals are penalized for exceeding cost targets by having to

absorb 75% of the overrun. In addition, cost limits are specified (120% of

similar hospital costs) which if exceeded require a hospital to absorb 100% of

the excess. This means that below the cost limits there is "cost sharing" of

profits and cost overruns while above the cost limits the hospital absorbs all

losses. Thus, one might consider TEFRA a intermediate step between a cost based

and a PPS payment system, and therefore lengths of stay should be longer under

TEFRA than under PPS.

         Since our empirical work is based on observations from the first year

of PPS phase-in, and because the payment system changed during the year for most

hospitals we may observe a disequilibrium situation. Because it is costly to

adjust to a new reimbursement system one might expect hospitals to begin a gra-

dual adjustment prior to the comencement of PPS in anticipation of the new

incentive structure.2 It is also possible that the adjustment process adopted

by the hospital would not lead to a new equilibrium level by the time PPS had

been implemented. The likelihood that hospitals do not instantaneously adjust

to new incentives means that in order to obtain unbiased estimates of the impact

of P1'S on length of stay, the empirical model must incorporate variables that

represent the dynamics of adjustment.
                                       -8-




 IV. Empirical Implementation

      a. The Data


         The data set is composed of data from three sources of information.

They are: the Health Care Financing Administration's (HCFA) Patient Billing

File (PATBILL) for fiscal year 1984, the American Hospital Association's (AHA)

Annual Survey of Hospitals for 1984, and the HCFA Provider of Service File (POS)

for November of 1985. The PATBILL file covers all hospital discharges paid for

by Medicare during fiscal year 1984 (October 1, 1983 to September 30, 1984).

The PATBILL file containsinformation on patient characteristics such as age,

sex, race and diagnosis as well as measures of hospital utilization such as

length of stay and incurred charges. The AHA and POS files contain information

on hospital characteristics. These include the number of beds, hospital

teaching status, location of the hospital and ownership category. Table 1 defi-

nes and indicates the data source for selected variables used in the empirical

analyses presented below. The means and standard deviations are also reported.


         In 1984 there were roughly 346,000 psychiatric and substance abuse

discharges reported in the PATBILL data. Of these, 41 per cent were in Major

Diagnosis Category (MDC) 19- the psychiatric DRGs while 57 per cent were in

MDC 20 the substance abuse. Considering MDC 19 discharges only the discharges

from freestanding psychiatric hospitals comprise 18.6 percent of the total.

Discharges from general hospitals accounted for 81.4 percent, with 47 percent

from general hospitals with psychiatric units and 34 percent from hospitals with

no unit. Hospitals without psychiatric units made up 78 per cent of the

general hospitals in the data set.
                                       - 9-.


         However, in order to examine the effect of PPS on patient length of

stay, we limited our analysis to discharges of patients from general hospitals

with no psychiatric units -   the pure scatterbed patients. We concentrate on
this subset of patients and hospitals for essentially three reasons. First, as

noted above, psychiatric units in general hospitals could apply for an exemption

from PPS and continue to be paid under TEFRA. Thus, if one were to Study the

impact of PPS on the psychiatric units that chose to receive PPS reimbursement,

one would have to take into account the decision not to seek the exemption in

order to obtain unbiased estimates of the PPS effect. This is a complicated

matter for a preliminary analysis. Second, for hospitals that treat patients

both in psychiatric units and in scatterbeds, the patients treated in scatter—

beds in unit hospitals are likely to be different from the patients treated in

hospitals with no units. Finally, for hospitals with units under PPS it is

impossible to distinguish between a discharge from a unit and a discharge from a

scatterbed, while for hospitals with exempt units, one can distinguish between

them only after the hospital was exempted from PPS. For all of these reasons we

chose to focus on the pure scatterbed discharges. There were 74,416 discharges

from pure scatterbeds. However, in order to control computer costs, we selected

a 10 per cent random sample of discharges.

         The selection criteria led to a systematic selection of hospitals and

psychiatric patients. For example, relative to the population of all psychi-

atric discharges1those from hospitals outside of Metropolitan Statistical Areas

(MSAs) were overrepresented in the analysis file. Forty-five per cent of the

discharges were from hospitals outside of MSAs while 7.2 percent were from

hospitals in central cities. The diagnostic mix and demographic composition is

similar to that found in all scatterbeds (it should be remembered that scatter-

beds in hospitals with units have been excluded) but quite different from the
                                      -10-


mix in units. Twenty-nine percent of the patients in scatterbeds had a ORG of

psychosis compared to 70 percent in the exempt psychiatric units. Thirty-four

percent of scatterbed patients were diagnosed as having an organic disorder

relative to 11 percent of the discharges from psychiatric units. Clearly, these

substantial differences across treatment settings limit the breadth of the

generalizations that can be made based on the specific estimates obtained from

the analysis of scatterbed discharges.

         There is, however, a different type of selection issue that needs to be

addressed. Was the population of patients treated in scatterbeds different

before and after the implementation of PPS? If it was, then any decrease in

observed or estimated length of stay in response to PPS might be due not to

differences in hospital practice patterns but rather to differences in the

inpatient population arising from changed hospital sorting patterns. To address

this issue, we first analyzed the flow of discharges from scatterbed hospitals

and then we analyzed the diagnostic mix of patients before and after PPS.

         In Fiscal Year (FY) 1984, the monthly flow of discharges ranged from 6.8

percent to 9.0 percent of total discharges.   The portion of FY 84 patients

discharged during the first three months of fiscal year 1984, when most hospi-

tals had not yet come under PPS, was 25.7 percent. The share of FY 84

discharges in the last three months of fiscal year 1984, when almost all hospi-

tals were on PPS, was 23.1 percent. This is not a significant difference.3

         Table 2 reports the diagnostic composition of scatterbed discharges pre

and post PPS. There appear to be no significant changes in diagnostic mix

related to PPS. The share of discharges accounted for by ORG 425 (acute adjust-

ment reaction) and ORG 429 (Organic Illness) did decrease slightly while the

share accounted for by DRG43O (Psychoses) increased slightly.   Thus, if

anything is reflected by such changes, it is a shift in patient composition
                                       —11—




toward patients who are somewhat more difficult to manage. Other explanations

such as "ORG creep" are also consistent with the change. In conclusion, the

available evidence suggests that it is probably reasonable to assume (as we do)

that no major changes in patient sorting occurred during the change from TEFRA

to PPS.


     b. Specifications

          The length of stay of individual discharges is hypothesized to be a

function of three classes of explanatory variables -    patient   characteristics,

hospital cost characteristics, and the set of rules under which the hospital is

paid (Ellis and McGuire 1986 and Seidman and Frank 1986). The characteristics

of the patients treated will be a major factor influencing how long they stay in

the hospital. The type of treatment provided will depend on the patient's cli-

nical conditions, his age, and the patient's support system. The patient's

response to treatment and his subsequent clinical status, in part, determine the

feasibility of discharging a patient and the consequences of such action.

A second set of factors is related to the structure of hospital costs. As

discussed above, the marginal cost of a hospital day defines the rate at which

hospitals exhaust their net revenues in a per case prospective payment system.

For this reason hospital characteristics which underlie the cost structure

serve to constrain a hospitaUs decision making regarding an individual

patient's stay. Finally, the incentives contained in the payment system are

constraints a hospital faces in pursuit of its goals such as providing quality

care and obtaining net revenues.

          In order to analyze the length of stay, one must have measures for each

of the factors affecting length of stay.      In this paper, clinical charac-

teristics of patients are measured by the patient's DRG, age, sex, race and
                                       —12—




Medicare eligibility status. We characterize patient diagnoses by using the

DRGs in MDC19. The age variable is specified as a quadratic function. This

reflects the cormion finding of an inverse U shaped relation between age and

health care utilization. The presence of information on Medicare eligibility

status allows for the differentiation between individuals qualifying for

Medicare because of age versus disability status. The psychiatric inpatient who

is disabled is quite likely to be chronically mentally ill and may have dif-

ferent patterns of use than acutely ill patients. The sex, race and diagnoses

measures are all specified as dichotomous dunhlly variables.

         Unfortunately we cannot directly measure many of the key factors that

might be included in a hospital's cost function. We thereby rely on indirect

measures of hospital cost factors. Hospital size and ownership are included in

the model to control for economies of scale and any possible slack or X-

inefficiency sometimes hypothesized to be associated with non-profit and public

ownership (see Frech and Ginsburg, 1981). It should be pointed out that larger

hospital size has also been associated with greater severity of illness in

patient populations. Hospital teaching activities have been shown to be asso-

ciated with higher hospital costs, we therefore include a variable which indica-

tes the presence of a teaching program.4 In order to account for input cost

differences we include durmiy variables which indicates hospital location (e.g.:

central city).

         The financing arrangements according to which Medicare patients are

paid are characterized in a number of ways. One might view the change in pay-

ment method as a shift in relative prices to the supplier. The change in quan-

tity supplied will therefore be explained by both a substitution and an income

effect. Salkever, Steinwachs and Rupp (1986), for example, noted that unless

hospitals were at risk of significant financial losses, relative prices at the
                                      -13-




margin may have a somewhat weak impact on hospital behavior. This is important

for model specification because it suggests that ideally one would want to

incorporate an indicator of income effect (ORG bite) for the hospital. One such

variable might be a hospital's average per case cost for a psychiatric patient

relative to the ORG payment for psychiatric patients. While we do not measure

this directly, most of the hospital characteristics along with geographic duniny

variables (both state and region specific) are explanatory variables for such an

income effect.5 Due to data limitations we rely on only direct PPS measures to

characterize the relative price change.

         We use three measures to capture the effect of PPS. The first is a

dunwy variable indicating whether the hospital was paid for treating a given

patient under PPS rules. The second measure, TIMEPRIOR, represents how many

days prior to the implementation of PPS a given discharge occurred. The third

measure, TIMEPOST, indicates how many days after the implementation of PPS, the

discharge occurred. As we argued above, it is unlikely that the hospital would

respond instantaneously to the implementation of PPS. We would expect that

hospitals would anticipate the implementation of PPS and would begin to imple-

ment new procedures to control the use of hospital resources prior to PPS. On

the other hand, after the implementation of PPS it becomes more costly not to

reduce length of stay to the equilibrium level. Thus one would expect that

adjustment would occur relatively quickly. We hypothesize that length of stay

would increase as TIMEPRIOR to PPS increases, and that length of stay would

fall as TIMEPOST increases. Since hospitals came under PPS at different times

of the year, the TIMEPRIOR and the TIMEPOST variables will differ across

hospitals. About 16 percent of the hosptials began PPS on October 1, 1983 while

24 percent began on January 1, 1984 and 36 percent started on July 1, 1984.6
                                      -14-



         Finally, we include a number of variables to control for possible con-

founding factors. They include a variable indicating whether a patient was

admitted on a weekend (Friday, Saturday or Sunday). Cannoodt and Knickman

(1984) found this variable to have a positive impact on length of stay.

Geographic dumy variables are included (both state and regional). Length of

stay has been hypothesized to vary during various parts of the calendar year.

For example, hospitals and physicians may be more reluctant to discharge patients

with little coninunity support during the winter than in the sumer. To take

account of this factor we include a dumy variable which takes on a value of one

during the winter months and zero otherwise (November through March). Whether a

patient was discharged against medical advice (AMA) was also measured. Finally

we control for level of urbanization by using five duniny variables which

describe the size of the MSA, central city versus suburban location, and a rural

area indicator.

         The basic length of stay model which we have just described assumed

that PPS effects could largely be captured as direct effects. We relax that

assumption and assess interaction effects. In particular, we assess PPS

interactions with hospital ownership. It may be that hospitals without the

backing of public budgets (privately owned) may have larger responses to changed

incentives than publicly owned providers.7

         In formulating the empirical model, the dependent variable was trans-

formed into logarithms. One reason for the logarithmic transformation of length

of stay is to make the dependent variable approximately normal. However, ordi-

nary least squares tends to be quite robust when departures from normality occur.

A more important reason for transforming length of stay is the assumption that PPS

will not effect all parts of the length of stay distribution with the same abso-

lute magnitude. It seems more reasonable to assume that PPS will have a propor-
                                       —15—




 tional effect on the length of stay (that is, that the length of stay of both

 the long stay cases and the short stay cases will fall by x percent) than it is

 to assume that PPS will have a linear effect on length of stay (that is that

 both long stay and short stay cases will experience a given decrease in their

 length of stay).B

          The model was estimated using ordinary least squares regression. Since

the individual discharge is the unit of observation in this analysis and groups

of patients are discharged from the same hospitals variance estimates based on

ordinary least squares regressions may be biased due to autocorrelation.

Generalized least squares would be appropriate in this case. However, with a

10% random sample the numbers of discharges from each hospital are small and

makes intrahospital covariance estimates not very meaningful. Because we were

interested in determining not only the PPS effect but also how sensitive the

estimated effect was to the way the PPS variable was measured, we estimated

three separate regressions. In Model I the PPS variable is specified as a

single duniny variable. In Model II the PPS impact is measured by three

variables, TIMEPRIOR, TIMEPOST and the PPS dumy (PPSIND). In Model III the

three PPS variables are included plus a PPS-ownership interaction term. The

results are presented in Table 3. Overall the models account for about 12 per-

cent of the variation in the length of stay of Medicare psychiatric patients.

Although the R2 are low, they are comparable to those obtained by other

investigators who have analyzed the length of stay of individual patients (Frank

and Lave 1986b, McGuire, Dickey and Shively 1986, and Taube et al 1984). The

R2s were 0.12, 0.12 and 0.11 respectively. The parameter estimates for the

three models presented on Table 3 are consistent with both our expectations and

with previous research.
                                      -16—


         The results of primary interest are those that offer insight into the

impact of PPS on length of stay. Model I characterizes PPS by a single dunny

variable. Models II and III attempt to capture the full adjustment to PPS by

attributing to PPS reductions before implementation due to anticipation and

reductions following implementation due to slow adjustment. Since we charac-

terize PPS in this manner it is important to carefully define the comparison

that is being made. By considering both anticipatory and slow adjustment types

of behavior we are estimating a 365 day PPS impact for a typical hospital (one

that went on PPS in March) relative to TEFRA.9 This specification should lead

to larger estimates than those resulting from inclusion of a single PPS duniny

variable. In the case of an immediate adjustment in length of stay at the time

that a hospital implements PPS the single dunuiy approach and our more compli-

cated formulation would yield identical results. That is, the TIMEPRIOR and

TIMEPOST variables would have coefficients of zero and the PPS durmy would cap-

ture the full effect.

         The components of the PPS impact estimate can be seen on Table 3. The

coefficients for the TIMEPRIOR and TIMEPOST variables indicate that adjustment

was not instantaneous on the PPS implementation date. The positive coefficient

for the TIMEPRIOR variable suggests that for every day one moves away from the

PPS implementation date length of stay is increased. This, of course, also

means that as the PPS starting date becomes closer length of stay falls)0

Similarly, the TIMEPOST coefficient estimate is negative and significant which

means that hospitals continue to cut length of stay after the PPS starting date.

These coefficients taken together indicate that PPS implementation took place

continuously over the observed time period. The TIMEPOST coefficient is larger

in absolute value than the TIMEPRIOR coefficient. This was expected since the

cost of adjustment to the new equilibrium after PPS has gone into effect is
                                       —17—



greater than the adjustment cost under TEFRA since marginal revenues for each

day under PPS are zero. Thus, the hospital that had not fully adjusted by the

time PPS took effect had a strong incentive to reach its new equilibrium relati-

vely quickly. Using an incremental F test, the two groups of coefficients in

Models II and III are significantly different from zero.11

          The PPS dumy had a negative and statistically significant impact on

length of stay even when the TIMEPRIOR and TIMEPOST variables were included in

the model the coefficient ranged from -0.049 to -0.064 indicating a 5 to 6 per-

cent shift in length of stay. This suggests that the impact of PPS became

stronger at the time of implementation. The estimated 365 day effect can there-

fore be characterized in a manner illustrated in Figure 1. The discontinuity at

the   PPS start date shows the impact of the PPS dumy. Note also that the slope
of the PPS adjustment curve is steeper following the start of PPS than it   was   in
the time prior to PPS. This reflects the magnitudes of the TIMEPRIOR and
TIMEPOST coefficients.

          Table 4 suninarizes the estimated PPS effects for the three regression

models. The three models indicate declines in length of stay associated with

implementation of PPS of 13 percent for Model I, 16.5 percent for Model II and

17 percent for Model III. Since the for-profit sector is relatively small and

the coefficient estimates rather stable in the two models the addition of the

PPS-ownership interaction changes little. As expected the 365 day PPS impacts

are substantially larger in magnitude than the PPS impact obtained using only

the PPS dumy variable. Thus we may view the 13 percent decline in length of

stay as a conservative lower bound estimate and the 17 percent decline as an

upper bound. The estimated 365 day PPS impacts are calculated on the basis of a

weighted average of days prior and days post. This allowed us to consider the

situation of the average: hospital given that hospitals were phased into PPS
                                        -18-




throughout the fiscal year. The point estimate of the PPS impact varies as one

considers different points at which a hospital might have con,'nenced PPS. Again,

because our prior reasoning suggest that a logarithmic transformation is most

reasonable we focus on those results.

         Table 4 also shows the "raw" decreases in length of stay. These num-

bers compare the average lengths of stay of all discharges which occurred prior

to PPS with those after PPS.   In absolute terms, the average length of stay fell

from 9.14 days to 7.24 days. This represents a decrease in the arithmetic mean

of 20.4 percent. In constrast the geometric mean declined by 12 percent. As

indicated above, unless detailed investigations of the length of stay show

otherwise, we think that it is more likely that the lengths of stay of all cases

fell by 12 percent than it is that the length of stay of each type of case in

the DRG class fell by 1.9 days. It is also of interest to note that the

decrease in the geometric mean length of stay of 12 percent is almost identical

to the PPS effect estimated in Model I.

         One must exercise some caution in interpreting the results.

Attributing the full effect captured by the TIMEPRIOR, TIMEPOST and PPSIND

variables may lead to overstating the effect of PPS. Since the TIMEPRIOR and

TIMEPOST in part will reflect secular trends in length of stay one must examine

recent trends in psychiatric length of stay .   Using data from the National

Hospital Discharge Survey (HDS) we examined the average length of stay for the

United States as a whole and for the greater than 65 year old age group for

1980 through 1983. Those data suggest that for the entire population

psychiatric length of stay has risen slightly (11.6 days to 12.4 days). For the

greater than 65 years old segment of the population length of stay remained

essentially constant (13.7 days to 13.5 days).'2 Thus it is unlikely that a

secular trend in length of stay is a dominant factor in interpreting the PPS
                                      -19-


results. A second issue relates to the possibility that our measure of antici-

patory effects in part represents slow adjustments to TEFRA. This is clearly a

possibility. However, the age specific national length of stay data suggest

little impact of TEFRA in 1983. Thus, virtually the entire TEFRA effect would

be occurring with at least a one year lag. While some lagged impact is probable

the lack of a one year effect leads us to believe that its magnitude is small.

         Few of the hospital characteristics specified in the model had signifi-

cant impacts on length of stay. Hospital size was estimated to have a positive

and significant effect on length of stay. Hospital ownership appeared to have

little effect on length of stay, neither did the teaching variable. This may in

part be because we measure the presence of any teaching activity (residency

program) rather than specific psychiatric training. Although one would expect

little psychiatric training in general hospitals without a psychiatric unit.

         Variables capturing the time of admission were not significantly dif-

ferent from zero at conventional levels. The WEEKEND variable did have the

expected positive sign. The WINTER variable had a negative sign which was

counter to our hypothesis. To some extent this weak result should not be

surprising since winter means such different things in the various regions of

the country.

         Several patient characteristics had important impacts on length of

stay. Patient gender and race were both significantly related to length of stay.

Females had significantly longer stays than men (approximately 7% after

adjusting for the semilog form of the model). Non-whites had stays that were

about 16 percent longer than those of whites. Finally, the diagnoses were esti-

mated to be important determinants of length of stay. DRGs 425, 426, 427, 429,

and 431 all had significantly shorter stays than did the reference category.

The DRGs as a group explained roughly 4.5 percent of the variation in length of
                                      -20-




stay (when run alone against length of stay). This is quite consistent with the

findings of Taube et al. (1984) and Frank and Lave (1986b).


VI. Discussion

         In this section we attempt to place the results for the PPS impact in

the context of other recent studies of length of stay. Table 5 again suninarizes

our results and presents the results of two recent studies of per case payment

systems based on DRG5.

         The Prospective Payment Assessment Con,nission (PROPAC) study reports

results based upon the 1984 PATBILL file for all Medicare hospital discharges.

Their decrease in lengths of stay are calculated by comparing the arithmatic

mean of pre PPS discharges with that of post PPS discharges. The overall

decline in length of stay "attributable" to PPS was 7.6 percent. They also

reported results that are disaggregated by class of DRG (medical vs. surgical)

and market type (rural vs. urban). For the medical DRGs, declines in length of

stay associated with PPS were considerably more dramatic than for the overall

Medicare population. Medical DRG cases treated in rural hospitals had on

average an 11 percent fall in length of stay during 1984 following implemen-

tation of PPS. Similarly medical cases treated in urban hospitals had a 12.9

percent drop in length of stay. Declines for surgical DRGs were substantially

smaller (3.5 and 1.7%).

         Recent work by Rosko and Broyles (1986) found that the New Jersey per

case prospective payment system was associated with 3.4 percent lower lengths of

stay than in hospitals paid under the parallel prospective per diem rate setting

system. The New Jersey study focuses on the hospital as the unit of analysis

which means the findings are not entirely analagous to those based on individual

discharge data.
                                      —21—




         Propac has called the 7.6 percent decrease in length of stay associated

with PPS "striking", (p.62). Since our analysis indicates that hospitals began

to adjust to the incentives embedded in PPS before they actually came under it,

the raw comparison of means will provide an underestimate of the complete PPS

effect. However, it is clear that PPS had a larger effect on the length of stay

of psychiatric patients in scatterbeds than it did overall. The observed

decrease in the "raw" length of stay of psychiatric patients associated with PPS

was 20.4 percent. This is a much larger decrease in length of stay than was

observed for any group of general Medicare discharges. Although we have taken

issue with using the decrease in the arithmetic mean length of stay as an indi-

cator of PPS impact, it is clear that the conclusion would not be changed if we

compared changes in the geometric mean length of stay.

         The supply response to PPS for psychiatric patients is large, par-

ticularly when it is observed over a single year. The reduction in psychiatric

length of stay is particularly impressive given the fact there is little evi-

dence of a time trend towards shorter lengths of stay. This finding is con-

sistent with the notion that there is considerable flexibility in the treatment

of psychiatric inpatients relative to medical or surgical patients. The impli-

cations of hospitals exercising this flexibility are not clear. For example,

one explanation for the dramatic response to PPS is that there was substantial

waste of resources in the delivery of hospital based psychiatric care under

TEFRA. In such a case an average length of stay of 7.24 days may be consistent

with high quality psychiatric care delivered at least cost. A second hypothesis

suggested by the work of Frank and Lave (1985b) is that patients may be shifted

to other types of providers of mental health care. This could be undesirable if

the referrals were not clinically appropriate. A third possibility is that

pointed to by Rupp and her colleagues (1984) which is that readmissions increase
                                        -22-




in response to lower lengths of stay. This would not be consistent with high

quality care delivered at least cost. Which of these competing explanations

dominates is not known. However, it is important to develop information to

reveal whether undertreatment is occurring so that the social benefits asso-

ciated with the observed declines in length of stay can be evaluated.

         Substantial concern has been raised by the work of Freiman et al.

(1986) and the NAPPH (1986) as to the financial status of providers of

psychiatric care under PPS. While our results do not directly address this

issue, they do suggest that if supply responses for psychiatric units and

psychiatric hospitals are at all similar to those found for scatterbeds, simula-

tions of payments that do not incorporate such response may be seriously

misleading. Large supply responses over a single year indicate an ability to

quickly reduce per case costs of treating psychiatric inpatients. It is this

ability that is a crucial determinant of the financial performance of hospitals

under PPS. Moreover, our results indicate that for-profit hospitals have only

slightly more flexibility in reducing length of stay than do either the public

or non—profit general hospitals.13 Thus an important implication of our analy-

sis is that there may be an overemphasis, in recent policy discussions, on pro-

tecting hospitals from losses. Instead one might focus attention on protecting

patients who might be hurt by dramatic supply response. Of course, in the long

run if the payment system is tightened and not refined, the issue of loser

hospitals may become quite important.

         Several important limitations to our analysis need to be pointed out.

The most obvious and probably most significant is that our sample consists of

"pure scatterbeds." The extent to which these hospitals respond to PPS in ways

similar to psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric units is not known. We do not

know that rural hospitals are overrepresented among the "pure scatterbeds." The
                                      -23-



psychiatric case mix in the hospitals analyzed here is different from that found

in psychiatric units and psychiatric hospitals. A second limitation is the

dearth of information on mental health status among the sample discharges.

Variables such as previous history of mental health care use, and educational

attainment were not available. Our theoretical framework called for the inclu-

sion of an income effect. While there are some econometric difficulties in spe-

cifying such a variable in our model, it would be desirable to experiment with a

direct income effect measure. Since we observe discharges over only one year

with some hospitals beginning PPS on the first day, our data is censored.

Thus, anticipatory behavior prior to October 1, 1983 is missed.

         Finally because adjustment to TEFRA may have been slow, some of the

adjustment attributed to PPS may in fact be due to TEFRA. Again, because length

of stay did not decline in 1983 we believe the magnitude of the slow TEFRA

adjustment is probably small.

         In conclusion our analysis provides a first glimpse at the hospital

supply response for psychiatric patients paid for under PPS. That glimpse

suggests a larger response than observed for medical patients paid for by

Medicare and relative to the experience in New Jersey. The results suggest that

adjustment to the new payment system was not immediate but rather took place

continuously over the phase-in year. Moreover, the adjustment process appears

to have accelerated as the P1'S start date approached. This also indicates

hospital sensitivity to financial incentives. The approach to characterizing

the PPS effect suggests that calculation of winners and losers under PPS must be

mindful of a hospital's ability to dramatically alter per case costs. Finally,

the strong response observed in this analysis makes it even more critical to

distinguish between increased efficiency and undertreatment.
L03


 LOA

                               pp's




                           I

          Ps



              FIGURE   1


       365 DAY IMPACT OF PPS
                                    TABLE 1


                         SELECTED DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS



              VARIABLE               MEAN                  SOURCE
                                      (SD)



       Length of stay                8.23                  PATBILL
                                    (5.8)


       TIMEPRIOR                     204                   PATBILL/POS
         (days)


       TIMEPOST                      161                   PATBILL/POS
         (days)

       BEDS                         122.2                  POS
                                    (83.0)

       PUBLIC                        23.0                  AHA/POS
                                    (42.0)

       NON-PROFIT                    61.0                  AHA/POS
                                    (48.0)

       PROFIT     C1                 14.0                  ARk/os
                                    (34.0)

SEX (Female)                         63.0                  PATBILL
                                    (48.0)


RACE   (White)   %                   90.2
                                    (29.7)
                                                           PATBILL



Medicare Status                      15.7                  PATBILL
       (Disabled)                   (36.4)
                                        TABLE 2

                          DIAGNOSTIC MIX IN SCATI'ERBEDS

                                 PRE PND POST PPS


                               % of PRE PPS            % of    POST PPS
           DRG                  Discharges                 Discharges


           424                         2.7                       2.2

           425                        16.0                      12.6

           426                        16.3                      17.6

           427                         1.5                       1.4

           428                         0.7                       1.0

           429                        36.5                      32.7

           430                        25.0                      31.0

           431                         0.5                       0.3

           432                         0.9                       1.1




           N                          2884                      3786


*
    No significant differences using a test of proportions
                            TABLE 3


                       RRESS ION     RESULTS

                  (Dependent Variable = LN LOS)*




VARIABLE                   MODEL I             MODEL II   MODEL III

Age                        0.011               0.009       0.010
                            (2.35)             (2.00)      (2.37)

Age2                      —0. 006e2        —0. 004e2      —0. 004e2
                           (1.67)              (1.32)      (1.67

Sex                        0.073               0.063       0.067
(lFemale)                  (3.59)              (3.14)      (3.31)

Race                       0.167               0.166       0.154
(1=Nonwhite)               (5.29)              (5.19)      (4.90)

Medicare Status            0.045               0.039       0.039
(1=Aged)                   (0.99)              (0.85)      (0.86)

Admission Day              0.025               0.022       0.019
(1=Weekend)                (1.26)              (1.11)      (0.99)

DRG

  424                      0.351               0.346       0.348
                           (5.45)              (5.38)      (5.41)

  425                     —0.477           —0.478         —0.471
                           (15.03)         (—15.06)        (14.95)

  426                     —0.119           —0.121         —0.122
                           (4.00)              (4.09)      (4.09)
  427                     —0.234           —0.233         —0.245
                           (2.89)              (2.88)      (3.03)
  428                     —0.9075          —0.071         —0.050
                          —(0.71)         —(0.68)         —(.48)
  429                      —0.061          —0.061         —0.062
                           (2.35)              (2.33)      (2.36)

  430                     —0.047           —0.051          0.019
                           (0.29)              (0.32)     —(0.12)

  431                     —0.341           —0.341         —0.345
                           (3.49)              (3.49)      (3.53)
                                 TABLE 3 (continued)



     VARIABLE                     MODEL I        MODEL II    MODEL III

     PPS dummy                   —0.128         —0.064       —0.049
                                  (6.11)         (2.02)       (1.84)

     TIMEPRIOR                                  0.0001        0. 0001
                                                (0.82)        (0.73)

    TI MEPOST                                  —0. 0005      —0.0004
                                                (3.49)        (3.42)

    WINTER                                      0.. 017      0.019
                                 (0.90)         (0.81)       (1.91)

    BEDS                         0.097          0.099        0.101
                                 (6.37)         (6.47)       (7.06)

    LOCATION DUMMIES            included       included     included


    TEACHING                    —0.042         —0.043       —0.044
                                 (1.29)         (1.32)       (1.38)

    PUBLIC                      —0.035         —0.039       —0.039
                                 (1.36)         (1.40)       (1.59)

    PFIT                         0.009        —0.019         0.027
                                 (0.29)         (0.62)       (0.68)

    PPS -PROFIT                                             —0.107
                                                             (1.94)

    GEOGRAPHI C                included       included      included
                               (states)        (states)     (regions)

    INTE REPT                    0.845          0.811        0.561
                                 (3.70)         (3.54)       (2.84)


    R2                           0.12            0.12        0.11
    F                           22.53           12.38       12.48
    N                           6662            6662        6662




*
    ( statistic in partheses
                                             TABLE 4

                                   SUMMARY OF       PPS IMPACTS

                      Raw Comparison     (Linear)1                — 20.4%
                        (1.9/9.14)


                      Raw Comparison (Logs)2                      -   12%



                      PPS Dummy (Model I)                         —13%


                      365 day effect (Model II)                   — 16.5%


                      365 day effect with interactions

                          (Model III)                             — 17.0%



1 (1.9/9.14) = 20.4%


2 In LOS   pp   — IN LOS POST = 1.80     —
                                             1.68   =   0.12


  bppg -   bpj X   (TIMEPRIOR) +   bp x (TIMEPOST)
  See   3 add bpp5 X PROFIT   (PROFIT)
                                TABLE 5


                  COMPARATIVE IMPACTS ON LENGTH OF STAY


Raw PPS — TEFRA   (Linear)                          —20.4%
  Comparison for Psychiatric Cases


Raw PPS - TEFRA (Log)
  Comparison for Psychiatric Cases                  —12.0%


PPS — TEFRA (PPS dununy only)                       —13.0%
  Comparison for psychiatric cases


365 day PPS — TEFRA                                 -16.5%
  Comparison for Psychiatric Cases


Overall Medicare PPS — TEFRA                        — 7.6%
  Comparison (PPAC)


PROPAC Rural Medical                                —11.0%
  DRGs (PPS vs. TEFRA)


PROPAC Urban Medical                                —12.9%
  DRG (PPS vs. TEFRA)


PROPAC Rural Surgical                               — 3.5%
  DRGs (PPS vs. TEFRA)


PROPAC Urban Surgical                               —   1.7%
  DRGs (PPS vs PEFRA)


Overall New Jersey DRGs                             -   3.4%
  versus Per Diem Rates
   (Rosko and Broyles 1986)
                                     FOOTNOTES

      Criteria for exemption of a psychiatric unit are outlined in Section 405.471
      of Medicare regulations. Three criteria regarding diagnoses of patients,
      qualification and presence of treatment personnel and maintenance of medical
      records were articulated in the regulations.

 2    Ad st nt is costly in that practice patterns must be altered, contracts
      mu oen be concluded or renegotiated, administrative procedures must be
      altered. These costs are not explicitly reimburseable.

 3. This is particularly remarkable when one considers that the last 3 months of
     the fiscal year are July, August and September.

 4. Sloan, Feldman and Steinwald (1983) review the evidence on this. They find
     that most of the differences in costs can be accounted for by casemix and
     physician payment factors. However, since our measures of a number of
     hospital features are limited we include teaching status as a control
      variable.

5. If one were specifying an instrumental
                                           variables solution to this problem,
    one would probably choose teaching study, size, inner city location,
    ownership and geographic region as instruments. This is sensible since a
    key factor in the wealth effect is the hospital's cost structure. Moreover,
    inclusion of these variables along with a wealth effect indicator may lead
    to collinearity problems and bias because the wealth effect indicator and
    the error term will be correlated.
                                        Unfortunately, one cannot identify the
    wealth effect from the instruments.

6. These measures are of course subject to measurement error because they
    measure the distance between discharge and PPS.
                                                    Admission might be a more
    appropriate measure if stays are long.

7.   It has become popular to estimate the 'total effects' evaluated at the
                                                                            mean
     of all the interacting variables. This practice is accompanied by
     construction of a confidence interval for that estimate. That test is some..
     what narrow since the estimate of the total
                                                 effect will vary with values of
     the interaction variables. We prefer to more general incremental F test of
     the joint hypotheses that group of coefficients comprising the total effect
     are significantly different from zero.

8. One implication of the logarithmic transormation of the dependent variable
    is that dumy variable coefficients must be adjusted. Assume the following
    general model
                  Ln V = a + b1 X1 +
                                        c1d

                    C1 is actually an estimate of

                    C1 = in (i+g) where g x 100 is the percent change in V
     attributable to a. To obtain an estimate of g C1 must be transformed in
                                                                             the
     following manner

                    g = exp
                            (C1 -½V (C1)3 -1
     where V(C1) is the variance of the coefficient estimate. Thus if V(C1) is
     large g and c1 may be quite different. This is derived by Kennedy (1981).
                             FOOTNOTES (continued)


 9. We use 365 days because that is the period for which we observed hospital
     behavior. Clearly the longer or shorter you make the adjustment period
     the bigger or smaller is the PPS impact. However, it seems sensible to use
     the time period from which the coefficient estimates were made.

10. We specified a PPS case as one that was admitted after a hospital began PPS.
     We also experimented with discharge after PPS. The results were not sensi-
     tive to these differences

11.                          F =       S1' P — 1)
                                                         - K   +   1)
                                       2' M - p
                     where i =         i'D'y       +   'x'y x'y-


                             S2 =       y'y    -
                                                       'D'y -
                             D     =     is   the vector of PPS effects

12. NCHS (1983, 1984, 1985 report average length of stay for psychiatric
     discharges in the nation as a whole and for those over 65 years of age as
      follows:

      Year                   1980              1981                1982   1983

      All Ages               11.6              11.9                12.1   12.4
      65+                    13.7              13.3                13.0   13.5


13. To illustrate this point with a simple example Freiman et al. report that
     in Michigan psychiatric patients in all hospitals would on average lose
     $255 per case. Assuming a modest 15% reduction in average cost due to PPS
     the average loss might well become an average gain of $187. This, of
     course, is a rough back of the envelope calculation.
