                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               EXPANDING THE SCHOOL BREAKFAST PROGRAM:
        IMPACTS ON CHILDREN'S CONSUMPTION, NUTRITION AND HEALTH

                                 Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
                                         Mary Zaki

                                      Working Paper 20308
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20308


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2014




We thank Patricia Anderson and Seema Jayachandran for helpful comments. Mary Zaki is currently
funded by a RIDGE grant through the USDA. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Mary Zaki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Expanding the School Breakfast Program: Impacts on Children's Consumption, Nutrition
and Health
Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Mary Zaki
NBER Working Paper No. 20308
July 2014
JEL No. I12,I21

                                                ABSTRACT

School meals programs are the front line of defense against childhood hunger, and while the school
lunch program is nearly universally available in U.S. public schools, the school breakfast program
has lagged behind in terms of availability and participation. In this paper we use experimental data
collected by the USDA to measure the impact of two popular policy innovations aimed at increasing
access to the school breakfast program. The first, universal free school breakfast, provides a hot breakfast
before school (typically served in the school’s cafeteria) to all students regardless of their income eligibility
for free or reduced-price meals. The second is the Breakfast in the Classroom (BIC) program that provides
free school breakfast to all children to be eaten in the classroom during the first few minutes of the
school day. We find both policies increase the take-up rate of school breakfast, though much of this
reflects shifting breakfast consumption from home to school or consumption of multiple breakfasts
and relatively little of the increase is from students gaining access to breakfast. We find little evidence
of overall improvements in child 24-hour nutritional intake, health, behavior or achievement, with
some evidence of health and behavior improvements among specific subpopulations.


Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Annenberg Hall, Room 205
2120 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
dws@northwestern.edu

Mary Zaki
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
m-zaki@northwestern.edu
         School meals programs are a front line of defense against childhood hunger, particularly for the

22.4 percent of children who live in households that experience food insecurity. While the school lunch

program has long been nearly universally offered, availability of the school breakfast program (SBP) has

lagged behind. There have been recent – and highly successful – attempts to expand access to the SBP. For

example, between 1989 and 2000 the total number of breakfasts served doubled (McLaughlin et al. 2002).

According to our calculations from NHANES data, as of 2009-10 almost three-quarters of children attend a

school that offers the SBP, up from approximately half of students in the 1988-94 wave.

         A large research literature supports the commonly held notion that breakfast is an important meal.

Children who skip breakfast have lower nutrient and energy intake across the day – in other words, they do

not make up for the skipped meal by consuming more calories later in the day. Briefel et al. (1999)

summarize the research evidence on cognitive impacts, and conclude “skipping breakfast interferes with

cognition and learning, and that this effect is more pronounced in poorly nourished children.” Despite the

importance of breakfast, only 86 percent of elementary school children aged, and 75 percent of children

aged 12-19, consume any type of breakfast on a typical day (USDA ARS, 2010).

         Policy makers have long been troubled by the low take-up rate of the SBP, which was 26 percent

in 2010 (compared with a 63 percent participation rate in the school lunch program, see Fox et al. 2013).

This is in part troubling because there is evidence that school breakfast is nutritionally superior to breakfast

at home (Bhattacharya et al. 2006; Devaney and Stuart 1998; Millimet et al. 2010). Two factors appear to

drive the low take-up of breakfast: stigma and timing. Recent policy innovations have attempted to

ameliorate these barriers to participation.

         To address (perceived) stigma associated with participation in the school breakfast program, some

districts have offered universal free school breakfast instead of the standard program that provides free

breakfast only to students who are income-eligible for a subsidy.1 There is some evidence, described below,

that this policy change increases take-up rates. The limitation remains, however, that in order to participate

in the breakfast program a student generally has to arrive at school prior to the start of classes and this is

reported to be an important barrier for some children. To address this, another recent policy innovation has


1
 The USDA has special reimbursement provisions that encourage schools to adopt universal free meals
programs.




                                                                                                                   2
been to serve breakfast in the classroom (BIC) during the first few minutes of the school day. BIC

eliminates the need for students to arrive to school early to participate in the school breakfast program, and

dramatically increases participation in the SBP (FRAC 2009; FNS undated). This program has recently

gained momentum, with major expansions in cities such as Washington, D.C., Houston, New York City,

Chicago, San Diego and Memphis.

         In this paper we re-analyze experimental data previously collected by the U.S. Department of

Agriculture to measure the impact of these two popular policy innovations: universal free breakfast, and

breakfast in the classroom. As described below, re-analysis of the data is necessary because the original

evaluation of the experiment was incomplete. In particular, it did not separately estimate the impacts of the

two policies even though the experimental design allowed such estimates to be conducted. In this re-

analysis, we calculate experimental estimates of both the impact of universal free cafeteria breakfast and

the impact of BIC.

         We extend the analysis in three additional directions. First, in order to improve statistical power of

the analysis and following the recent program evaluation literature (Kling et al. 2007; Anderson 2008;

Hoynes et al. 2012), we combine similar outcomes into summary indexes covering areas such as nutrition

at breakfast, nutrition over 24 hours, and child health outcomes. Second, we implement an instrumental

variables approach to estimate the causal impact of eating breakfast on student outcomes. Third, in an

appendix we address the policy decision facing a school district by constructing difference-in-difference

estimates of the relative effectiveness of BIC compared with universally free cafeteria breakfast.

    I.        Literature Review

         Two recent types of policy innovations have attempted to increase breakfast takeup, and there has

been recent evidence on their impacts using a variety of difference-in-differences research designs. The

first type of policy is the introduction of universal free breakfast, which allows children to participate in the

school breakfast program at no charge regardless of whether they are typically eligible for free or reduced-

price school meals. Ribar and Haldeman (2013) study the introduction and discontinuation of universal free

school breakfasts in Guilford County, North Carolina, and find that take-up of school breakfast increases by

12 to 16 percentage points when the program is universally free of charge. While most of the increased

participation was among students formerly ineligible for subsidized meals, they also find an increase




                                                                                                                    3
among those who were eligible for free meals all along. When the program was discontinued, there were no

changes in attendance rates or test scores. Leos-Urbel et al. (2013) compare New York City public schools

that implement universal free school breakfast to those that retain the traditional program in a triple-

difference framework. They find strong impacts on participation but no impacts on student test scores, and

a small positive impact on attendance for some subgroups.

         The second area of recent policy innovation is offering breakfast in the classroom during the

school day. Imberman and Kugler (2014) investigate the very short-term impacts of the introduction of a

BIC program in a large urban school district in the southwestern United States. The program was

introduced on a rolling basis across schools, and the earliest-adopting schools had the program in place for

up to 9 weeks before the state’s annual standardized test was administered. They find an increase in both

reading and math test scores, but no impact on grades or attendance. Additionally, there was no difference

in impact between those schools that had adopted the program for only one week vs. those that had the

program for a longer time. The pattern in the results led the authors to conclude that the test score impacts

were driven by short-term cognitive gains on the day of the test due to eating breakfast and not underlying

learning gains.2 Dotter (2012), on the other hand, finds stronger longer-run impacts of the staggered

introduction of a BIC program in elementary schools in San Diego. Using a difference-in-differences

approach, he finds that BIC increases test scores in math and reading by 0.15 and 0.10 standard deviations,

respectively. He finds no test score impacts on schools that previously had universal free breakfast, and no

impacts on attendance rates. As shown below, our results from the randomized experiment are consistent

with the earlier literature in that we find no consistent attendance impacts.3 On the other hand, we also find

no positive impact of BIC on test scores and can rule out effect sizes as large as those found in the earlier,

quasi-experimental literature.




2
  This interpretation is consistent with earlier research by Figlio and Winicki (2005), which found that
schools with much at stake in a test-based accountability system served higher-calorie lunches during
testing weeks.
3
  We find modest positive attendance impacts in year 3 only.



                                                                                                                 4
     II.       Empirical Approach

           This paper uses data from a randomized experiment implemented in 153 schools across 6 school

districts designed to test the impact of universal free school breakfast.4 That is, at baseline all schools in the

experiment at least offered the standard school breakfast program. Control group schools continued to offer

the standard program, which serves free or reduced-price (maximum price of 30 cents) breakfast to those

that are income-eligible and can be purchased at full price for those ineligible for a meal subsidy (current

average price $1.13, Fox et al. 2013). The breakfast is typically served before school in the cafeteria.

Treatment schools offered school breakfast free of charge to all students regardless of their usual eligibility

for subsidized meals.5 The experimental design first matched schools into pairs (or occasionally groups of 3

schools), and then treatment status was randomly assigned within the pair. There are 70 matched pairs in

the experiment, which we call “randomization pools” because random assignment is done within each of

these 70 pairs. After randomization occurred, the treatment schools got to choose whether to implement

their universal school breakfast as a traditional program – that is, in the cafeteria before school – or as a

BIC program. The treatment lasted for 3 years.

           The original evaluation found that treatment schools nearly doubled their SBP participation, and

that students in treatment schools were 4 percentage points more likely to consume a “nutritionally

substantive breakfast.” There were no statistically significant impacts on most other measures of food

intake, food security, student health, or achievement outcomes.



A.         The Need for Re-analysis

           In the original evaluations of the experiment (Bernstein et al. 2004), outcomes were presented

separately for the overall treatment and control groups, and then the treatment group outcomes were

presented separately by whether they adopted a cafeteria-based or classroom program. But it is

inappropriate to compare the separate treatment groups to a pooled control group, and may lead to biased


4
  The experiment was conducted by the USDA in conjunction with Abt Associates from 1999 through 2003
and was entitled the School Breakfast Pilot Project. We obtained the public-use data by requesting it from
USDA.
5
  Under normal circumstances, a child is eligible for free meals if his or her family’s income is less than or
equal to 130 percent of the poverty threshold, and is eligible for reduced-price meals if the family income is
less than or equal to 185 percent of the poverty threshold.




                                                                                                                     5
estimates of the policy impacts if different types of schools selected into cafeteria vs. classroom breakfast

programs. In practice, this is an important concern because there is evidence that the treatment schools

differed prior to program implementation. In the year before the experiment began, schools that would go

on to implement a cafeteria-based program had a 14 percent participation rate in the SBP, while those that

would opt for a BIC program had a 22 percent participation rate (see Table 1). As shown below, the two

types of treatment schools also differed along other characteristics such as rates of disadvantage. As a

result, impact estimates separately comparing them to a pooled control group may be seriously biased.

         Appropriate impact estimates can be constructed, though. As described above, in the experimental

protocol schools were first paired on observable characteristics and then treatment or control status was

randomly assigned within pairs. Subsequently, treatment schools were allowed to choose the location of

their universal school breakfast program. The design of the experiment is represented in Figure 1, below.

Since random assignment was conducted within treatment pairs, it is possible to measure the causal impact

of the universal cafeteria breakfast and the causal impact of BIC by comparing each treatment group to its

matched control group. To graphically demonstrate how to estimate the impact of the program in this

experimental design, see that outcomes for groups should be compared vertically. That is, the impact of a

universal cafeteria breakfast could be estimated as the difference between A and A’. Similarly, the impact

of the BIC program can be estimated as the difference between B and B’. Of course, the overall impact of

universal school breakfast (regardless of location) can be estimated as the difference between average

outcomes in the set A + B compared to those in the control group A’+B’.

Figure 1: Experimental design setup
                                                                      Location
                                                   Cafeteria                            Classroom
Treatment                                             A                                     B
Control                                               A’                                    B’

         Surprisingly, the official USDA evaluation failed to provide the experimental impacts separately

for BIC vs. cafeteria-based programs. Below, we first reanalyze the data using the appropriate control

group. This will allow us to make separate conclusions about the impacts of a universal cafeteria breakfast

and universal breakfast in the classroom, which to date have not been known because of the limitations of

the original analysis.




                                                                                                                6
B.       Outcomes to be measured

         Many prior analyses of school breakfast programs are limited by the outcome variables that are

available. Among the quasi-experimental literature, studies have looked either at take-up (Ribar and

Haldeman, 2013), or academic achievement (Frisvold 2012; Imberman and Kugler 2014; Dotter 2012), or

detailed nutrition outcomes (Bhattacharya et al. 2006), or a combination of take-up and achievement (Leos-

Urbel et al. 2013). To our knowledge, no paper in the prior literature has access to all of these outcomes in

the same dataset. Not only do we have detailed information on a range of outcomes, but we also have three

years of outcome data, allowing us to investigate the impacts of the programs as they mature.

         We start by analyzing the impact of each of the programs on take-up, and how the impacts vary

across characteristics such as prior income-eligibility for free breakfast, gender, race, and other

characteristics that were measured prior to the experiment. Next, we turn to nutrition and health outcomes.

We measure whether a student consumed any breakfast, or consumed a “nutritionally adequate” breakfast

as defined in the prior literature. We also measure whether a student consumes two breakfasts (typically,

one at home and one at school), and the household’s food security status. We analyze consumption of total

calories and micronutrient intake as percent of RDA and measure these both for breakfast and over a 24-

hour period. For measures of student health, we have parent-reported health status, and height and weight

(from which we calculate BMI and obesity). Finally, we analyze behavioral and cognitive measures such as

test scores, school attendance, and tardiness.

         Because we observe many outcome variables and in order to increase statistical precision, we

follow the recent literature (e.g. Kling, Liebman and Katz 2007; Anderson 2008; Hoynes, Schanzenbach

and Almond 2012) and estimate summary standardized indices that aggregate information over multiple

treatments. The summary index is the simple average across standardized z-score measures of each

component. The z-score is calculated by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation of the

pooled control group. In particular, we form five indices. Two nutrition indices cover nutrient intake at

breakfast and over 24-hours, respectively. The health outcomes index includes parent-reported health

status, whether the child has a chronic health problem, and (separate) indicators for whether the child is




                                                                                                                7
obese or overweight6. The behavior measures include measures of whether a student is inattentive, defiant,

and so on. Finally, the index of academic outcomes combines math and reading test scores across the three

years of the experiment. Summary statistics of the five indices and their component parts are presented in

Appendix Table 1.



C.       Impact of SBP participation and Breakfast Consumption

         We address whether participation in the SBP improves student outcomes. There are conflicting

and sometimes perverse-signed impact estimates in the literature (summarized in Briefel et al. 1999, also

Waehrer 2007), though most prior studies have been correlational.7 The prior literature is severely limited

because there are few research designs available to isolate the causal impact of SBP participation on

outcomes.

         We are also able to make statements about the causal impact of breakfast consumption by using

the experimental data and an instrumental variables approach. In particular, we use a school’s random

assignment to treatment status to instrument for a student’s breakfast consumption. This will allow us to

estimate the impact of breakfast consumption on the so-called “compliers” in a local average treatment

effect framework – that is, the impact on students who were induced to eat a breakfast in the program by

the universal school breakfast policy (Angrist and Pischke 2009). The impacts of the program on this group

are of particular interest to policy makers.



III.     Results

A.       Validity of the Experiment

         Table 1 presents means of pre-determined characteristics across the treatment and control groups.

As described above, we present three groups of estimates: first the pooled results for the impact of

universal free breakfast regardless of the type of program adopted, then separately those for the BIC

experiment and cafeteria-based experiment. The first two columns in each set of results presents means for


6
  Following the standard CDC definition, a student is defined as “overweight” or “obese” if he/she is at or
above the 85th or 95th percentile, respectively, of a standardized BMI distribution.
7
  Bhattacharya et al. (2006) is a notable exception, in which the authors use quasi-random variation in SBP
availability and find that the program improves nutritional intake among participants.




                                                                                                              8
the control and treatment groups, respectively. The third column presents the p-value of a test for whether

the means are the same across groups after conditioning on randomization pool fixed effects. In general, the

treatment and control groups are well-balanced across background characteristics, with no statistically

significant differences for the pooled group or the cafeteria group. Among the BIC group, however, there is

a small difference in student-level eligibility for free or reduced-price lunch, with the treatment group being

slightly less disadvantaged than the control group. The differences are not statistically significant across

other measures of disadvantage, such as family income less than $20,000 per year, minority status, or

whether the student is from a single parent household. Our subsequent analyses are largely unchanged if we

control for these background characteristics. There are no significant differences in school-level

characteristics (shown in panel B). Note that the schools in the BIC sample are substantially more

disadvantaged than the cafeteria sample. Among the control groups, 61 percent of the BIC group is eligible

for free or reduced-price lunch, compared with 51 percent of the cafeteria-based group. When restricted to

free lunch only, the rates are 45 and 34 percent, respectively. Furthermore, students in the BIC control

group take up school breakfasts in 22% of school days in the base year as compared to 14% for the

cafeteria-based group. These differences underscore the need to compare the BIC treatment group to the

appropriate control group.



B.         Outcomes

            Table 2 shows results for participation and nutrition intake during the first year of the experiment.

The table presents coefficients on an indicator for treatment group in a regression that controls	  for	  

randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  eligibility,	  

household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age. Standard errors (adjusted for

homoscedasticity at the school level) are shown in parentheses. Participation is measured as the proportion

of days that a student has taken a school breakfast, whether or not the child took the school breakfast on the

day that the nutrition information was collected. The overall (pooled) impact on SBP participation is 18

percentage points, a near doubling of participation compared with the control group. There is a substantial

difference in treatment effects, however, across program type. The BIC program increased year 1

participation by 38 percentage points, or a 144 percent increase in participation. The cafeteria-based




                                                                                                                                            9
program also significantly increases participation, but by a more modest 10.5 percentage points, or a 52

percent increase in rate. Since breakfasts are reimbursed on a per-pupil basis, a child’s participation in SBP

determines the total cost of the program. Another way to measure participation is whether a child “usually”

takes a school breakfast. When we define “usually” as participation in 75 percent or more days, the impacts

on participation are even larger in percentage terms. The impacts are a 13 percentage-point increase in

participation in the pooled sample (an increase of over 160 percent), and 29 percentage points in the BIC

sample (a 242 percent increase). These increases in program participation could reflect students going from

consuming no breakfast to a school breakfast, but could also reflect substitution of a home breakfast for a

school breakfast, or consumption of multiple breakfasts. The total impact on nutritional intake depends on

the extent of the substitution.

         The impact on breakfast consumption varies depending on the definition of breakfast chosen.8 At

one extreme, we can define any positive caloric intake in the morning to be breakfast consumption.

According to this definition, 96 percent of the pooled control group eats some breakfast. Overall, universal

school breakfast does not change this probability, although the BIC program increases the likelihood that a

child eats any breakfast by 2 percentage points. If we implement a more stringent threshold for what counts

as breakfast – a “nutritionally substantive” breakfast that requires consumption of at least 2 food groups

and at least 15 percent of the daily allowance of calories – then the impact is stronger. The pooled impact is

an increase of 3 percentage points, compared to a control group level of 59 percent consuming that quality

level of breakfast. This is driven almost entirely by a 10 percentage-point increase among the BIC group,

with an insignificant 1 percentage-point estimate among the cafeteria-based program group.9 BIC

substantially increases both participation and the likelihood that a student actually eats breakfast, while a

universal cafeteria-based program increases participation in the program but primarily alters where – and

not whether – students eat breakfast.

         The next row displays the impact on whether a student reports eating two nutritionally substantive

breakfasts, one at school and one at another location. Here again the impact is primarily driven by the BIC

8
  “Breakfast” includes all foods and beverages, excluding water, consumed between 5:00 a.m. and 45
minutes after the start of school, and also any foods consumed before 10:30 a.m. that the student/parent
reported as being part of breakfast.
9
  Impacts are similar if we use alternate definitions of breakfast commonly used in the literature, such as
consuming 2 food groups and 10 percent of RDA of calories, or consuming 3 food groups and 25 percent
of RDA of calories.



                                                                                                                 10
group, which causes a 5-point increase in eating two breakfasts. This represents more than doubling the

likelihood of eating two breakfasts. The BIC program reduces the likelihood that a student eats breakfast

only outside of school by 45 percentage points, while the universal cafeteria-based program reduces this

likelihood by 13 points.

          The final set of rows report impacts on calorie and nutrient intakes, both at breakfast(s) and over a

24-hour period, as well as on food security. Consistent with the reported meal intake patterns, BIC

participants consume an additional 1.7 percent of the recommended daily allowance (RDA) of calories

(adjusted for child’s age) at breakfast. There is no measured difference in calorie intake among the

cafeteria-based program group. The program does not appear to be increasing the nutrient intake at

breakfast for either treatment group.10 The 24-hour dietary impacts suggest that any increase in

consumption at breakfast is offset at other times during the day, and 24-hour calorie and nutrition intakes

are no higher for the treatment groups. Finally, neither program appears to impact household food security

status.

          Overall, the universal cafeteria-based program appears to shift where students consume breakfast,

but does not substantially alter whether or how much breakfast is consumed. On the other hand, the BIC

program changes where students eat breakfast as well as how much they eat. It raises the likelihood that a

child eats any breakfast, and also raises the likelihood that he or she eats two breakfasts. Since the

cafeteria-based program does not change students’ nutritional intake, it would be surprising to find that it

impacts other outcomes. On the other hand, since BIC increases nutritional intake (both in terms of

increasing the likelihood that a child eats any breakfast, and in terms of meal quality) and also potentially

crowds out some classroom instructional time, the expected impacts are ambiguous.

          Table 3 shows impacts on academic, behavioral and health outcomes during the first year of the

experiment. For completeness, we include the impacts from the pooled sample and the cafeteria-based

program, but we concentrate our discussion on the BIC results11. The BIC treatment does not statistically

significantly improve any outcome. The point estimate for the test score index is -0.052 indicating a


10
   The index consists of consumption of vitamins A, B-6, B-12, C, riboflavin, folate, calcium, iron,
magnesium and zinc.
11
   Further analysis of the relative impact of BIC vs. cafeteria based universal breakfast programs using a
difference-in-difference approach is presented in the Appendix. Such an analysis may be useful as schools
often face the decision to introduce universal school breakfast in the cafeteria or in the classroom.



                                                                                                                  11
statistically insignificant 5 percent of a standard deviation decline in average math and reading test scores.

The standard errors allow us to reject a positive impact as small as 0.03 standard deviations, which is

smaller than the results found in the quasi-experimental literature.12 When broken out separately by subject,

the estimated impact (standard error) for math is -0.085 (0.052) and reading is -0.023 (0.037). The

estimated impact of BIC on attendance and tardiness is wrong-signed but not statistically significant. The

BIC impact on the “bad behavior index” is right-signed, in that the point estimate indicates a decrease in

misbehavior, but not statistically different from zero. There is no impact on child health as measured by

child’s (age-adjusted) BMI, an indicator for being overweight or the health index. Note that the control

group means across many of these characteristics indicate that the BIC sample is more disadvantaged than

the cafeteria-based sample.

         Table 4 shows impacts for subsequent years. We define the BIC sample consistently over time

based on their status in the first year of the program, even though six BIC treatment schools switched to a

cafeteria-based program at some point during the experiment. The impact on SBP participation is relatively

stable over time, with the pooled impact essentially doubling takeup, BIC increasing takeup by about 150

percent, and the cafeteria-based program increasing it by approximately 54 percent. There is no evidence of

a positive impact on test scores, with small and insignificant impacts in year two and three, and when the

data are pooled across all 3 years of outcomes. Impacts on attendance rates are positive and significant in

year 3 only, with an estimated 1.05 percentage-point increase in attendance rate for the BIC group. The

pooled impacts on attendance rates across all 3 years, however, are small or wrong-signed and not

statistically significantly different from zero. The BIC appears to increase tardiness significantly in some

years, though, again, the magnitude of the impact is quite small (i.e. less than a day per school year).

         Table 5 explores whether the BIC impacts are different across subgroups. Each triplet of columns

represents a different subgroup. The first column in each pair presents the control group mean, the second

column presents the impact of BIC treatment after conditioning on randomization pool fixed effects and

previously mentioned demographic controls and the last column presents the number of observations.

There is some variation in the impact on participation and breakfast eating. Free-lunch ineligible students


12
  In order to increase precision of the estimates, we control for baseline test scores in the models. As
expected, addition of these controls does not change the impact estimates but they do reduce the standard
errors by 20-30 percent.



                                                                                                                 12
increase their participation rates by more in response to BIC than do free-lunch eligible students, but the

impact on breakfast consumption is slightly stronger among the more disadvantaged group. Similarly, BIC

increases the likelihood that boys participate in the program more than girls, but has a stronger increase on

the likelihood that a girl eats a nutritionally substantial breakfast. Among high-poverty, urban schools, BIC

increases participation by 138 percent, and increases breakfast eating by over 27 percent. Despite

differences in treatment intensity, there is no significant positive impact on test scores or attendance.13

Results are generally stable across the behavior index measure (indicating an improvement in behavior),

but only reach statistical significance among the subset of minority students. However, the BIC treatment

statistically significantly increases health and decreases the incidence of overweight when the sample is

limited to certain sub-populations, such as students who attend high-poverty, urban schools.



C.       Impact of Eating Breakfast

         An elusive question in the literature has been what is the impact of eating breakfast – whether at

home or school – on a child’s outcomes. As shown in Table 2 above, being randomly assigned to the BIC

treatment increases the likelihood that a student consumes breakfast. We can thus use the school’s random

assignment to BIC as an instrument for breakfast consumption, and estimate the causal impact of breakfast

consumption. It is important to emphasize that this is a local average treatment effect, and provides an

estimate of the causal impact of breakfast consumption for those students who were induced to start eating

breakfast because of the treatment. Results are presented in Table 6, and are limited only to the BIC sample

(i.e. the randomization pools in which the treatment group participated in BIC).

         The first triplet of columns shows results for a nutritionally substantial breakfast (i.e., as before

this includes consumption of food from 2 food groups and at least 15 percent of daily RDA of calories).

The first column shows the OLS relationship between breakfast eating and a variety of outcomes, after

controlling for other background characteristics. Consistent with the prior literature, eating breakfast is

correlated with better dietary outcomes. Eating breakfast is associated with a 0.46 standard deviation

increase in nutritional intake as measured by the 24-hour micronutrient index, and a 16 percentage-point

increase in daily calories as a percent of RDA. There is no systematic relationship in these data between

13
  We constructed the urban, high-poverty sample to be similar to the sample used in Dotter (2012) and we
can rule out impacts as large as he finds on test scores.



                                                                                                                 13
breakfast eating and child’s BMI, or whether the child is overweight. There is also no statistically

significant association between breakfast eating and child outcomes such as behavior, attendance or test

scores.

          Moving to column 2, we can estimate the causal impact of being induced to eat a substantive

breakfast by the BIC program. The instrument predicts a 10-point increase in breakfast eating, and is a

strong predictor with an F-statistic of over 16. Instrumenting for breakfast consumption flips the signs of

most of the estimates, suggesting that the correlations in the OLS results are largely driven by selection.

The standard errors are quite large and most of the IV estimates are not statistically significantly different

from zero. Nonetheless, the point estimates from the IV results for behavior, health and overweight status

suggest that eating breakfast may improve these outcomes. On the other hand, the estimates on attendance,

and test scores become more negative when instrumented.

          Instead of defining breakfast as a binary variable equal to one if consumption is at or above a

floor, an alternative measure of breakfast, displayed in columns (4) and (5), is the total calorie consumption

in the morning. In this case, the instrument is considerably weaker with an F-statistic of 4.8. Results are

generally similar as those in the first two columns, with the point estimates in the IV results suggesting

declines in overweight and bad behavior but wrong-signed, though small, estimates on attendance and test

scores. The standard errors are large and none of the estimates are statistically significantly different from

zero.



IV.       Discussion and Conclusions

          The USDA implemented an extremely important experiment on the impacts of making school

breakfast uniformly available at no cost, both in the cafeteria before school and in the classroom. Our

reanalysis isolated the impact of each of these programs on nutrition, health, attendance and achievement.

We find that expanding the school breakfast program substantially increases program takeup, especially

under the BIC treatment. Furthermore, universal free school breakfast and BIC also increase the likelihood

that a child eats a nutritionally substantive breakfast. BIC also increases the likelihood that a child eats two

breakfasts. The additional consumption appears to be offset across the rest of the day, so there is no

measurable impact on 24-hour nutrition as measured by calories or nutritional intake.




                                                                                                                   14
         Despite the increase in breakfast consumption under BIC, we find no positive impact on most

other outcomes. In contrast to the earlier, quasi-experimental literature, we find no positive impact on test

scores and some evidence of negative impacts. Similarly, there appears to be no overall positive impact on

attendance rates or child health. There is suggestive evidence that BIC may improve behavior and health in

some highly disadvantaged subgroups, though.

         Of course, the results should be viewed with the important caveat that our results do not indicate

that the school breakfast program is not effective. There is already a reasonably high program participation

rate among the control group, and a higher breakfast consumption rate among the control group, indicating

that some children who do not participate in the school program eat breakfast at home. In other words, our

results do not shed light on what would happen if the school breakfast program were reduced or eliminated,

nor do they suggest that reducing or eliminating the school breakfast program is warranted. The results

speak only to attempts to further expand the program, through universal access or BIC programs. These

results indicate that much of the increase in program participation induced by program expansions

represents substitution from consumption of breakfast at home to school. A substantial share of children is

induced to start consuming breakfast by the program, and a slightly smaller share is induced to consume

two breakfasts. The relatively modest measured benefits suggest that policy-makers should carefully

consider how to trade these off against the increased program costs.




                                                                                                                15
Citations

Angrist, Joshua and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Anderson, Michael (2008). “Multiple inference and gender differences in the effects of early intervention:
A reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 103(484).

Bernstein LS, JE McLaughlin, MK Crepinsek, LM Daft. (2004). “Evaluation of the School Breakfast
Program Pilot Project: Final Report,” Nutrition Assistance Program Report Series, No. CN-04-SBP, Project
Officer: Anita Singh. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis,
Nutrition, and Evaluation, Alexandria, VA.

Briefel, Ronette, J. Michael Murphy, Susanna Kung, and Barbara Devaney (1999). “Universal-Free School
Breakfast Program Evaluation Design Project: Review of Literature on Breakfast and Learning, Final
Report,” Office of Analysis, Nutrition and Evaluation, Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.

Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Janet Currie and Steven J. Haider (2006). “Breakfast of Champions? The School
Breakfast Program and the Nutrition of Children and Families,” Journal of Human Resources 41(3): 445-
466.

Devaney, Barbara and Elizabeth Stuart (1998). “Eating Breakfast: Effects of the School Breakfast
Program,” Office of Analysis and Evaluation, Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.

Dotter, Dallas (2012). “Breakfast at the Desk: The Impact of Universal Breakfast Programs on Academic
Performance,” mimeo, University of California – San Diego.

Figlio, David N. and Joshua Winicki (2005). “Food for Thought: The Effects of School Accountability
Plans on School Nutrition,” Journal of Public Economics 89(2-3): 381-394.

Food Research and Action Center (2009). “Universal Classroom Breakfast Fact Sheet.”
http://frac.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/universal_classroom_breakfast_fact_sheet.pdf

Fox, Mary Kay et al. (2013). “School Nutrition Dietary Assessment Study IV Volume I: School Food
Service Operations, School Environments, and Meals Offered and Served,” Office of Analysis, Food and
Nutrition Service, USDA. Report No. CN-12-SNDA.

Frisvold, David (2012). “Nutrition and Cognitive Achievement: An Evaluation of the School Breakfast
Program,” Emory University, mimeo.

Hoynes, Hilary, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Douglas Almond (2012). “Long Run Impacts of
Childhood Access to the Safety Net,” NBER Working Paper #18535.

Imberman, Scott and Adrianna Kugler (2014). “The Effect of Providing Breakfast in Class on Student
Performance,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 33(3), 669-699.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz (2007). “Experimental analysis of neighborhood
effects,” Econometrica, 75(1), 83-119.

Leos-Urbel, Jacob, Amy Ellen Schwartz, Meryle Weinstein and Sean Corcoran (2013). “Not Just for Poor
Kids: The Impact of Universal Free School Breakfast on Meal Participation and Student Outcomes,”
Economics of Education Review 36: 88-107.

McLaughlin et al. (2002). Evaluation of the School Breakfast Program Pilot Project: Findings from the
First Year of Implementation. Report No. CN-02-SBP.




                                                                                                             16
Millimet, Daniel, Rusty Tchernis and Muna Husain (2010). “School nutrition programs and the incidence
of childhood obesity,” Journal of Human Resources 45(3), 640-654.

Ribar, David and Lauren Haldeman (2013). “Changes in Meal Participation, Attendance, and Test Scores
Associated with the Availability of Universal-Free School Breakfasts.” Social Service Review 87(2), 354-
385.

USDA, Agricultural Research Service (2009-10). “What We Eat in America, NHANES 2009-10.”
http://www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/12355000/pdf/0910/Table_13_BRK_GEN_09.pdf

USDA, Food and Nutrition Service (undated). “10 Reasons to Try Breakfast in the Classroom.”
http://www.fns.usda.gov/cnd/breakfast/expansion/10reasons-breakfast_flyer.pdf

Waehrer, Geetha M. (2008). “The School Breakfast Program and Breakfast Consumption,” Institute for
Research on Poverty Discussion Paper no. 1360-08.




                                                                                                           17
Appendix

Difference-in-difference estimates

         The more relevant policy question for a school or district considering implementing a universal

school breakfast program is the relative effectiveness of a traditional cafeteria-based school breakfast

relative to breakfast in the classroom. To experimentally address this policy question, schools would need

to have been randomly assigned across these groups. Referring back to Figure 1, this would mean that

schools should have been randomly assigned to columns in addition to rows (i.e. randomly assigned to

group A or group B). Under a design like this, a simple difference-in-difference estimate (i.e. comparing

outcomes across cells [A – A’] – [B – B’] = δ) would yield an unbiased estimate of the relative impact of

universal breakfast in the cafeteria vs. the classroom.

         Unfortunately, schools were not randomly assigned but instead self-selected into treatment type.

Under the arguably palatable assumption that schools choose the program that will improve their outcomes

the most, we can estimate an upper bound on the relative effectiveness of the two types of universal

breakfast programs by comparing effect sizes across the groups. The relative effect of a classroom vs.

cafeteria universal program is an important policy-relevant question, with little evidence to date on it.

Therefore we calculate the difference-in-difference estimates, attempting to estimate the relative

effectiveness of BIC compared to a cafeteria-based program, even though this parameter is not

experimentally identified.

         We calculate the difference-in-difference estimates, comparing each treatment type to its randomly

assigned control group, then test for differences in impact across the two treatment types. Results are

shown in Appendix Table 2. Most notably, BIC increases participation relative to universal cafeteria

breakfast by an average of 28 percentage points. Similarly, BIC increases the likelihood of actually eating

breakfast (not merely participating in the program) by between 2 and 8 percentage points depending on the

definition of breakfast. It also raises the likelihood that a child eats two breakfasts by 5 points relative to the

cafeteria-based program. On the other hand, there are signs that the cafeteria-based program, relative to the

BIC program, increases the likelihood that a child is not tardy (by around 1.2 days over a 180-day school

year according to the pooled-year results). This makes sense, as participation in the cafeteria-based

program requires a child be present at school before school starts. Since there are few statistically




                                                                                                                      18
significant impacts of universal breakfast, the difference-in-differences estimates also show no impact of

BIC relative to a cafeteria breakfast on other nutrition, health, attendance, behavior or achievement

outcomes.




                                                                                                             19
Table	  1:	  Baseline	  Summary	  Statistics
                                              Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast	  Program                                                          BIC	  Only                                                                       Cafeteria	  Only
                                               Control Treatment p-­‐value                   N                                               Control Treatment p-­‐value                                       N                 Control Treatment p-­‐value                N
                                                 (1)         (2)              (3)           (4)                                                (5)      (6)          (7)                                      (8)                  (9)      (10)         (11)              (12)
Student-­‐level	  characteristics
Eligible	  for	  Free	  or	  Reduced	  
Lunch                                            0.54        0.54             0.39         4358                                                  0.61                0.58                0.02               1054                    0.51                0.52        0.97   3339
Eligible	  for	  Free	  Lunch                 0.37        0.37             0.20         4358                                                  0.45                0.39                0.00               1054                    0.34                0.36        0.80   3339
Income	  <	  $20K                              0.19        0.18             0.18         3278                                                  0.20                0.18                0.10                783                    0.18                0.18        0.60   2521
Black                                            0.10        0.09             0.21         4169                                                  0.10                0.10                0.73               1035                    0.10                0.08        0.16   3167
Non-­‐white                                      0.39        0.39             0.62         4169                                                  0.37                0.35                0.14               1035                    0.40                0.41        0.96   3167
Female                                           0.51        0.52             0.31         4358                                                  0.53                0.52                0.60               1054                    0.51                0.53        0.16   3339
Single	  Parent	  Household                    0.24        0.25             0.70         3423                                                  0.22                0.23                0.64                809                    0.25                0.26        0.84   2640
Age	  (years)                                    9.8         9.8             0.29         4358                                                   9.9                 9.9                0.62               1054                     9.8                 9.8        0.29   3339
School	  Breakfast	  Program	  
Participation	  (%	  of	  days)	  -­‐	  
Base	  Year                                    16.26       16.36             0.48         3380                                                 21.55               22.80                0.54                939                   14.42               13.83        0.17   2475

School-­‐level	  characteristics
%	  Eligible	  Free/Reduced	  
Lunch	  -­‐	  Base	  Year                                 45.6                45.6                0.81                151                     54.4                54.7                0.73                 37                    42.2                42.9        0.96   117
%	  Eligible	  Free	  or	  Reduced	  
Lunch	  -­‐	  Year	  1                                    46.2                45.2                0.20                153                     55.1                52.9                0.19                 38                    42.4                42.9        0.63   119
%	  Minority	  Students	  -­‐	  Base	  
Year                                                         32.6                33.8                0.90                153                     33.4                29.1                0.11                 38                    31.7                35.2        0.46   119
School	  size	  -­‐	  Base	  Year                        507                 471                 0.15                151                     646                 550                 0.20                 37                    481                 447         0.30   117
Notes:	  P-­‐values	  represent	  a	  test	  for	  whether	  the	  row	  variable	  is	  different	  in	  the	  treatment	  group	  than	  the	  control	  group,	  after	  conditioning	  on	  randomization	  pool	  fixed	  effects.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20
Table	  2:	  Effect	  of	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  on	  Participation	  and	  Nutrition,	  by	  Type	  of	  Program

                                                                             Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                                                          BIC	  Only                                                          Cafeteria	  Only
                                                                             Control	                                                                  Control	                                                                 Control	  
                                                                              group	                                                                    group	                                                                   group	  
                                                                              mean           Impact             N                                        mean                    Impact                    N                       mean                    Impact                     N
                                                                                    (1)                  (2)   (3)                                        (4)                                   (5)       (6)                       (7)                             (8)              (9)
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                                     21.69       18.44***            3380                                       26.29                 37.86***                   939                      20.01                 10.50***                   2475
                                                                                                 (	  1.58)                                                                          (	  2.18)                                                               (	  1.15)
Usually	  participate	  (>=75%	  of	  days)                                 	  0.08    	  0.13***       3380                                         	  0.12             	  0.29***               939                        	  0.07             	  0.06***               2475
                                                                                                 (	  0.02)                                                                          (	  0.04)                                                               (	  0.01)
Ate	  Any	  Breakfast                                                         	  0.96             	  0.00 4278                                         	  0.96                     	  0.02*        1048                        	  0.96                  -­‐0.00              3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.00)                                                                          (	  0.01)                                                               (	  0.01)
Ate	  Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast                                	  0.59        	  0.03**    4278                                         	  0.60             	  0.10***              1048                        	  0.59                   	  0.01            3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.01)                                                                          (	  0.02)                                                               (	  0.01)
Ate	  2	  Substantive	  Breakfasts                                           	  0.02    	  0.01***       4278                                         	  0.02             	  0.05***              1048                        	  0.02                  -­‐0.00              3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.00)                                                                          (	  0.01)                                                               (	  0.00)
Eats	  Breakfast	  Outside	  of	  School	  Only                            	  0.69   -­‐0.21***         4278                                         	  0.64            -­‐0.45***                1048                        	  0.70            -­‐0.13***                 3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.02)                                                                          (	  0.03)                                                               (	  0.01)
Breakfast:	  Total	  Energy	  (%	  RDA)                                   20.58                  	  0.37 4278                                        20.67                     	  1.70**           1048                       20.57                      -­‐0.10              3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.32)                                                                          (	  0.78)                                                               (	  0.32)
Breakfast:	  Micronutrient	  Index                                            	  0.00             	  0.02 4278                                        -­‐0.09                           	  0.03     1048                        	  0.03                   	  0.01            3265
                                                                                                 (	  0.02)                                                                          (	  0.05)                                                               (	  0.02)
24	  Hour:	  Total	  Energy	  (%	  RDA)                                 101.94                 -­‐1.15   3347                                       103.32                            -­‐2.00        803                      101.65                      -­‐1.16              2570
                                                                                                 (	  0.81)                                                                          (	  1.86)                                                               (	  0.90)
24	  Hour:	  Micronutrient	  Index                                          -­‐0.00               	  0.00 3347                                        -­‐0.07                          -­‐0.04        803                        	  0.02                   	  0.01            2570
                                                                                                 (	  0.02)                                                                          (	  0.04)                                                               (	  0.02)
Food	  Insecure                                                                	  0.23            -­‐0.01   3375                                         	  0.26                        -­‐0.02        809                        	  0.22                  -­‐0.00              2592
                                                                                                 (	  0.01)                                                                          (	  0.02)                                                               (	  0.01)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  
eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Definitions	  of	  breakfast	  are	  as	  follows:	  any	  breakfast	  is	  defined	  as	  consumption	  of	  any	  calories	  between	  5:00	  
a.m.	  and	  45	  minutes	  after	  the	  start	  of	  school,	  and	  also	  any	  foods	  consumed	  before	  10:30	  a.m.	  that	  the	  student/parent	  reported	  as	  being	  part	  of	  breakfast	  on	  the	  survey	  date.	  A	  child	  ate	  a	  
nutritionally	  substantive	  breakfast	  if	  he	  or	  she	  consumed	  food	  from	  at	  least	  2	  main	  food	  groups	  and	  >15%	  of	  calorie	  RDA	  during	  the	  same	  breakfast	  time	  period.	  A	  child	  ate	  2	  substantive	  
breakfasts	  if	  he	  or	  she	  consumed	  a	  nutritionally	  substantive	  breakfast	  at	  school	  as	  well	  as	  another	  nutritionally	  substantive	  breakfast	  at	  another	  location	  during	  the	  breakfast	  time	  period.	  
Micronutrient	  index	  combines	  the	  intake	  as	  a	  percentage	  of	  RDA	  for	  the	  following:	  Vitamins	  A,	  B-­‐6,	  B-­‐12,	  C,	  riboflavin,	  folate,	  calcium,	  iron,	  magnesium,	  and	  zinc.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         21
Table	  3:	  Effect	  of	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  on	  First-­‐Year	  Academic,	  Behavior	  and	  Health	  Outcomes,	  by	  Type	  of	  Program

                                               Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                                                            BIC	  Only                                                      Cafeteria	  Only
                                               Control	                                                                     Control	                                                         Control	  
                                                  group	                                                                     group	                                                           group	  
                                                    mean                 Impact                      N                         mean                Impact                 N                     mean                    Impact                   N
                                                          (1)                      (2)              (3)                             (4)                      (5)         (6)                             (7)                        (8)         (9)
Test	  Score	  Index                               -­‐0.01              -­‐0.03*                 2572                        -­‐0.03                  -­‐0.05         554                            0.00                    -­‐0.02         2024
                                                                          (0.02)                                                                     (0.04)                                                                (0.02)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                 95.97                     -­‐0.14              3603                        95.74                    -­‐0.23         875                       96.07                    -­‐0.15*            2752
                                                                          (	  0.09)                                                                (	  0.22)                                                           (	  0.09)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                    	  2.47            -­‐0.34*                 2051                         	  2.37                 	  0.11       445                          	  2.51              -­‐0.40*            1630
                                                                          (	  0.20)                                                                (	  0.42)                                                           (	  0.23)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                             -­‐0.00                   	  0.00            4089                         	  0.03                -­‐0.04         998                         -­‐0.01                     	  0.02       3119
                                                                          (	  0.02)                                                                (	  0.04)                                                           (	  0.02)
BMI	  percentile	  for	  Age                     63.35                  	  1.18*               4300                        66.13                     	  0.76      1043                       62.67                     	  1.12*          3292
                                                                          (	  0.63)                                                                (	  1.42)                                                           (	  0.68)
Overweight                                            	  0.31             	  0.02*               4300                         	  0.38                -­‐0.01        1043                          	  0.30           	  0.03**             3292
                                                                          (	  0.01)                                                                (	  0.02)                                                           (	  0.01)
Health	  Index                                      -­‐0.01                   	  0.02            4320                        -­‐0.10                   	  0.05      1051                          	  0.02                   	  0.01       3304
                                                                          (	      0.02)                                                            (	      0.04)                                                       (	        0.02)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  
reduced	  lunch	  eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  reading	  test	  z-­‐
scores.	  Controlling	  for	  baseline	  test	  scores	  improves	  statistical	  precision	  but	  has	  little	  effect	  on	  impact	  estimates.	  Test	  score	  index	  is	  the	  average	  of	  math	  and	  reading	  z-­‐scores,	  
standardized	  by	  subject	  and	  grade	  based	  on	  the	  pooled	  control	  group.	  Attendance	  and	  tardiness	  is	  measured	  as	  the	  percent	  of	  total	  school	  days.	  The	  bottom	  2%	  of	  attendance	  
observations	  are	  trimmed.	  Bad	  behavior	  index	  contains	  15	  teacher-­‐reported	  measures	  of	  the	  student's	  inability	  to	  control	  behavior	  and	  focus.	  A	  child	  is	  overweight	  if	  he/she	  
is	  in	  the	  85th	  percentile	  	  or	  above	  of	  BMI	  for	  his	  age.	  Health	  index	  combines	  parent-­‐reported	  health	  status,	  and	  indicator	  variables	  for	  whether	  the	  child	  is	  overweight,	  obese	  
or	  has	  any	  parent-­‐reported	  health	  problems.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               22
Table	  4:	  Effect	  of	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  in	  Subsequent	  Years

                                                                   Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                                                    BIC	  Only                                                     Cafeteria	  Only
                                                                   Control	                                                             Control	                                                            Control	  
                                                                    group	                                                               group	                                                              group	  
                                                                    mean         Impact               N                                   mean                 Impact                     N                    mean                  Impact                     N
                                                                     (1)            (2)              (3)                                   (4)                   (5)                     (6)                    (7)                    (8)                     (9)
Year	  2
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                             20.97              21.38***                 2459                     26.00              41.59***                  709                      18.97              12.89***                 1779
                                                                                           (	  1.79)                                                          (	  2.95)                                                            (	  1.39)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                -­‐0.01                 -­‐0.05             1546                     -­‐0.10                   0.01               341                       0.01               -­‐0.06*                1208
                                                                                             (0.03)                                                            (0.06)                                                                (0.03)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                   95.92               	  0.18**              2642                     95.77                   	  0.16             651                      95.99                  	  0.14             2011
                                                                                           (	  0.09)                                                          (	  0.19)                                                            (	  0.10)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                    	  1.75                -­‐0.11             1511                      	  0.98           	  0.37*                337                      	  1.91              -­‐0.20               1194
                                                                                           (	  0.18)                                                          (	  0.21)                                                            (	  0.21)
Year	  3
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                             19.40              18.08***                 1679                     22.67              36.07***                  457                      18.16              11.00***                 1240
                                                                                          (	  1.85)                                                              (	  3.43)                                                         (	  1.48)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                -­‐0.01                 0.00                1285                     -­‐0.01                 -­‐0.02              255                      -­‐0.01                0.01                 1030
                                                                                          (0.04)                                                                  (0.05)                                                             (0.04)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                   95.88                 	  0.13              1790                     94.88              	  1.05***               420                      96.20                -­‐0.14                1383
                                                                                          (	  0.12)                                                              (	  0.34)                                                         (	  0.11)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                    	  2.12             -­‐0.18                 988                      	  1.51                	  1.14            206                      	  2.29             -­‐0.42                 795
                                                                                          (	  0.26)                                                              (	  0.87)                                                         (	  0.26)
Pooled	  Outcomes:	  Years	  1,	  2	  and	  3
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                             21.35              18.68***                 3380                     25.50              38.52***                  939                      19.82              10.72***                 2475
                                                                                          (	  1.53)                                                           (	  2.16)                                                             (	  1.04)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                -­‐0.02              -­‐0.02                2619                     -­‐0.07                -­‐0.01               571                       0.00                  -­‐0.02              2054
                                                                                          (0.02)                                                               (0.04)                                                                  (0.02)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                   95.82                 	  0.01              3678                     95.58                  -­‐0.07               890                      95.92                  -­‐0.01              2812
                                                                                          (	  0.08)                                                           (	  0.21)                                                             (	  0.08)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                    	  2.23             -­‐0.23                2064                      	  1.76           	  0.42*                446                      	  2.33            -­‐0.33**               1642
                                                                                          (	  0.14)                                                           (	  0.24)                                                             (	  0.16)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  
eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  reading	  test	  z-­‐scores.	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23
Table	  5:	  Effect	  of	  Breakfast	  in	  the	  Classroom	  Program,	  by	  Subgroup

                                                                                   A:	  Free-­‐lunch	  eligible                                        B:	  Free-­‐lunch	  ineligible
                                                                          Control	                                                              Control	  
                                                                           group	                                                                group	  
                                                                           mean                   Impact                    N                     mean                 Impact                      N
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                                  41.48                24.00***                   382                    14.76               46.30***                    557
                                                                                                     (	  2.60)                                                            (	  2.62)
Ate	  Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast                             	  0.62            	  0.10***               436                      	  0.58          	  0.09***                 612
                                                                                                     (	  0.04)                                                            (	  0.03)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                         95.29               -­‐0.79***                 361                     96.10                      -­‐0.03             514
                                                                                                     (	  0.28)                                                            (	  0.26)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                                                     	  0.16                 -­‐0.04              418                      -­‐0.08                   -­‐0.04             580
                                                                                                     (	  0.06)                                                            (	  0.05)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                       -­‐0.26                  -­‐0.04              214                       0.14                     -­‐0.06             340
                                                                                                     (0.07)                                                                  (0.05)
Overweight                                                                   	  0.37                  	  0.04            434                      	  0.40                  -­‐0.05             609
                                                                                                     (	  0.03)                                                            (	  0.04)
Health	  Index                                                              -­‐0.10                  -­‐0.03              438                      -­‐0.09               	  0.11**              613
                                                                                                     (	  0.05)                                                            (	  0.06)
                                                                                                  C:	  Male                                                         D:	  Female
                                                                          Control	                                                              Control	  
                                                                           group	                                                                group	  
                                                                           mean               Impact            N                                 mean                  Impact                     N
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                                  24.03            41.70***           442                                28.34              34.38***                     497
                                                                                                  (	  2.19)                                                               (	  2.69)
Ate	  Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast                             	  0.66            	  0.07**    498                                  	  0.55              	  0.11**              550
                                                                                                  (	  0.03)                                                               (	  0.04)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                        95.80                     -­‐0.01   413                                 95.68                      -­‐0.39             462
                                                                                                  (	  0.25)                                                               (	  0.28)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                                                     	  0.23                -­‐0.02   475                                  -­‐0.16                   -­‐0.05             523
                                                                                                  (	  0.05)                                                               (	  0.05)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                         0.03                  -­‐0.07   255                                  -­‐0.08                   -­‐0.02             299
                                                                                                    (0.06)                                                                   (0.06)
Overweight                                                                   	  0.41                -­‐0.03   496                                  	  0.36                   	  0.00           547
                                                                                                  (	  0.04)                                                               (	  0.04)
Health	  Index                                                             -­‐0.12                   	  0.05 500                                  -­‐0.08                    	  0.05           551
                                                                                                  (	  0.06)                                                               (	  0.06)
                                                                           E:	  Urban,	  High-­‐Poverty	  School                                                 F:	  Minority
                                                                          Control	                                                              Control	  
                                                                           group	                                                                group	  
                                                                           mean               Impact            N                                 mean                  Impact                     N
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                                  27.30            37.74***           206                                34.80                31.21***                   314
                                                                                                  (	  5.07)                                                              (	  3.33)
Ate	  Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast                             	  0.63        	  0.17***       225                                  	  0.66                 	  0.08             374
                                                                                                  (	  0.03)                                                              (	  0.05)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                        95.50            -­‐0.52***         201                                 95.90                    -­‐0.07               309
                                                                                                  (	  0.16)                                                              (	  0.30)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                                                     	  0.10                 	  0.07 220                                  	  0.19           -­‐0.18***                 354
                                                                                                  (	  0.18)                                                              (	  0.07)
Test	  Score	  Index                                                      -­‐0.19         -­‐0.29***         126                                  -­‐0.17              -­‐0.15**                197
                                                                                                    (0.07)                                                                 (0.08)
Overweight                                                                   	  0.40       -­‐0.10***         225                                  	  0.43                -­‐0.03               374
                                                                                                  (	  0.04)                                                              (	  0.04)
Health	  Index                                                             -­‐0.18          	  0.22***       226                                  -­‐0.17                  	  0.06             374
                                                                                                  (	  0.04)                                                              (	  0.06)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  Outcomes	  reported	  for	  first	  year	  only.	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  
randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  
household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  reading	  test	  z-­‐scores.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                24
Table	  6:	  Instrumental	  Variables	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  Breakfast	  Consumption	  
                                                                   Endogenous	  Variable:	  Ate	                                      Endogenous	  Variable:	  Total	  Energy	  
                                                               Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast                                    (%RDA)	  Intake	  at	  Breakfast
                                                                 OLS                       IV      N                                        OLS                   IV           N
                                                                 (1)                      (2)     (3)                                       (4)                  (5)          (6)
FIRST	  STAGE                                                                   	  0.10***                                                             	  1.70**
Instrument                                                                           (	  0.02)                                                           (	  0.78)
F-­‐statistic                                                                         16.53                                                                  	  4.79

SECOND	  STAGE
24	  Hour:	  Micronutrient	  Index                           	  0.46***                  -­‐0.35               802                      	  0.02***              -­‐0.02                 802
                                                                    (	  0.05)           (	  0.39)                                             (	  0.00)          (	  0.03)
24	  Hour:	  Total	  Energy	  (%	  RDA)                    15.58***                  -­‐17.11                 802                      	  0.99***              -­‐1.19                 802
                                                                    (	  2.09)           (18.64)                                                (	  0.09)          (	  1.62)
BMI	  percentile	  for	  Age                                      	  2.05                	  8.34             1039                           -­‐0.03             	  0.49               1039
                                                                    (	  2.00)           (13.75)                                                (	  0.09)          (	  0.77)
Overweight                                                           	  0.02                -­‐0.11              1039                           -­‐0.00             -­‐0.01                1039
                                                                    (	  0.03)           (	  0.21)                                             (	  0.00)          (	  0.01)
Health	  Index                                                      -­‐0.05                 	  0.50             1046                           	  0.00            	  0.03               1046
                                                                    (	  0.05)           (	  0.42)                                             (	  0.00)          (	  0.03)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                                             	  0.02                -­‐0.34               993                           	  0.00            -­‐0.02                 993
                                                                    (	  0.05)           (	  0.38)                                             (	  0.00)          (	  0.02)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                  	  0.16                -­‐2.85               870                           -­‐0.00             -­‐0.17                 870
                                                                    (	  0.24)           (	  2.37)                                             (	  0.01)          (	  0.16)
Test	  Score	  Index                                               -­‐0.03                 -­‐0.39               531                             0.00              -­‐0.02                 417
                                                                    (0.04)                 (0.47)                                               (0.00)              (0.03)
Notes:	  Standard	  errors	  adjusted	  for	  homoskedasticity	  at	  the	  school	  level.	  The	  instrumental	  variable	  is	  the	  school's	  random	  assignment	  to	  
receive	  the	  universal	  school	  breakfast	  program.	  Sample	  is	  limited	  randomization	  pairs	  in	  which	  the	  treatment	  school	  opted	  into	  the	  Breakfast	  
in	  the	  Classroom	  program.	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  
eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  
reading	  test	  z-­‐scores.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 25
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Effect	  of	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  on	  Index	  Sub-­‐Components	  
                                                                                  A:	  Breakfast	  -­‐	  Micronutrient	  Index
                                                            Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                              BIC	  Only                                                          Cafeteria	  Only
                                                            Control	                                              Control	                                                            Control	  
                                                             group	                                                group	                                                              group	  
                                                             mean            Impact               N                 mean          Impact                                          N      mean             Impact              N
                                                                  (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)            (5)                                          (6)      (7)               (8)              (9)

Calcium                                                                     35.75              	  2.34***            4278                    34.63             	  4.24**       1048    36.18            	  1.59**         3265
                                                                                                   (	  0.74)                                                    (	  1.82)                                (	  0.77)
Folate                                                                      51.05                      	  0.42       4278                    45.21                 -­‐0.22      1048    52.83                    	  0.45   3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.07)                                                    (	  2.83)                                (	  1.10)
Iron                                                                        63.56                     -­‐0.16         4278                     56.8                  	  1.03    1048     65.5                   -­‐0.73     3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.34)                                                    (	  3.42)                                (	  1.41)
Magnesium                                                                   31.41                  	  1.19*          4278                    27.61             	  2.52**       1048    32.62                    	  0.67   3265
                                                                                                   (	  0.62)                                                    (	  1.25)                                (	  0.71)
Niacin                                                                      60.21                      	  0.00       4278                    55.14                 -­‐1.12      1048    61.73                    	  0.22   3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.44)                                                    (	  3.56)                                (	  1.52)
Riboflavin	                                                               109.63                      	  1.45       4278                    99.55                  	  4.56    1048   112.67                    	  0.19   3265
                                                                                                   (	  2.05)                                                    (	  5.16)                                (	  2.12)
Thiamin                                                                     78.29                      	  0.47       4278                    72.09                  	  2.08    1048    80.16                   -­‐0.26     3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.51)                                                    (	  3.81)                                (	  1.57)
Vitamin	  A	                                                              60.42                  	  2.57*          4278                    54.43                  	  2.03    1048    62.22                	  2.43*      3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.45)                                                    (	  4.18)                                (	  1.38)
Vitamin	  B-­‐6	                                                          79.25                     -­‐0.05         4278                    71.62                 -­‐3.19      1048    81.44                    	  0.82   3265
                                                                                                   (	  2.12)                                                    (	  4.92)                                (	  2.31)
Vitamin	  B-­‐12                                                           97.94                     -­‐1.72         4278                     93.5                 -­‐5.84      1048    99.23                   -­‐0.40     3265
                                                                                                   (	  3.16)                                                    (	  8.19)                                (	  3.26)
Vitamin	  C                                                                86.24                      	  0.57       4278                    78.24                 -­‐3.77      1048    89.34                    	  1.04   3265
                                                                                                   (	  2.95)                                                    (	  6.21)                                (	  3.42)
Zinc	                                                                      51.64                      	  0.94       4278                    44.17                  	  4.34    1048    53.85                   -­‐0.22     3265
                                                                                                   (	  1.31)                                                    (	  3.31)                                (	  1.31)
Notes:	  Row	  variables	  represent	  nutrient	  intake	  at	  breakfast	  as	  a	  percent	  of	  recommended	  daily	  allowance	  (RDA).
                                                                                                B:	  24	  Hour	  -­‐	  Micronutrient	  Index
                                                                          Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                                BIC	  Only                                          Cafeteria	  Only
                                                                          Control	                                               Control	                                             Control	  
                                                                           group	                                                 group	                                               group	  
                                                                           mean         Impact                  N                  mean           Impact                          N      mean             Impact              N
                                                                            (1)            (2)                 (3)                   (4)            (5)                          (6)      (7)               (8)              (9)

Calcium                                                                    135.65                  	  0.33           3347                   134.98                  -­‐4.71     803    135.49              	  1.72         2570
                                                                                                (	  2.14)                                                       (	  4.92)                               (	  2.35)
Folate                                                                     149.56                  	  2.33           3347                   140.49                   	  0.25   803    152.36              	  2.35         2570
                                                                                                (	  2.15)                                                       (	  4.08)                               (	  2.50)
Iron                                                                       182.38                  	  0.25           3347                   179.51                  -­‐4.52     803    183.21              	  0.95         2570
                                                                                                (	  2.33)                                                       (	  4.29)                               (	  2.74)
Magnesium                                                                  135.85                  	  0.32           3347                   127.87                  -­‐1.02     803    138.27              	  0.37         2570
                                                                                                (	  1.44)                                                       (	  2.71)                               (	  1.71)
Niacin                                                                     210.68                 -­‐0.14             3347                   203.35                  -­‐3.64     803    213.44             -­‐0.12           2570
                                                                                                (	  2.86)                                                       (	  6.63)                               (	  3.13)
Riboflavin	                                                               311.58                  	  2.24           3347                    297.2                   	  0.34   803    315.89              	  1.88         2570
                                                                                                (	  3.44)                                                       (	  7.38)                               (	  3.98)
Thiamin                                                                    244.95                  	  1.33           3347                   239.07                  -­‐3.28     803    247.03              	  1.87         2570
                                                                                                (	  3.19)                                                       (	  6.95)                               (	  3.62)
Vitamin	  A	                                                             164.29                  	  2.93           3347                   147.89                   	  2.89   803    169.12              	  1.80         2570
                                                                                                (	  2.47)                                                       (	  5.27)                               (	  2.85)
Vitamin	  B-­‐6	                                                         221.37                  	  0.16           3347                    212.9                  -­‐3.65     803    224.08              	  0.35         2570
                                                                                                (	  3.18)                                                       (	  6.27)                               (	  3.69)
Vitamin	  B-­‐12                                                          311.57              -­‐10.42*              3347                   297.99               -­‐17.34       803    315.69             -­‐9.33           2570
                                                                                                (	  5.75)                                                       (11.16)                                  (	  6.82)
Vitamin	  C                                                               259.46                 -­‐3.36             3347                   253.77           -­‐33.24***        803    262.54              	  3.05         2570
                                                                                                (	  6.36)                                                       (10.16)                                  (	  7.61)
Zinc	                                                                     173.72                 -­‐0.62             3347                   165.92                  -­‐0.07     803    175.92             -­‐1.22           2570
                                                                                                (	  2.18)                                                       (	  5.15)                               (	  2.34)
Notes:	  Row	  variables	  represent	  nutrient	  intake	  at	  breakfast	  as	  a	  percent	  of	  recommended	  daily	  allowance	  (RDA).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              26
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Effect	  of	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  on	  Index	  Sub-­‐Components	  (Continued)
                                                                                          C:	  Bad	  Behavior	  Index
                                                            Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                           BIC	  Only                                                  Cafeteria	  Only
                                                            Control	                                            Control	                                                   Control	  
                                                             group	                                               group	                                                    group	  
                                                             mean            Impact               N                mean        Impact                                   N     mean             Impact            N
                                                                  (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)         (5)                                   (6)     (7)               (8)            (9)

Has	  a	  hard	  time	  keeping	  his/her	  mind	  on	  
activities.                                                                       	  2.85            	  0.09*               4086             	  3.10    -­‐0.12     998     	  2.77        	  0.16***      3116
                                                                                                      (	  0.04)                                          (	  0.11)                               (	  0.05)
It	  is	  hard	  to	  get	  his/her	  attention	  when	  
s/he	  is	  concentrating	  on	  something.                                   	  2.69             	  0.06               4086             	  2.77    -­‐0.09     998     	  2.67        	  0.12**       3116
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.11)                            (	  0.05)
Will	  move	  from	  one	  task	  to	  another	  
without	  completing	  any	  of	  them.                                       	  2.91             	  0.08               4079             	  2.97    -­‐0.03     996     	  2.89        	  0.13**       3111
                                                                                                      (	  0.06)                                          (	  0.15)                            (	  0.06)
Has	  difficulty	  waiting	  in	  line.                                       	  2.55             	  0.00               4087             	  2.60    -­‐0.08     998     	  2.53            	  0.04     3117
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.12)                            (	  0.06)
Has	  a	  lot	  of	  trouble	  stopping	  an	  activity	  
when	  called	  to	  do	  something	  else.                                  	  2.59             	  0.07               4082             	  2.62    -­‐0.12     993     	  2.58        	  0.14**       3117
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.11)                            (	  0.06)
Has	  trouble	  sitting	  still	  when	  s/he	  is	  told	  
to.                                                                               	  2.55             	  0.06               4088             	  2.54    	  0.11    997     	  2.56          	  0.04       3119
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.09)                            (	  0.06)
Sometimes	  does	  not	  seem	  to	  hear	  me	  
when	  I	  talk	  to	  him/her.                                               	  2.86             -­‐0.03                4080             	  2.96   -­‐0.25*     997     	  2.84          	  0.05       3111
                                                                                                      (	  0.06)                                          (	  0.14)                            (	  0.06)
Is	  easily	  distracted	  when	  listening	  to	  a	  
story	  or	  someone	  talking.                                                	  3.12             	  0.06               4079             	  3.31   -­‐0.21*     997     	  3.06        	  0.16***      3110
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.11)                               (	  0.05)
Can	  wait	  before	  entering	  new	  activities	  if	  
s/he	  is	  asked	  to.                                                        	  5.28             -­‐0.01                4087             	  5.16    	  0.06    998     	  5.32          -­‐0.04        3117
                                                                                                      (	  0.06)                                          (	  0.13)                            (	  0.06)
Can	  easily	  shift	  from	  one	  activity	  to	  
another.                                                                          	  5.20             -­‐0.05                4081             	  5.19     	  0.03   996     	  5.20          -­‐0.08        3113
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.09)                            (	  0.06)
Is	  good	  at	  following	  instructions.                                    	  5.05             -­‐0.01                4085             	  5.04    -­‐0.11     998     	  5.05           	  0.01      3115
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.09)                            (	  0.05)
Shows	  good	  concentration	  skills	  when	  
drawing	  and	  coloring.                                                       	  5.17             	  0.04               4079             	  5.13    	  0.14    997     	  5.18          	  0.01       3110
                                                                                                      (	  0.05)                                          (	  0.10)                            (	  0.05)
Has	  an	  easy	  time	  leaving	  recess	  or	  lunch	  to	  
come	  back	  to	  class.                                                      	  5.06             	  0.08               4074             	  5.25    -­‐0.07     995     	  5.00         	  0.13*       3107
                                                                                                      (	  0.06)                                          (	  0.11)                            (	  0.07)
Approaches	  places	  s/he	  has	  been	  told	  are	  
dangerous	  slowly	  and	  cautiously.                                         	  4.31           	  0.30***              3962             	  4.21    	  0.12    982     	  4.35        	  0.35***      3008
                                                                                                         (	  0.09)                                       (	  0.19)                               (	  0.10)
Can	  easily	  stop	  an	  activity	  when	  s/he	  is	  
told	  “no”.                                                                     	  5.13             	  0.05               4073             	  5.17    	  0.08    997     	  5.12          	  0.03       3104
                                                                                                      (	  0.06)                                          (	  0.12)                            (	  0.06)
Notes:	  Scale	  1-­‐7	  (where	  1="Extremely	  untrue	  of	  this	  child"	  and	  7="Extremely	  true	  of	  this	  child")




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Effect	  of	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast	  Program	  on	  Index	  Sub-­‐Components	  (Continued)
                                                                                                 D:	  Health	  Index
                                                            Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                            BIC	  Only                                                                                               Cafeteria	  Only
                                                            Control	                                              Control	                                                                                              Control	  
                                                             group	                                                group	                                                                                                group	  
                                                             mean            Impact                N                mean        Impact                                                               N                     mean                 Impact                     N
                                                                  (1)           (2)               (3)                (4)          (5)                                                               (6)                     (7)                   (8)                     (9)

Obese                                                                            	  0.18                -­‐0.01             4300                      	  0.23             -­‐0.04               1043                      	  0.16                 -­‐0.00            3292
                                                                                                      (	  0.01)                                                           (	  0.02)                                                             (	  0.01)
Overweight                                                                       	  0.31             	  0.02*              4300                      	  0.38             -­‐0.01               1043                      	  0.30             	  0.03**             3292
                                                                                                      (	  0.01)                                                           (	  0.02)                                                             (	  0.01)
Child's	  Health	  "Excellent"	  (Parent	  report)                           	  0.55             	  0.03*              3415                      	  0.53              	  0.04               808                     	  0.56                  	  0.02          2633
                                                                                                      (	  0.02)                                                           (	  0.03)                                                             (	  0.02)
Child	  has	  chronic	  health	  Problem                                     	  0.20                -­‐0.01             3404                      	  0.21              	  0.01               805                     	  0.20                 -­‐0.02            2625
                                                                                                      (	  0.01)                                                           (	  0.02)                                                             (	  0.01)
                                                                                                                E:	  Test	  Scores
                                                                              Any	  Universal	  School	  Breakfast                                                    BIC	  Only                                                     Cafeteria	  Only
                                                                              Control	                                           Control	                                                                               Control	  
                                                                               group	                                             group	                                                                                 group	  
                                                                               mean         Impact               N                 mean                                   Impact                     N                     mean                 Impact                     N
                                                                                (1)            (2)              (3)                  (4)                                    (5)                     (6)                     (7)                   (8)                     (9)

Math	  (Year	  1)                                                              0.00                 -­‐0.03*               2536                      0.03                 -­‐0.09*                550                     -­‐0.01                -­‐0.02              1992
                                                                                                      (0.02)                                                                (0.05)                                                               (0.02)
Reading	  (Year	  1)                                                           0.00                   -­‐0.02              2501                      -­‐0.07                -­‐0.02               536                      0.02                  -­‐0.02              1971
                                                                                                      (0.02)                                                                (0.04)                                                               (0.02)
Math	  (Year	  2)                                                              0.00                   -­‐0.05              1521                      -­‐0.11                 0.05                 334                      0.03                -­‐0.08*               1190
                                                                                                      (0.04)                                                                (0.08)                                                               (0.04)
Reading	  (Year	  2)                                                           0.00                   -­‐0.01              1351                      -­‐0.02                -­‐0.06               309                      0.00                   0.00                1045
                                                                                                      (0.03)                                                                (0.09)                                                               (0.04)
Math	  (Year	  3)                                                              0.00                   -­‐0.03              1265                      -­‐0.04                 0.01                 252                      0.01                  -­‐0.03              1013
                                                                                                      (0.04)                                                                (0.07)                                                               (0.05)
Reading	  (Year	  3)                                                           0.00                    0.03                1252                      0.06                   -­‐0.07               246                     -­‐0.01                 0.06                1006
                                                                                                      (0.04)                                                                (0.06)                                                               (0.05)
Math	  (Years	  1-­‐3)                                                         -­‐0.01              -­‐0.03*               2583                      -­‐0.04                -­‐0.01               565                      0.01                -­‐0.04*               2024
                                                                                                      (0.02)                                                                (0.05)                                                               (0.02)
Reading	  (Years	  1-­‐3)                                                      -­‐0.02                -­‐0.01              2552                      -­‐0.09                -­‐0.01               552                      0.00                  -­‐0.01              2006
                                                                                                      (0.02)                                                                (0.04)                                                               (0.02)
Note:	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  All	  regressions	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  
eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  reading	  test	  z-­‐scores.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           28
Appendix	  Table	  2:	  Difference-­‐in-­‐difference	  Analysis:	  Impact	  of	  BIC	  
Treatment	  Relative	  to	  Universal	  Cafeteria	  Breakfast

                                                        Difference-­‐in-­‐
                                                         difference	  
                                                         Coefficient	  
                                                          Estimate	                 N
                                                             (1)                    (2)
Year	  1
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)                   27.98***              3380
                                                                 (	  2.47)
Usually	  participate	  (>=75%	  of	  days)              	  0.24***          3380
                                                                 (	  0.04)
Ate	  Any	  Breakfast                                          	  0.02*        4278
                                                                 (	  0.01)
Ate	  Nutritionally	  Substantive	  Breakfast             	  0.08***          4278
                                                                 (	  0.03)
Ate	  2	  Substantive	  Breakfasts                        	  0.05***          4278
                                                                 (	  0.01)
Eats	  Breakfast	  Outside	  of	  School	  Only        -­‐0.30***            4278
                                                                 (	  0.03)
Breakfast:	  Total	  Energy	  (%	  RDA)                      	  1.56*        4278
                                                                 (	  0.89)
Breakfast:	  Micronutrient	  Index                                 	  0.00     4278
                                                                 (	  0.06)
24	  Hour:	  Total	  Energy	  (%	  RDA)                        -­‐0.12       3347
                                                                 (	  1.91)
24	  Hour:	  Micronutrient	  Index                               -­‐0.04       3347
                                                                 (	  0.04)
Food	  Insecure                                                    -­‐0.01       3375
                                                                 (	  0.02)
Test	  Score	  Index                                              -­‐0.03       2477
                                                                 (0.04)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                 -­‐0.03       3603
                                                                 (	  0.24)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                   	  0.47     2051
                                                                 (	  0.47)
Bad	  Behavior	  Index                                            -­‐0.06       4089
                                                                 (	  0.04)
BMI	  percentile	  for	  Age                                     -­‐0.01       4300
                                                                 (	  1.51)
Overweight                                                          -­‐0.04       4300
                                                                 (	  0.02)
Health	  Index                                                      	  0.04     4320
                                                                 (	  0.04)



                                                                                                  29
Appendix	  Table	  2:	  Difference-­‐in-­‐difference	  Analysis:	  Impact	  of	  BIC	  
                                                    Difference-­‐in-­‐
                                                     difference	  
                                                     Coefficient	  
                                                      Estimate	              N
                                                                       (1)   (2)
Year	  2
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)              28.17***             2459
                                                            (	  3.21)
Test	  Score	  Index                                               0.05   1504
                                                              (0.07)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                                	  0.08 2642
                                                            (	  0.22)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                             	  0.49*    1511
                                                            (	  0.27)
Year	  3
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)              24.83***             1679
                                                            (	  3.77)
Test	  Score	  Index                                            -­‐0.08   1248
                                                              (0.07)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                    	  1.17***          1790
                                                            (	  0.36)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                             	  1.42*     988
                                                            (	  0.74)
Pooled	  Outcomes:	  Years	  1,	  2	  and	  3
SBP	  Participation	  (%	  of	  days)              27.94***             3380
                                                            (	  2.28)
Test	  Score	  Index                                               0.01   2516
                                                              (0.04)
Attendance	  	  (%	  of	  days)                               -­‐0.00   3678
                                                            (	  0.23)
Tardiness	  	  (%	  of	  days)                         	  0.69**       2064
                                                            (	  0.29)
Note:	  Coefficients	  reported	  are	  for	  the	  interaction	  between	  treatment	  status	  and	  BIC	  
treatment	  pair.	  Standard	  errors	  (clustered	  at	  the	  school	  level)	  are	  in	  parentheses.	  All	  
regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  randomization-­‐pool	  fixed	  effects,	  randomly	  
assigned	  treatment	  status,	  and	  the	  following	  covariates:	  free	  and	  reduced	  lunch	  
eligibility,	  household	  income,	  race,	  single	  parent	  household,	  gender	  and	  age.	  Test	  
score	  regressions	  additionally	  control	  for	  baseline	  math	  and	  reading	  test	  z-­‐scores.




                                                                                                                                  30
