NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GRADIENTS OF POWER:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE HOUSING MARKET
Hanming Fang
Quanlin Gu
Li-An Zhou
Working Paper 20317
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20317

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We would like to thank Zhiwu Chen, Matthew Kahn, Shang-jin Wei, Wei Xiong and participants at
the NBER China Working Group Conference (Spring 2014) for useful discussions and comments.
We are responsible for all remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
Â© 2014 by Hanming Fang, Quanlin Gu, and Li-An Zhou. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including Â© notice, is given to the source.

The Gradients of Power: Evidence from the Chinese Housing Market
Hanming Fang, Quanlin Gu, and Li-An Zhou
NBER Working Paper No. 20317
July 2014
JEL No. D73,H1,O18
ABSTRACT
Using a large, unique dataset on the Chinese housing market, we propose to measure corruption using
the price differences paid by bureaucrat buyers and non-bureaucrat buyers in the housing market. We
find that the housing price paid by bureaucrat buyers is on average 1.05 percentage points lower than
non-bureaucrat buyers, after controlling for a full set of characteristics of buyers, houses and mortgage
loans. More interestingly, we find that the bureaucrat price discounts exhibit interesting gradients with
respect to their hierarchical ranks, the criticality of their government agencies to real estate developers,
and geography. We argue that the bureaucrat price discounts and the gradients of these discounts are
unlikely to be driven by alternative explanations, thus they are evidence of corruption and measures
of the market value of government power.

Hanming Fang
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
Quanlin Gu
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
CHINA
linng@gsm.pku.edu.cn

Li-An Zhou
Guanghua School of Management
Peking University
Beijing 100871
CHINA
zhoula@gsm.pku.edu.cn

1

Introduction
The discretionary power of government oÂ¢cials often puts them in a position to seek rents and engage

in other corrupt behavior, especially in developing and transition economies. Corruption may lead to
ineÂ¢cient resource allocations and impede growth (Murphy et al., 1993; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993; Mauro,
1995). There is a large literature in economics that attempts to measure corruption, investigate its causes
and consequences, and study policies to reduce it. Olken and Pande (2011) provide an excellent survey on
the recent advances in the literature regarding these questions.1
Due to its illicit and secretive nature, measuring corruption and its impact are often hindered by the
lack of reliable data (Bardhan, 1997). As a result, most empirical studies on corruption were based either
on self-reported bribery data or subjective cross-country corruption indices. For example, Svensson (2003)
measures corruption using surveys that ask rms how much they pay in bribes to bureaucrats; and crosscountry measures of corruption primarily rely on perception-based responses to survey questions about the
incidence of corruption from a large number of subjects across countries and over time (see, e.g., Mauro,
1995; Knack and Keefer, 1995; La Porta et al., 1999; and Treisman, 2000). While these types of datasets
are advantageous in that they are available for a large number of countries, their reliability has been
challenged on the grounds that peopleÂ’s perceptions about corruption could be seriously biased and it is
hard, if not impossible, to make cross-country comparisons since people from diÂ¤erent countries may have
very diÂ¤erent understandings of the subject of corruption (Rose-Ackerman, 1999; Olken, 2009).
Signi cant advances in the literature were achieved during the last decade regarding the measurement,
determinants and consequences of corruption using a variety of micro-level and objective evidence (see
Oklen and Pande, 2011, for a detailed review). One method is to estimate corruption by direct observation.
For example, McMillan and Zoido (2004) use records kept by a police chief in Peru on the bribes he paid
to judges, politicians and the news media, which became public after the fall of the Fujimori regime, to
estimate the cost of bribing various oÂ¢cials. Bertrand et al. (2007) and Olken and Barron (2009) measure
corruption via direct observations in the eld on bribery payments made by, respectively, drivers seeking
driving licences to oÂ¢cials and truck drivers to local police on their routes.
A second method to measure corruption is by Â“subtractionÂ” or Â“cross-checking.Â” For example, Reinikka
and Svensson (2004) use the Public Expenditure Tracking Survey to estimate the leakage of government
funds by comparing the amount of a special education block grant allocated from the central government
in Uganda with the amount of the block grant received by schools. They nd an initial rate of leakage of
87 percent, which fell to less than 20 percent after the release of an audit report. Fisman and Wei (2004)
1

See also survey papers by Svensson (2005) and Banerjee, Hanna, and Mullainathan (2009) for recent development in the

theoretical and empirical studies of corruption. Bardhan (1997) oÂ¤ers an earlier literature review on corruption and its impact
on development.

1

measure the extent of tax evasion by estimating the diÂ¤erence between Hong KongÂ’s reported exports and
ChinaÂ’s reported imports of the same products. They nd that higher-taxed products are associated with
a forty percent higher median evasion rate. Hsieh and Moretti (2006) try to detect corruption under the
Iraqi Oil for Food program administrated by the United Nations. They use the diÂ¤erence between the price
received by Iraq for its oil and the price of comparable oil in the world spot market to gauge the extent
of underpricing and corruption. Olken (2007) presents an estimate of the Â“missing expenditureÂ” on rural
road projects in Indonesia by examining the oÂ¢cially claimed amount of money spent on the road with
the cost estimates obtained from independent engineers. He nds that the diÂ¤erence accounts for about
24 percent of the total cost of the road.2
A third approach attempts to estimate the degree of corruption using market inference. For example,
Fisman (2001), in a seminal study, estimates the value of political connections to Indonesian President
Soeharto by measuring how much the prices of the shares of the rms Â“connectedÂ” to Soeharto moved
when he fell ill. The idea is that, if the eÂ¢cient market hypothesis holds, then the change in the stock
market value surrounding the event of SoehartoÂ’s illness captures the value of the political connection
to the rms.3 Also belonging to this approach are papers that use the equilibrium conditions in labor
markets or nancial markets. For example, Gorodnichenko and Peter (2007) develop a measure of bribery
by estimating gaps in the reported earnings and expenditures between the public and private sectors. Using
a household survey from Ukraine, they nd that, controlling for education, hours of work, job security,
fringe bene ts and other job characteristics, public sector workers received 24-32 percent less income than
their private sector counterparts, yet, they had the same level of consumption and assets. These ndings
suggest that a large part of the gap between public and private sector earnings is comprised of bribes.
Khwaja and Mian (2005) examine corruption by the politically connected rms in Pakistan by showing
how the political connectedness of a rm, as measured by whether its directors participate in elections,
aÂ¤ects the amount of loans it is able to obtain from the banks and the associated default rates. They
nd that politically connected rms borrow 45 percent more and have 50 percent higher default rates;
moreover, somewhat surprisingly, such preferential treatment exclusively involved government banks, and
private banks provided no such political favors.
In this paper, we attempt to measure corruption in the Chinese housing market. Our paper draws on
a large, unique dataset on housing mortgage loans from a leading commercial bank in China which has
about 15% market share in Chinese residential mortgage loans market in 2012. ChinaÂ’s housing market
oÂ¤ers a unique setting for studying corruption since it is notorious for the prevalence of corruption and
2

Other studies using the cross-checking approach include Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2003) who quantify corruption in

hospital procurements, and Olken (2006) and Antonossava et al. (2008) who both estimate corruption in food distribution
programs in developing countries.
3
Similar event studies using market inference include Faccio (2006) and Fisman et al. (2012).

2

rent-seeking activities, as a result of heavy state regulation of the real estate market.4 In every phase of
real estate development, from the initial land taking and auctions, to the approval of architectural designs,
to sales licenses, real estate developers need support from bureaucrats in various government agencies in
order to get favorable treatment. The discretionary power of the bureaucrats in these approval steps invites
rent-seeking and corruption, making ChinaÂ’s housing market an ideal context to quantify corruption.5
Our empirical methodology is in the spirit of the Â“market inferenceÂ” approach described above, particularly that of Gorodnichenko and Peter (2007). Speci cally, we measure the extent of corruption by
the diÂ¤erence in the unit price (per square meter) of the houses purchased by bureaucrat buyers relative
to those by otherwise identical non-bureaucrat buyers. Our empirical analysis starts by documenting two
interesting facts. First, despite the fact that bureaucrats on average earn lower incomes than other buyers
in the housing market, they are more likely to buy apartments in relatively more expensive apartment
complexes, and to buy larger apartments. Second, after controlling for a detailed set of characteristics of
buyers, apartments (including controls as detailed as the Â‡oor number, the apartment complex, and the
orientation of the apartment unit) and mortgage loans, we nd that bureaucrat buyers receive about a
1.05 percent discount in unit price relative to non-bureaucrat buyers in the same housing market.
We interpret the rst fact as suggestive evidence that bureaucrats are either more likely to receive
additional income sources apart from their wage earnings, which may or may not indicate corruption, or
as a result of receiving price discounts from real estate developers (second fact). We interpret the second
fact as suggestive evidence that the bureaucrat buyers receive price discounts as a form of bribery.
More interestingly, our data set contains information about the hierarchical ranks of bureaucrats and
the government agencies for which they work. This allows us to examine the gradients of the market value
of power measured by hierarchy, by criticality and by geography. We measure hierarchy by the rank of
the bureaucrat, criticality by the importance of the government agency to real estate development, and
geography by whether the bureaucrat works in the city where the housing transaction takes place. We nd
that bureaucrats working in the agencies critical for real estate development or having a higher ranking
in the oÂ¢cial hierarchy receive larger price discounts in their housing purchases. For instance, we nd
that bureaucrats from critical agencies receive a 2.48 percent price discount, while bureaucrats from other
agencies only obtain a 0.98 percent price discount. Bureaucrats working for provincial governments enjoy
an even higher price discount of approximately 3.9 percent, price discount.6 We nd that the eÂ¤ect of
4

According to China Statistical Yearbook (2013), the value-added of ChinaÂ’s real estate sector was 2.9 trillion RMB

(approximately 480 billion US dollars) in 2012, which accounted for 5.8 percent of ChinaÂ’s GDP in that year.
5
For example, Cai, Henderson and Zhang (2013) present strong evidence on corruption in ChinaÂ’s urban land auctions.
6
If we factor in the fact that bureaucrats working for provincial governments typically live in provincial capital cities
associated with relatively high housing prices, a 3.9 percent price discount implies an even larger amount of money than this
percentage indicates.

3

government power on price discounts decreases substantially when bureaucrats leave their jurisdictions
and buy houses in other jurisdictions. We also nd evidence that bureaucrats with lower rankings but in
critical agencies may enjoy larger price discounts than those with high rankings but not working in critical
agencies.
Compared with the existing literature measuring corruption, our study has several distinctive features.
First, our data contains information on mortgage loans in over 100 cities in China from 2004 to 2010 and
includes more than a million transactions. This allows us to assess corruption on a nationwide scale in a
highly important sector of the Chinese economy.
Second, to the best of our knowledge, our paper is the rst to show direct evidence of the hierarchical, critical and geographical gradients of the market value of bureaucratic power; moreover, we employ
diÂ¤erences in these power gradients to interpret price discounts as a measure of corruption.
The most serious challenge to the cross-checking approach to measuring corruption is the diÂ¢culty in
attributing the observed diÂ¤erences to corruption. As emphasized in a review article by Banerjee et al.
(2009), in many cases it is diÂ¢cult to tell whether the missing resources observed in the data are actually
corruption or simply mismeasurement of the indicators or even just a sign of bureaucrat incompetence.
Our rich dataset allows us to tackle this issue in a number of ways. We try to control for a full set of
characteristics to capture the heterogeneity in house location and other attributes (down to Â‡oor level and
window orientation) as well as buyersÂ’ and loan characteristics. More importantly, we diÂ¤erentiate the
eÂ¤ects of power on price discounts by criticality of agencies, hierarchical ranks and geographical locations.
Our empirical ndings are consistent with our hypotheses on the diÂ¤erential values of power in the housing
market, varying with rank, level, and jurisdiction of power. We also nd collaborative correlations between
our measure of corruption (i.e. price discounts received by bureaucrats) and other variables, in particular
the Entertainment and Travel Costs (ETC) measure of corruption proposed by Cai, Fang and Xu (2011).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the institutional background
of ChinaÂ’s housing market and the potential involvement of bureaucrats; in Section 3 we develop several
testable hypotheses regarding the gradients of power as a measure of corruption in the housing market;
in Section 4 we provide details of our data set and descriptive statistics; in Section 5 we present our
main empirical results; in Section 6 we discuss and cast doubt on several key alternative explanations for
our empirical ndings; in Section 7 we present collaborative evidence in support of our interpretation of
bureaucrat price discounts as a measure of corruption; and in section 8 we conclude.

4

2

Institutional Background

2.1

ChinaÂ’s Housing Market

Until 1994, Chinese urban households lived in the apartments allocated by either the government or their
work units (such as state-owned enterprises), and there was no commercial housing market. Housing reform
was initiated in 1994 when employees in the state sector were allowed to purchase full or partial property
rights to their current apartment units at subsidized prices. Nascent housing markets emerged in some
large cities in the early 1990s, and they started to grow rapidly from 1998 when the central government
completely abolished the traditional model of housing allocation as in-kind bene ts and privatized the
housing property of all urban residents. Also in 1998, in an important impetus to the development of a
private housing market, ChinaÂ’s central bank, the PeopleÂ’s Bank of China (PBC), outlined the procedures
for house purchasers to obtain residential mortgages at subsidized interest rates.
According to a report published by the PeopleÂ’s Bank of China in 2013, nancial institutions made a
total of 8.1 trillion RMB in mortgage loans in 2012, accounting for 16 percent of all bank loans in that year.
In the residential housing mortgage market, ChinaÂ’s four state-owned commercial banks take a dominant
position with a total market share of over 60 percent.7
In order to be eligible for mortgage loans, the applicants are required to meet a set of conditions, such
as stable income Â‡ows, age ranging between 18 and 60, good credit records, and a down payment of no less
than 20 or 30 percent of the purchase price of the house. To substantiate a stable income Â‡ow, applicants
must provide proof for their monthly income certi ed by their employers and supported by their bank
payment records. The minimum down-payment ratio has varied substantially over time, as it is subject
to the PBC regulation and is often used as a policy instrument to address volatile housing prices. The
maximum maturity of mortgage loans is 30 years. In 2004, China Banking Commission released guidelines
for the risk management of mortgage loans for commercial banks which stipulate that the monthly mortgage
payment to income ratio of borrowers should be no higher than 50 percent. The interest rates of mortgage
loans are set by the PBC and are adjustable; if the PBC changes the baseline interest rate, the loan interest
rate will be adjusted accordingly. Fixed interest rate mortgages are rarely seen in the market.
The contractual relationship between the mortgage borrowers (the home buyers) and the banks is
typically mediated by real estate developers. When an individual decides to buy an apartment in a certain
complex, he or she will sign mortgage contracts with a commercial bank designated by the real estate
developer of the complex. It is very rare for buyers to choose a commercial bank diÂ¤erent from the
one designated by the developer for two reasons. First, real estate developers need sizable loans from
7

They are: Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), China Construction Bank (CCB), Bank of China (BOC),

and Agricultural Bank of China (ABC).

5

a commercial bank to construct houses. To avoid potential risks, commercial banks will conduct due
diligence to check the real estate developerÂ’s quali cations and home construction plans before entering
collaboration with them. Commercial banks make use of their strong bargaining power in lending to ask
for a bundling of future mortgage loans and construction loans. Second, due to heavy state regulation in
the mortgage market, there is limited room for product diÂ¤erentiation, and mortgage contracts oÂ¤ered by
commercial banks are highly homogenous. Therefore, home buyers as borrowers lack incentives to look for
better mortgage deals when there is one already oÂ¤ered through the mediation of the real estate developer.
Home buyersÂ’ lack of free choice of commercial banks facilitates our empirical analysis because once the
xed eÂ¤ects of complexes are controlled for, we do not need to worry about the endogenous matching of
commercial banks and housing buyers, which could lead to potential concerns about the endogeneity of
observed mortgage loans.
Prior to October 2010, individuals from other regions of China were as eligible for mortgage loans as local
residents. During the past decade, rapidly rising housing prices in ChinaÂ’s rst-tier cities have attracted
many buyers from other areas in the country. However, this trend came to an abrupt halt in October
2010 when the Chinese central government started to impose a house quota (up to 2 apartments) for each
household with a local household registration (i.e., local Hukou), and prohibited residents without a local
household registration from buying local houses. Other rst-tier cities, such as Shanghai, Guangzhou, and
Shenzhen quickly followed suit and established similar restrictions on housing purchases. Many second-tier
cities, such as Hangzhou and Qingdao, have also formulated since late 2010 new policies to cool down
speculative investment in the housing market.

2.2

Bureaucrats in ChinaÂ’s Housing Market

Chinese bureaucrats are important players in the housing market. On the one hand, bureaucrats like
to use bribery income to invest in the housing market in order to maximize their returns on investment.
ChinaÂ’s strong economic growth and massive urbanization during the past decade have resulted in rapidly
increasing housing prices, generating handsome returns on housing investments. Encouraged by the booming prospects in the housing market, most Chinese bureaucrats regard real estate property as the most
lucrative investment channel. The absolute majority of bureaucrats charged with corruption are reported
to own multiple houses in big cities in China, sometimes even dozens of houses.8 On the other hand,
the power held by bureaucrats is critical for real estate developers to get projects done. In China, the
design, construction and sale of houses is subject to regulation by the state. During this process, real
estate developers have to go through numerous government agencies for approval and each government
8

A recent well-known corruption case involved a bureaucrat in the housing administration bureau in Guangdong who owned

over 49 houses around the country. He was dubbed as Â“Uncle HouseÂ” by the Chinese news media.

6

agency has veto power to delay or prevent the progress of a housing development project. The formal
conversion of agricultural land into urban construction land is the rst step requiring government approval
and support, followed by a government review process regarding architectural design, land use planning,
and housing construction. The market value of power is reÂ‡ected not only in the bribes bureaucrats may
receive from real estate developers, but also in the price discounts oÂ¤ered to bureaucrats when buying a
house. One of the attractions of price discounts is their ability to better circumvent corruption charges,
compared with collecting money up-front from the real estate developers. As will be shown in Section 4,
bureaucrats receive signi cant price discounts compared with other buyers in the housing market.

3

Hypotheses on the Gradients of Power in the Housing Market
State regulation naturally gives rise to rent-seeking activities. The real estate sector in China has

been heavily regulated by the state. In order to get the oÂ¢cial approvals, obtain lower land prices or
favorable Â‡oor area ratios, or simply to speed up the approval process, building good connections with
bureaucrats and even bribing them is critical for real estate developers. More often than not, real estate
developers either seek or return favors from bureaucrats by granting signi cant price discounts for their
housing purchases. This leads to our rst testable hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: (Discounts for Bureaucrats) All else being equal, bureaucrat buyers will pay a lower
price than non-bureaucrat buyers for the same house.
While government power conveys market value to its holders due to weak constraints on the discretionary use of power, the market value of power (i.e. the private gains the power can generate) hinges on
the hierarchical rankings, territory levels, and criticality of the agencies the power is associated with. A
higher hierarchical ranking means more decision-making authority, so we would expect to see higher-ranked
bureaucrats obtain more rents from their positions than those with lower rankings. In China, the territory
level of government the bureaucrat is aÂ¢liated with is an important dimension of power. Typically the
administration of a higher territorial level will be responsible for more important approval procedures.
For example, land taking and conversion is usually subject to approval by higher-level territorial governments (e.g. provincial governments). The territory level of government invoked in the approval of an
investment project increases with the size of the investment. In addition, some government agencies are
more important than others from the viewpoint of real estate developers. For real estate developers, the
relatively important agencies include the development and reform committee, the housing administration
bureau, the land administration bureau, and the construction planning bureau. These government agencies
regulate critical matters related to land conversion, architectural design, land use planning, and housing
construction and sales. This observation leads to the following testable hypothesis:

7

Hypothesis 2: (Hierarchical Gradient) All else being equal, bureaucrats with higher rankings will
pay a lower price than bureaucrats with lower rankings.
As a famous traditional Chinese saying goes, it is not the person in authority, but the person directly
in charge, who has real power. The idea behind this old saying is that due to asymmetric information, the
person in authority may not be able to monitor the behavior of his or her subordinates such that the person
directly in charge is able to enjoy a signi cant degree of discretion. Either discretion or command over local
information enables the person directly in charge to capture his or her clients. Applying this logic to our
analysis of the housing market implies that some low-ranking bureaucrats in critical agencies could hold
control over key procedures or policy details, making them more powerful in practice than his/her rank
may imply. In other words, hierarchical rankings are not the only determinant of the rents from power;
the relative importance of agencies matters a lot as well. Although some bureaucrats have relatively low
hierarchical rankings, if they work in Â“criticalÂ” agencies they may be more valuable in the housing market
than others with relatively higher rankings but not working in critical agencies.
Hypothesis 3: (Critical Gradient) All else being equal, bureaucrats from agencies critical to real
estate developers will pay a lower price than bureaucrats from less critical agencies.
It is possible that bureaucrats with lower rankings but from critical agencies may receive greater price
discounts than bureaucrats with higher rankings but who are from non-critical agencies.
Any power has its boundaries of inÂ‡uence. A government bureau leader may seem powerful in the eyes of
real estate developers in the jurisdiction over which that bureaucrat exercises decision-making power, but for
developers doing business in other jurisdictions, this individual may not be that important. This suggests
that the eÂ¤ect of power on rent-seeking depends greatly upon geographical distance or jurisdictional scope.
However, going out of a given jurisdiction may not make bureaucrats lose their inÂ‡uence on businesspeople
completely, since they may have some ties with bureaucrats in other jurisdictions. However, while these
indirect connections still yield some bene ts to bureaucrats beyond their power areas, typically they are
not as strong. The natural implication derived from this discussion yields the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4: (Geographical Gradient) The price discount bureaucrats receive decreases outside
their jurisdictions of authority; the farther away from their jurisdiction, the less the price discount they
will receive, if any.

4

Data and Descriptive Statistics
The data used in this paper are compiled from mortgage contracts provided by a large commercial bank

in China that accounts for about 15 percent of the mortgage loan market in China as of 2012.9 Restricting
9

We do not release the name of the commercial bank for reasons of con dentiality.

8

the sample to mortgages for new, residential properties yields over 1 million mortgage loan contracts
dating from the rst quarter of 2004 to the fourth quarter of 2010. As mentioned above, the housing
rationing policy initiated in rst and second tier cities in October 2010 stipulated that only households
with local household registration are eligible to buy a maximum of two apartments. In order to avoid the
confounding eÂ¤ect of quota-induced distortions, we end our data sample in the fourth quarter of 2010. A
typical mortgage contract contains detailed information on the personal characteristics of housing buyers
(e.g. age, gender, marital status, income, employer, education, occupation, and region and address of
residence), housing price and size, apartment-level characteristics (e.g. complex location, Â‡oor level, and
room number), as well as loan-level characteristics (e.g. maturity, loan to value ratio, and down-payment).
Our data also contain information on the hierarchical levels and job title of the buyers and their employers.
For the purposes of our analysis, we exclude mortgages in the following cases from our data sample:
(1) mansions; (2) employer- nanced housing construction; and (3) instances when employees from given
employer (including government agencies) band together to obtain group price discounts from the real
estate developers; and (4) instances where the number of transactions in a complex is less than 5.10 After
deleting these observations, we end up with a sample of 1,005,960 observations.
[Table 1 About Here]
Table 1 presents summary statistics for the key variables used in our analysis. The average housing
price in our sample period is 3,765.3 RMB per square meter with a large variation (the standard deviation
is 3,196 RMB). Table 1 also shows that among housing buyers, 33 percent are females, 69 percent are
married, 20 percent have college degrees, and the average age is around 35. The monthly income of home
buyers is close to 6,000 RMB, but with a huge variation (the standard deviation is 10,179 RMB). In our
sample, 85 percent of the purchases are made by buyers within their current city of residence, 13 percent
are in other cities in the same province, and only 1.8 percent of transactions are in cities outside of the
buyerÂ’s home province. The average size of apartments purchased in our sample is 113.2 square meters,
which corresponds to a three-bedroom apartment. The average mortgage loan maturity is 188.5 months,
and the loan to value (LTV) ratio averages 64.8 percent.
[Figure 1 About Here]
We de ne housing buyers whose employer belongs to an administrative agency of the government as
bureaucrats. This de nition of bureaucrats does not include individuals who work in the so-called Â“public
institutionsÂ” which may be aÂ¢liated with government agencies but which do not perform administrative
10

We will do robustness checks in Section 5.4 by changing the threshold number of transactions in a complex.

9

functions.11 In our sample, bureaucrats account for 7.1 percent of buyers, which is much higher than the
proportion of bureaucrats in the total population of China.12 During 2004-2010, we see a clear trend of
the increasing presence of bureaucrats in the housing market, as shown in Figure 1. In 2004, only about 3
percent of the home buyers in our sample were bureaucrats. This share rose to about 11 percent in the rst
quarter of 2009, and has since remained steady at about 8-9 percent. In addition, about 4 percent of the
sample of bureaucrats have Ke or higher rank. Ke refers to a hierarchical ranking which is equivalent to
a bureau chief in a county-level government, or a section chief in a prefecture-city level bureau. We de ne
this group of bureaucrats as Â“bureaucrats in high rank Â” in the subsequent analysis. In order to examine
the diÂ¤erential eÂ¤ect of power, we distinguish some Â“critical Â” government agencies from others from the
viewpoint of real estate developers. We denote bureaus such as the development and reform committee,
housing administration, land administration, and construction planning as Â“critical agenciesÂ”. As described
in Section 2, bureaucrats in these agencies hold critical authority to decide whether to approve the real
estate developersÂ’ applications and under what terms. In our sample, about 6 percent of bureaucrats come
from these critical agencies. Table 1 also shows that about 1 percent of bureaucrats work in the provincial
government. Provincial bureaucrats show up in our data either because they purchase houses in provincial
capitals where provincial governments are located or because they purchase houses elsewhere.
[Figure 2 About Here]
We are interested in the price diÂ¤erences of the homes purchased by bureaucrats compared with other
buyers in the housing market. Figure 2 shows the time trend of the percentage diÂ¤erences in the average
housing prices per square meter for bureaucrat and non-bureaucrat buyers from 2004 to 2010. We nd
that the average price diÂ¤erences between bureaucrat and non-bureaucrat buyers Â‡uctuated between 3
percent and 9 percent over time, and averaged about 6 percent. To put a 6 percent price discount in
perspective, suppose a government oÂ¢cial wants to buy an Â“averageÂ” apartment with a size of 113 square
meters, and the market price is 3,765 RMB per square meter. A 6 percent price discount saves a bureaucrat
buyer about 25,536 RMB in purchase price. This is approximately equivalent to one year of salary for
government employees in most regions in China. Of course, in Figure 2 the price diÂ¤erences are constructed
only controlling for the year of the transaction. Thus they are likely confounded by potential diÂ¤erences
in the characteristics of houses (e.g. complex location) and other characteristics of the buyer and loans.
In our analysis in Section 5 we will control for these diÂ¤erences.
11

Public institutions in China mainly engage in commercial business (e.g. product quality examination centers) and social

services (e.g. university and research institutions). Employees in public institutions do not hold administrative power which
is critical for private rms to conduct business, and they are not regarded as Â“civil servantsÂ” in ChinaÂ’s social welfare system.
12
According to Zhou (2009), the bureaucrats in the administrative branch of government accounted for approximately 0.86
percent of the total population during 1989-2006.

10

[Table 2 About Here]
Table 2 presents the average housing prices per square meter by power status (hierarchy and rank) and
by geography (located in city of residence, in other cities in the home province, and in other provinces).
The average housing prices calculated here do not adjust for any diÂ¤erences in housing characteristics.
For the housing purchased within a buyerÂ’s city of residence, bureaucrats paid 3,659 RMB per square
meter, in contrast to the average price of 3,789 RMB per square meter for all buyers. The average price
per square meter for bureaucrat buyers from critical government agencies is even lower at 3,458 RMB.
Without controlling for other characteristics of the housing and loans, we

nd that bureaucrats with

higher rankings pay about 3650 RMB per square meter, not so diÂ¤erent from the average price for all
bureaucrats; and bureaucrats from provincial governments on average pays 5477 RMB per square meter,
much higher than the average price for all buyers. Of course, this is due to the fact that bureaucrats
with higher ranks or in provincial governments are more likely concentrated in provincial capitals which
generally have a higher housing price than other cities in the same province. This observation highlights the
necessity of controlling for city xed eÂ¤ects in our subsequent analysis in order to examine the diÂ¤erential
eÂ¤ect of hierarchical rankings and territorial levels. Table 2 also shows that if bureaucrats purchase houses
in cities outside of their registered city of residence, they still enjoy some price discounts, including when
they go out to other provinces. In this case, bureaucrats from critical agencies also enjoy higher discounts
than those from other agencies not critical to real estate development.
[Tables 3-4 About Here]
Table 3 summarizes the results from a series of regressions with the dependent variables being respectively, log area (Column 1), LTV (Column 2), log loan maturity (Column 3), log monthly income (Column
4) and relative complex price (Column 5), on bureaucrat dummy, or critical and non-critical agency dummies, high- or low-rank dummies, provincial- or lower level-government dummies, and other variables such
as gender, marital status, age, age squared, complex location, etc. (See Table 3 for details). The omitted category is non-bureaucrat buyers. We report the coeÂ¢cients of the respective dummies related to
bureaucrat status. The coeÂ¢cient estimates reveal two interesting patterns:
 Bureaucrat buyers tend to buy larger apartments, have a lower LTV ratio, a somewhat longer loan
maturity, and buy into more expensive apartment complexes.
 Bureaucrats tend to have lower (about 14%) monthly income than other buyers in the market.
Similar patterns are also shown in Table 4 where we report the Probit regression results of the dummy
variable of whether the buyer is a bureaucrat on a set of covariates. In Column 3 where we list most
11

of the controls, we nd that bureaucrat dummy is positively correlated with more expensive apartment
complexes, larger apartment size, lower LTC, longer loan maturity, and lower monthly income.
There are two possibly complementary explanations for why bureaucrats can aÂ¤ord to buy houses in
more expensive locations and with larger sizes despite their relatively lower incomes. The rst is that
bureaucrats receive other sources of income in addition to their regular income (e.g., grey income from
bribery or other activities). The second explanation, which we explore further below, is that bureaucrats
actually pay lower prices than other buyers for the same apartment. Notice that the rst explanation
reÂ‡ects the cumulative eÂ¤ect of the power of being a bureaucrat, including potential in-kind bene ts that
bureaucrats receive compared with non-bureaucrats, and potential bribes. This is consistent with the
ndings in Gorodnichenko and Peter (2007) who show that public sector employees receive 24-32 percent
less wages than their counterparts in the private sector, but that they enjoy essentially identical level of
consumption expenditures and asset holdings, indicating the presence of non-reported compensation in the
public sector. In contrast, the second explanation is a measure of the value of the power in the particular
housing transaction. Our data does not permit us to examine the rst eÂ¤ect.

5

Empirical Analysis of the EÂ¤ect of Power on Housing Prices

5.1

Econometric Speci cation

In this section, we examine the eÂ¤ects of government power on the purchase price of apartments (per
square meter). We will rst look at the overall eÂ¤ect of being bureaucrats on housing prices, then we will
investigate separately how the hierarchical rank and territory level of government power aÂ¤ects the price
discounts bureaucrats enjoy, and how the eÂ¤ect of government power varies with geographical distance
from the region of residence.
We will estimate the following model with OLS:
|lmw @

. Bureaucratlmw . [lmw Âƒ .  m . xw . lmw

(1)

where |lmw denotes the logarithm of apartment price per square meter in transaction l in complex location m
at time of purchase w; Bureaucratlmw is a dummy variable indicating whether the buyer of the transaction is
a government oÂ¢cial according to our de nition, and [lmw denotes a vector of controls for the characteristics
of buyers, apartments and mortgage loans involved in the transaction. One of the serious challenges in
estimating the determinants of housing price is the considerable heterogeneity of apartments. Apartments
diÂ¤er in locations, Â‡oor level, window orientation, and time of construction, and prices respond to all of
these characteristics. In order to address concerns about the eÂ¤ect of housing heterogeneity on prices, we
control for a set of xed eÂ¤ects including complex location ( m )and transaction time in months (xw ), as
12

well as city of residence of buyers. In ChinaÂ’s housing market, buyers are not only sensitive to complex
locations, but also Â‡oor levels and apartment orientation, so housing prices vary signi cantly across these
attributes. In the following regressions, besides controlling for complex-level xed eÂ¤ects, we also control
for Â‡oor level and room number of the apartment.13
We can reasonably assume that bureaucrats are price takers in the housing market, so we do not
need to worry about the reverse causality from the decisions of bureaucrats to housing prices. However,
bureaucrats may endogenously choose to purchase apartments in certain complex locations, due to some
unobserved heterogeneity of apartment characteristics, which will bias our estimation. Therefore, a full set
of controls for the characteristics of buyers as well as apartments (e.g. purchase time, complex location,
Â‡oor level, and room number) enables us to capture the eÂ¤ects of unobserved heterogeneity in apartments
which may confound our estimation.

5.2

Baseline Results: Price Discount for Bureaucrats

Table 5 reports OLS regression results with the logarithm of apartment prices per square meter as the
dependent variable. The number of observations is over 1 million. We report results from four speci cations
with diÂ¤erent sets of controls. In Column 1, we only include a dummy for bureaucrat. We nd that, without
any additional controls, bureaucrat buyers pay about 3.72 percent less than non-bureaucrat buyers for their
apartment purchases. Notice that the diÂ¤erence between the 6 percent average bureaucrat discount we
calculated in Figure 2 and the 3.72 percent discount reported in Column 1 is driven by the fact that
complex location and month of transactions are controlled for in the calculation for Figure 2 but not in
Column 1.
[Table 5 About Here]
In Columns 2-4, we add more controls for the characteristics of apartment and loans. In each of these
speci cations, we include controls for complex location, purchasing time (month), building number, Â‡oor
level, last digit of room number, and whether the property is in the buyerÂ’s home province. The three
speci cations diÂ¤er with regard to the other controls for the buyer, apartment and loan characteristics.
With these ner controls, the U2 is above 90 percent for all remaining three speci cations.
Column 2 reports the estimated coeÂ¢cient on bureaucrats only controlling for the common set of
apartment controls listed above, but not controlling for apartment area and its squared term, and the
characteristics of buyers and mortgage loans. We

nd that bureaucrats enjoy a 0.7 percent of price

discount compared to other non-bureaucrat buyers, and this diÂ¤erence is signi cant at the 1 percent level.
13

The room number of the apartment is often associated with whether an apartment faces the south or the north and how

much of sunshine the apartment can be exposed to the.

13

For the speci cation in column 3 we add apartment area and its squared term, loan maturity (log), and
loan to value to the regression in Column 2. The price discount of bureaucrats increases to 0.88 percent
and is still statistically signi cant at the 1 percent level. In Column 4, we additionally control for buyersÂ’
personal characteristics, including gender, marital status, college education, age, age squared and monthly
income (log). The price discount subsequently increases further to 1.05 percent (see Column 4), and it
remains statistically signi cant at the 1 percent level. These results suggest that government power does
convey signi cant rents to its holders, which strongly supports Hypothesis 1. It is important to note that in
each regression we have controlled for a full set of complex and apartment characteristics and exclude the
observations involving group purchases. Therefore, the signi cant price discounts enjoyed by bureaucrats
are unlikely driven by the alternative story that bureaucrats tend to choose apartments with undesirable
complex locations or undesirable buildings within a complex.
Table 5 also reveals some interesting results regarding other determinants of housing prices in ChinaÂ’s
housing market. Apartment prices have a X -shaped relation with apartment area, with the minimum
price hitting at an area of 81 and 84 square meters, based on the estimates in Column 3 and Column
4 respectively. Higher prices are associated with a longer loan maturity and a lower loan to value ratio.
Married couples and higher-educated buyers tend to pay more for their apartments, possibly because they
face higher search costs.14 Age also has a X -shaped relation with apartment prices with the minimum at
the age of 23.

5.3

The Gradients of Power

So far we have established that bureaucrat buyers pay about 1 percent less than non-bureaucrat buyers
for Â“identical apartmentsÂ” (to the extent that we have suÂ¢ciently controlled for the characteristics of the
apartments). This is consistent with Hypothesis 1 in Section 3. We now use the rich information about
the hierarchical rank, criticality of the government agency and the geographical location of a bureaucratÂ’s
power and the housing transaction to test Hypotheses 2-4 in Section 3.
5.3.1

Hierarchical and Critical Gradients

Hypotheses 2 and 3 state that, all else being equal, bureaucrats with higher rankings or territorial
levels, and who work in critical government agencies (for real estate developers), will enjoy larger price
discounts in the housing market. We refer to this as the hierarchical and critical gradients of power. Table
6 provides estimation results that support the two hypotheses. Here we diÂ¤erentiate power rank and levels
in three ways. First we compare bureaucrats in Â“criticalÂ” agencies with those in non-critical agencies. As
mentioned before, connections with bureaucrats in critical agencies are vital for real estate developers. We
14

We discuss the possibility of search costs in explaining the ndings in Section 6.

14

expect bureaucrats from these agencies would get more rents from real estate developers than those from
non-critical government agencies. Second, we distinguish bureaucrats by their hierarchical ranks, whether
they have Ke or above rank. Third, we diÂ¤erentiate the territory levels of the bureaucrats by whether they
work in provincial governments or lower-level governments.
[Table 6 About Here]
Table 6 reports regression results showing the eÂ¤ects of diÂ¤erential government power on housing
prices. In each regression reported in Table 5, we have controlled for a full set of characteristics of buyers,
apartments and mortgage loans as speci ed in Column 4 in Table 5. In Column 1, we nd that bureaucrats
from critical agencies receive a 2.48 percent price discount compared with non-bureaucrats, while those
from non-critical agencies only enjoy a 0.97 percent price discount. In Column 2, we nd that the ranking of
the bureaucrats also makes a signi cant diÂ¤erence in the price discounts they receive: bureaucrats with Ke
or higher ranking pay 1.38 percent less than non-bureaucrats, while bureaucrat buyers with lower ranking
receive a 1.03 lower percent price discount.
In Column 3, we show that bureaucrats working in provincial governments receives a 3.90 percent
price discount relative to non-bureaucrat buyers, which is substantially higher than the 1 percent price
discount received by bureaucrats working in lower-level governments. These results lend strong support to
the notion that the distribution of power to collect rents largely hinges upon the hierarchical ranking/level
of the associated government agency and its criticality to the real estate sector.
The estimates in Columns 1 and 2 show that bureaucrats from critical agencies receive a much higher
price discount in the housing market than those with higher rankings. One may argue that this result may
be driven by the possibility that the bureaucrats in critical agencies may primarily have high rankings, so
we do not know whether the larger price discount associated with critical agencies is caused by the agenciesÂ’
criticality or higher rankings. In order to see more clearly the diÂ¤erential eÂ¤ects of agency criticality vs.
hierarchical rankings, we divide bureaucrats into four categories: (a) those in critical agencies with high
ranking; (b) those in critical agencies with low ranking; (3) those in non-critical agencies with high ranking;
and (4) those in non-critical agencies with low ranking.
Column (4) in Table 6 reports the results for price discounts received by these four types of bureaucrats
relative to non-bureaucrat buyers. We can see a very interesting result: while high ranking always conveys
larger price discounts for bureaucrats given the criticality of agencies for which they work, low ranking
bureaucrats in critical agencies enjoy a price discount doubles that received by bureaucrats from noncritical agencies with high ranking. This nding con rms Hypothesis 3 and provides solid evidence for
the importance of the criticality of the government agency relative to hierarchical rank. Bureaucrats who
have relatively higher rankings but are not from agencies critical to real estate developers may appear less
15

powerful than those with low rankings but who are from critical agencies.
The signi cant diÂ¤erence in price discounts for diÂ¤erent hierarchical rank and agency criticality also
helps address the previous concern that the eÂ¤ect of government power on housing prices is actually driven
by bureaucratsÂ’ self-selection of cheaper apartments or unfavorable complex location. It is diÂ¢cult for this
explanation to account for why bureaucrats in critical agencies or with higher ranking are more likely to
buy cheaper apartments than those who are either from non-critical agencies or lower ranking.
5.3.2

Geographical Gradient

Hypothesis 4 predicts that the price discount bureaucrat buyers receive depends on the jurisdiction
of their power, and it will decrease with the distance away from its jurisdiction. We refer to this as the
geographical gradient of power. To introduce the measure of geographical distance, we rely on reported
information about the buyersÂ’ city of residence and the city of the housing transaction to judge whether
buyers purchase houses outside of their resident cities.15
[Table 7 About Here]
Table 7 provides regression results for the geographical gradient of power. For each regression, we have
the same set of controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. Column 1 shows that buyers pay 0.74 percent higher
price for properties in cities elsewhere in their home province than in their resident cities. If they purchase
outside of their home province, they face even higher prices (an approximately 1.72 percent price premium)
than buying in their resident city. Bureaucrat buyers, however, still receive a 1.07 percent price discount
on average compared to non-bureaucrat buyers.
In Column 2, we add the interactions of the bureaucrat dummy and the indicators for whether the
purchase is in other cities of the home province; in Column 3, we add the interactions of the bureaucrat
dummy and the indicators for whether the purchase is in other provinces; and in Column 4 we include
both interactions. The results provide strong evidence consistent with Hypothesis 4. For example, Column
2 shows that bureaucrat buyers receive a 1.24 percent price discount in their resident cities compared to
non-bureaucrat buyers, but their price discount decreases to 0.36 percent (3=3457 à¸€ 3=33;; @ 3=3369) if
they purchase houses in other cities within their home province. Column 3 shows that bureaucrat buyers
receive a 1.08 percent price discount in their home province compared to non-bureaucrat buyers, but the
price discount is reduced to 0.13 percent (3=343; à¸€ 3=3<6 @ 3=348) if they buy houses outside their home
province. All these results are statistically signi cant at the conventional levels.
15

This rule is especially accurate for bureaucrats since they usually live in the city where their government agencies are

located.

16

In Column 4 when we include both interaction terms, we nd that the price discount for bureaucrat
buyers is 1.26 percent in their resident cities, but it declines to 0.35 percent (3=3459 à¸€ 3=33<4 @ 3=3368) in
other cities of the home province, and the price discount for bureaucrats further decreases to 0.15 percent
(3=3459 à¸€ 3=3444 @ 3=3348) when they purchase houses outside of their home province. This evidence
strongly suggests that the inÂ‡uence of power has a very clear jurisdictional boundary: if bureaucrats
move beyond their jurisdictions, the market value of their government power has to be discounted, and it
continuously decreases as they move from their home city to home province to other provinces. This result
accords exactly with the prediction of Hypothesis 4, oÂ¤ering strong supporting evidence. Interestingly,
Table 7 also shows that even when bureaucrats move outside their home provinces, the market value of
their power does not disappear completely. This result indicates that bureaucrats may make use of their
nationwide networks to extend the inÂ‡uence of their power across jurisdictions.
5.3.3

Interactions of Hierarchical, Critical and Geographical Gradients

So far we have found strong evidence for the bureaucrat discount in Table 5, and we have also established
strong evidence for the hierarchical and critical gradients of power in Table 6, as well as the geographical
gradient of power in Table 7. In Tables 8 and 9, we investigate the interactions between the hierarchical,
critical and geographical dimensions of power and see how the eÂ¤ects of jurisdictional boundaries on rents
derived from the government power diÂ¤er by agencies and ranking.
[Table 8 About Here]
Table 8 focuses on the interactions of the geographical and critical dimensions of bureaucratsÂ’ power.
Column 1 shows that, even after controlling for whether the house purchase is in other cities in the home
province, or whether it is outside of the home province, bureaucrats in critical agencies receive a 2.52
percent price discount while those from non-critical agencies receive a 0.99 percent price discount. This
con rms the nding in Table 6 where we did not control for whether the house purchase was in other cities
in the home province or outside of home province.
The more interesting nding emerges in Columns 2-4. It shows that if bureaucrats purchase houses
outside of their resident city but still within their home province, the value of their power decreases,
but the magnitude of the decrease in the price discount depends on the criticality of the bureaucratÂ’s
government agency. For bureaucrats from critical agencies, if they purchase houses outside their resident
city in their home province, the decrease in the price discounts they receive (or the value of their power) is
marginally statistically signi cant or insigni cant. This suggests that they enjoy almost the same amount
of price discounts even when they move out of their home jurisdictions. In contrast, when bureaucrats
in non-critical agencies make purchases outside their resident city, either within or across provinces, the
17

price discounts they receive are reduced signi cantly by 0.89-1.06 percentage points, and the declines are
statistically signi cant. Although bureaucrats in non-critical agencies still receive some amount of price
discounts even when they go beyond their own cities to buy houses, just as bureaucrats from critical
agencies do, the diÂ¤erence between these two sets of bureaucrats is quite remarkable. Column (4) puts
all the interactions terms together, and results remain quantitatively the same. This robust, interesting
nding highlights the diÂ¤erential market value of power derived from diÂ¤erent government agencies, not
only along the critical dimension but also in its interaction with jurisdictional boundaries.
[Table 9 About Here]
Table 9 examines the interaction between the hierarchical and geographical dimensions of power. Column 1 shows that bureaucrats with Ke or higher rankings receive a 1.42 percent discount, while those
with lower rankings receive a 1.05 percent discount, relative to non-bureaucrat buyers. However, Column
2 shows that both see their discounts decline substantially when they purchase in other cities in their home
province. Bureaucrats with high rankings receive a 1.99 percent discount in their resident cities, but the
discount declines by 1.79 percentage points when they purchase in other cities in their home province.
Conversely bureaucrats with lower rankings enjoy a smaller discount in their resident cities, but surprisingly, their discount declines less than the higher-ranked bureaucrats when they purchase in other cities
in their home province. Similar results hold in Column 4 when we introduce the interactions between the
ranking of the bureaucrats and the indicators for whether the transaction is in other cities in the home
province, or in other provinces. This empirical result again suggests the localized nature of the market
value of power, as highlighted by the results in Tables 7 and 8: even if high rankings pay oÂ¤ in the housing
market in terms of receiving higher price discounts, these bene ts decline quickly when moving outside of
the bureaucratsÂ’ jurisdiction of power.16

5.4

Robustness Checks: DiÂ¤erent Sample Section Criterion

In the previous analysis, the analyses were conducted on a sample of housing transactions involving
apartment complexes only if each complex has at least 5 transactions. We now show that our qualitative
results are completely robust to an alternative threshold number of at least 10 transactions for the complex
to be included in our analysis sample. Of course, the sample size is now slightly smaller (965,996 instead
of 1,005,960). The regression results are reported in Panel Â“Sub-sample IÂ” in Table 10A. These regressions
have the same set of controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. The main results, reported in Column 2, are
16

A similar analysis can be done for bureaucrats from provincial governments buying houses elsewhere. However, the number

of bureaucrats at the provincial governments buying houses in other cities either within or across provinces is too small (less
than 100 in each case) to have enough statistical power to do the regression analysis.

18

quantitatively similar to our previous ndings. Bureaucrats receive a 1.29 percent price discount relative
to non-bureaucrat buyers in their resident city, but such discounts decrease by 0.93 percent when they
purchase in other cities in the home province and by 1.05 percent when they buy in other provinces.17
[Tables 10A-10B About Here]
In order to facilitate comparisons of prices paid by bureaucrat buyers and non-bureaucrat buyers in the
same apartment complex, we can also limit our sample to include only transactions involving apartment
complexes with at least one bureaucrat-buyer transaction. The size of this sub-sample is now reduced to
647,649, and the results on this new subsample (Sub-sample II) are reported in Panel Â“Sub-sample IIÂ”
Table 10A. The key results are the same as before.
We can also restrict our sample to two diÂ¤erent cases: in Sub-sample III, we include only transactions in
apartment complexes with at least one transaction involving a buyer from other cities in the same province;
and in Sub-sample IV, we include transactions in apartment complexes with at least one transaction
involving a buyer from other cities in the same province and at least one bureaucrat-buyer. The regression
results for these two cases are reported in Panel Â“Sub-sample IIIÂ” and Panel Â“Sub-sample IVÂ” respectively
in Table 10B. Again, our main results are robust to these restrictions on the data.

6

Alternative Explanations
We interpret the price discounts received by bureaucrats as evidence of the market value of government

power and a measure of corruption. In this section, we discuss several alternative explanations.

6.1

Non-Representative Data

The dataset we use comes from a large commercial bank, and we argued that the data it includes should
be representative of all the mortgage loans in China. However, one may be concerned that it may not be
representative of all buyers in the housing market because it does not include individuals who buy homes
entirely using cash. First of all, in the new apartment market, the majority of buyers are likely to use
mortgages because the Chinese government oÂ¤ers discounted mortgage interest rates to.18 While we do
not have data to evaluate the characteristics of cash buyers, it is reasonable to assume that they include
two types:

rst, they are extremely wealthy, for example, some private entrepreneurs and top CEOs; and

second, they would like to hide some aspects of the housing transaction. The rst group is small, and they
17

These results still hold if we increase the threshold number of transactions in each complex into 20. The details are

available upon request.
18
The PeopleÂ’s Bank of China issues a baseline interest rate for borrowing from the banks, and the mortgage interest rate
is typically 80 percent of the baseline rate.

19

are likely buying mansions that we do not include in our analysis (see Section 4 for a description of our
sample selection). The second group, however, would typically include government oÂ¢cials who probably
have obtained much larger price discounts than the typical bureaucrats we are studying in this paper. If
the discounts are unusually large, the bureaucrat buyer may nd it important to at least partially conceal
the paper trail by paying for the transaction in cash. Typical non-bureaucrat buyers do not have such
incentives. Thus to the extent that the mortgage transactions in our dataset are not representative of all
housing transactions because they do not include all-cash transactions, we believe that it would bias our
estimate of the value of power downward.
The second concern is that a bureaucrat may use his/her spouse or adult child as the nominal borrower
of the mortgage in attempt to conceal transactions that may be suspected of corruption. This is indeed a
possibility as many anti-corruption investigations have revealed that it is common for government oÂ¢cials
to own properties in the names of their family members. To the extent that such a phenomenon occurs in
the housing market, our estimate of the market value of power would again be biased downward because
we would be categorizing some bureaucrat buyers who receive discounts as non-bureaucrat buyers in our
analysis.
The third concern is that the housing prices recorded in the mortgage could be deÂ‡ated so that the
buyers and sellers can both reduce their property transaction tax bills (which is 1 percent of the sales price
each for the buyer and the seller). Anecdotally this seems to be common among secondary market housing
transactions; but this does not appear to be common in new apartment sales. In new apartment sales, the
seller is a real estate developer who is under an elevated level of scrutiny not to mis-report the housing
transaction prices to the bank. This is the reason that we are only using data for mortgages involving new
apartment sales in our analysis.

6.2

Selection on Unobservable Housing Characteristics

One may be concerned that the price discounts we found for bureaucrat buyers may occur because
bureaucrats are buying houses that systematically have less desirable characteristics that are not captured
by our controls. In other words, the concern is that the bureaucrat price discount is not reÂ‡ecting the
market value of power, rather it is a discount for undesirable housing characteristics unobserved to us but
observed by the seller and buyers.
While no one can possibly control for all possible characteristics of the house or complex that a buyer
may value, we believe this concern is unlikely to be the driver for our main ndings. In the regressions in
which we measure the price and gradient of government power, we control for the housing characteristics
listed in Column 4 of Table 5, which includes area (log), area squared, complex location, purchasing Time
(month), building, Â‡oor level, last digit of room number. It is important to emphasize that diÂ¤erent
20

apartment units in a given complex in China are often largely homogenous (see Figure 3 for a typical
depiction of buildings and apartment units in a development complex in China). After controlling for all
of these characteristics, what could still be potentially diÂ¤erent among apartments is likely to be indoor
structures, decorations, or Â‡oor plans. On these dimensions (unobserved to us), if anything we would
expect that the bureaucrats are more likely to receive favorable treatment. Also, recall from Table 3 and 4
that bureaucrats in general are more likely to purchase large apartments and in more expensive complexes.
Therefore, their purchases are likely to also be more desirable along such unobservable dimensions. Thus,
to the extent that there are unobservable housing characteristics that are not controlled for in our analysis,
our estimate of the value of power is likely to be biased downward.
[Figure 3 About Here]

6.3

Information Advantage

A third alternative explanation for the price discounts bureaucrat buyers receive in the housing market
is that it derives from the bureaucrats possessing more information about the housing price distributions,
instead of rents from government power.
We now present a series of regressions to assess whether the information advantage of bureaucrats
may be responsible for the price discounts they enjoy in the housing market. First, the Chinese housing
market has experienced tremendous price increases since 2003, and the year-to-year price growth was over
20 per cent year in some cities. If bureaucratsÂ’ information advantage is driving the price discounts we
documented earlier, we would expect that they would also more likely to be among the early buyers in any
apartment complex. To empirically assess this, we exploit the fact that in China, many of the apartment
complexes have multiple buildings and they often go on the market sequentially. We thus select apartment
complexes for which the sales period lasted at least 12 months in our sample, and contained at least 5
transactions in the rst three months and at least 5 transactions from the fourth month on. We are left
with 380,255 transactions using the above selection criterion. For each of the transactions in this selected
sample, we can then de ne an indicator variable for whether the transaction occurred within the rst 3
months after the apartment complex went on sale.
[Tables 11A-11D About Here]
In Tables 11A-11D, we report the linear probability regression results examining whether bureaucrat
buyers are more likely to be among the early buyers ( rst 3 months) of apartment complexes. Table 11A
reports the results for bureaucrats as a whole. Column 1 shows that bureaucrats are not more likely to
be early buyers than non-bureaucrats. This nding also holds when we distinguish transactions in the

21

resident city from those in other cities of the home province and those in other provinces (Column 2); and
it also holds when we add the price growth of the apartment complex (Column 3).
In Table 11B, we distinguish bureaucrats according to whether they work in critical government agencies. If information advantage is the reason for the observed price discounts that bureaucrats receive, we
would expect that those working in critical government agencies should more likely to be among the early
buyers due to their proximate knowledge of when the complex would go on sale. We do not nd any
such evidence; in fact, if anything, we nd that bureaucrats in critical agencies are less likely to be among
early buyers. In Table 11C, we distinguish bureaucrats according to their rank. Again we do not nd any
evidence that the bureaucrats with high rankings are more likely to early buyers.
Another angle from which we can assess a posited information advantage mechanism is to examine
whether bureaucrats receive higher price discounts in cities with a larger dispersion of housing prices. For
this purpose, we create a variable Â“City Price DispersionÂ” measured by the ratio of the 80th percentile and
20th percentile of the per square meter prices in the housing prices each month, by city. If information
advantage is driving the bureaucrat price discounts, we expect that they would enjoy higher discounts in
cities with higher price dispersion. Table 12 presents the results from these regressions. In Column 1, we
nd that bureaucrats in general actually receive lower discounts in cities with larger price dispersion. The
same holds in Column 2 when we distinguish bureaucrats by the criticality of their government agencies (in
Column 2), by their ranking (Column 3) and by whether they are provincial level or lower level bureaucrats
(Column 4). These results suggest that information advantage is unlikely to be the driving force for the
observed bureaucrat price discounts.
[Tables 12 About Here]
Yet another possible alternative explanation is that bureaucrats may have lower search costs, which
allows them to obtain better deals by searching more. While we do not have direct evidence to rule out the
possibility that bureaucrats as a whole have lower search costs than non-bureaucrat buyers, it is unlikely
that this could be the only explanation for our ndings. Recall that those bureaucrats with higher rankings,
and in critical agencies are found to be receiving larger price discounts; common sense suggests that it is
unlikely that the bureaucrats with higher rankings and in critical agencies have lower search costs than
other bureaucrats.

6.4

Discounts to Bureaucrats as Â“AnchorÂ” Residents?

A fourth alternative explanation for the price discounts bureaucrat buyers receive is that they can play
the role of Â“anchorÂ” residents for developers and attract more buyers into a given apartment complex.
If so, the developers may be willing to give bureaucrat buyers a price discount to compensate for their
22

bringing additional buyers. The idea is akin to anchor stores receiving rent discounts from shopping mall
developers (Pashigian and Gould, 1998; and Gould, Pashigian and Prendergast, 2005). For example,
maybe the developer can expect that amenities near the apartment complex are more likely improved by
public infrastructure investments if there are more bureaucrat residents in the apartment complex (see,
e.g., Zheng and Kahn, 2013). However, there is a crucial diÂ¤erence between anchor stores in shopping malls
and bureaucrat residents. Anchor stores receive rent discounts from developers for their generating traÂ¢c
to the shopping mall, which has important positive externalities on other tenants of the shopping mall. In
contrast, there is no plausible channel through which bureaucrat residents could generate bene ts to the
developers or other residents that are not related to the power they may have as government oÂ¢cials.
We examine this hypothesis using several methods. First, if bureaucrat buyers receive price discounts
because they serve as Â“anchorÂ” residents for the developer to attract other buyers, we would expect that
bureaucrat buyers are more likely to be among the earlier purchasers of the units in an apartment complex.
However, as we have documented in Tables 11A-11D, this is not the case.
[Table 13 About Here]
Second, if bureaucrat buyers are receiving price discounts because they are more likely to bring infrastructure investments to the neighborhood, which can increase the prices of future apartments in the
same complex, then we would expect to see that the fraction of bureaucrat buyers in the rst oÂ¤ering of
a multi-oÂ¤ering apartment complex is positively related to the price appreciation of the later oÂ¤erings. In
Table 13, we examine this hypothesis. Focusing on the developments with multiple oÂ¤ering in our dataset
leaves us with a total of 1,230 multi-oÂ¤ering apartment complexes. For each oÂ¤ering, we construct the
average per square meter price of the apartment units. The dependent variable in the regressions reported
in Table 13 is the log of the price ratio between the average price of a latter oÂ¤ering (q-th oÂ¤ering, where
q  5, and the average price of the rst oÂ¤ering, and the independent variables include the fraction of
bureaucrat buyers in rst oÂ¤ering of the apartment complex (Column 1), the fraction of bureaucrat buyers
from critical government agencies in the rst oÂ¤ering (Column 2), the fraction of high-ranking bureaucrat
buyers in the rst oÂ¤ering (Column 3) and the fraction of bureaucrat buyers from provincial government
in the rst oÂ¤ering (Column 4). All regressions include dummies for city, oÂ¤ering time, and the numerical
order of the oÂ¤ering. Table 13 shows that none of coeÂ¢cients for the fractions of bureaucrats are statistically signi cant. We should emphasize that this nding does not imply that bureaucrats do not provide
any quid pro quo for the price discounts they receive in their purchase of the apartment units; rather, it
suggests that such quid pro quo probably occurred before, not after, the bureaucrats received their price
discounts.

23

6.5

Access to the Purchase of Apartment Units as Bribes?

A common reaction to our

nding that bureaucrat buyers on average receive about a 1.05 percent

price discount relative to non-bureaucrat buyers for identical apartment units is that the bureaucrat price
discount is surprisingly low. We would like to point out that our estimate of the bureaucrat price discount
for apartment purchase is, to the best of our knowledge, the rst systematic estimate based on a large data
set. Anecdotal evidence from the widely-publicized anti-corruption cases tends to include only those outrageous price discounts received by government oÂ¢cials, if they did not obtain the apartments completely
free of charge, but such cases are not representative. However, due to the issues we pointed out in Section
6.1, we do agree that our estimate of the market value of power tends to be downward biased.
One may argue that in a booming housing market like China where apartment prices have increased
up to ten-fold in some cities, a more important channel to bribe the government oÂ¢cials is not so much
through the price discounts, but rather through granting the access to apartment units. According to this
hypothesis, in cities with large housing price appreciations, access to apartment units is more valuable than
that in cities with small price appreciations. As a result, we should expect that the outright price discounts
to bureaucrat buyers will be smaller in cities with larger price appreciations. In Tables 14A-14D, we report
regression results that aim to test this hypothesis. The speci cations of these regressions are same as those
reported in Tables 5-9, except that we now include the price appreciations at the city level in 6 months, 12
months and 24 months following the transaction, and their interactions with the bureaucrat dummies of the
buyer.19 In Table 14A where we only distinguish bureaucrat buyers from non-bureaucrat buyers, we do nd
that the bureaucrat price discount is lower in cities with large subsequent price appreciation, but the eÂ¤ect
is not statistically signi cant. The same is true in Table 14B where we distinguish bureaucrat buyers by
whether they work in government agencies critical or non-critical to real estate development. In Table 14C,
however, where we distinguish bureaucrat buyers by their rank, we nd that higher ranking bureaucrats
tend to receive larger price discounts in cities with more subsequent price appreciation, contrary to the
predictions from the hypothesis that access to purchase of apartment units can substitute for outright
price discounts. In Table 14D where we distinguish bureaucrat buyers by whether they work in provincial
governments, we do nd some evidence consistent with the predictions from the hypothesis.
[Tables 14A-14D About Here]
19

The sample size in the regressions reported in Table 14A-14D is somewhat smaller than those in Tables 5-9 because we

can only include transactions in cities with suÂ¢cient number of transactions in each month that would allow us to construct
reliable estimates of city-speci c house price indices.

24

7

Relationship with Entertainment and Travel Cost (ETC) Measure of
City-Level Corruption
So far we nd that on average, bureaucrats receive about 0.7 to 1.05 percent price discounts for identical

apartments than non-bureaucrat buyers (Table 5), and bureaucrat buyers in critical agencies receive a 2.48
percent discount (Table 6). We interpret these price discounts received by bureaucrat buyers as evidence
of the market value of power and a measure of corruption. Because transactions from all the cities are
used in the regressions reported in Tables 5-9, the bureaucrat price discounts estimated in these tables are
bureaucrat discounts averaged over diÂ¤erent cities. The large size of our sample actually permits us to
estimate city-speci c bureaucrat price discounts by running analogous regressions as in Tables 5-9 by city.
To the extent that the price discounts received by bureaucrat buyers vary by city, they could be used as
an alternative measure of city-level corruption. This provides us with an opportunity to collaborate our
measure of corruption by bureaucrat price discount with an existing measure of city-level corruption by
Entertainment and Travel Costs (ETC) as proposed in Cai, Fang and Xu (2011).
Chinese

rms regularly report expenditures on entertainment, travel costs and conferences in their

accounting books. As detailed in Cai, Fang, and Xu (2011), Chinese managers often use these expenditure
categories to reimburse money spent on bribing government oÂ¢cials and entertaining clients and suppliers,
and so these expenditures can be used as a measure of corruption in Chinese rms. The data on rmsÂ’
expenditures on entertainment and conferences are drawn from the rm-level Investment Climate Survey
conducted jointly by the World Bank and the Enterprises Survey Organization of the National Bureau of
Statistics of China in 2005. This survey covered 12,400 rms located in 120 cities in all Chinese provinces
except Tibet. It contained information on the rm-level expenditures on entertainment, travel costs, and
conferences as well as the city level GDP per capita and other economic characteristics, such as the fraction
of employees in the nancial sector.20
We calculate the average

rm expenditures on entertainment, and on meetings for each city, and

then merge these city-level average expenditures with the estimated coeÂ¢cients for Â“bureaucrat in critical
agenciesÂ” obtained from regressions run for each city with the same speci cation as in Column 1 of Table
6. Due to some missing values or small samples for certain cities in our housing data, we end up with a
sample of 99 cities in the merged data.
[Table 15 About Here]
Table 15 reports the cross-sectional OLS regression results on the correlation between city-speci c
price discounts of bureaucrats in critical agencies and log of the rmsÂ’ average entertainment expenditures
20

See Cai, Fang, and Xu (2011) for more details about the survey data.

25

(Columns 1 and 2), and log of the rmsÂ’ average meeting expenditures (Columns 3 and 4). Each regression
in Table 15 is weighted by the variance of the estimated coeÂ¢cient on the Â“bureaucrat in critical agencyÂ”
dummy. The results reveal that indeed, the price discounts are deeper in cities where rms spend more
on entertainment and meeting expenditures. The correlation between the price discounts to bureaucrats
in critical agencies (negative) and the log of ETC expenditures range from -0.031 to -0.042 depending on
speci cations, and they are marginally signi cant at the 10 percent level. This provides further collaborative
evidence for our interpretation of bureaucrat price discounts as a measure of corruption.

8

Conclusion
The discretionary power of government often leads to rent-seeking and corruption, especially in devel-

oping and transition economies. How to quantify the magnitude of corruption has been a serious challenge
for scholars due to the often secretive nature of corrupt activities. Using a large, unique dataset from
ChinaÂ’s housing market, we propose a novel approach to measure corruption using the price diÂ¤erences
paid by bureaucrat buyers and non-bureaucrat buyers in the housing market. We nd that the housing
price paid by bureaucrat buyers is on average 1.05 percentage points lower than non-bureaucrat buyers,
after controlling for a full set of characteristics of buyers, houses and mortgage loans.
More interestingly, we

nd that these price discounts exhibit interesting gradients with respect to

bureaucratsÂ’ hierarchical ranking, criticality of their government agencies to real estate developers, and
geographical jurisdiction. Speci cally, we nd that bureaucrat buyers in critical agencies receive a 2.48
percent price discount, in contrast to a 0.97 percent price discount to bureaucrats in non-critical agencies;
higher ranking bureaucrats receive a 1.38 percent price discount in contrast to a 1.03 percent price discount
for low ranking bureaucrats; and bureaucrats from provincial governments receive a 3.9 percent price
discount in contrast to a 1 percent price discount for bureaucrats from lower-level governments. Moreover,
we nd that the market power of bureaucrats declines once they leave their resident city: if bureaucrats
purchase apartments in other cities in their home province, the price discount is reduced by 0.9 percent
relative to the price discounts they could obtain in their resident city (approximately 1.24 percent); and
if they buy in other provinces, they essentially do not enjoy any price discounts. This suggests that
the market value of government power is rather localized in China. Additionally we nd evidence that
bureaucrats with low ranking but from agencies critical to real estate development may enjoy larger price
discounts than those with high ranking but from non-critical agencies. This highlights the importance of
distinguishing Â“real authorityÂ” from Â“formal authorityÂ” (Aghion and Tirole, 1997).
We argue that the bureaucrat price discounts and the gradients of these discounts are evidence of
corruption and measures of the market value of government power in economies with weak institutions

26

to prevent its abuse. We also evaluate and cast doubt on alternative mechanisms that may explain why
bureaucrat buyers receive a lower price for identical housing units. Our study sheds new light on corruption
in the Chinese housing market as well as the functioning of power in the interplay between government
and market when the rule of law is weak.

References
[1] Aghion, Philippe and Tirole, Jean (1997). Â“Formal and Real Authority in Organizations.Â” Journal of
Political Economy, 105(1), 1-29.
[2] Antonossava, Antonia, Maranne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2008). Â“Misclassi cation in
Targeted Programs: A Study of the Targeted Public Distribution System in Karnataka, India,Â” mimeo,
Harvard University.
[3] Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna and Sendhil Mullainathan (2012). Â“Corruption.Â” In Handbook of
Organizational Economics, ed. R Gibbons, J Roberts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
[4] Bardhan, Pranab (1997). Â“Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues.Â” Journal of Economic
Literature, 35, 1320-1346.
[5] Bertrand, Marianne, Simeon Djankov, Rema Hanna, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2007). Â“Obtaining
a Driving License in India: An Experimental Approach to Study Corruption.Â” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122: 1639Â–76.
[6] Cai, Hongbin, Hanming Fang and Lixin C. Xu (2011). Â“Eat, Drink, Firms, and Government: An
Investigation of Corruption From Entertainment and Travel Costs of Chinese Firms.Â” Journal of Law
and Economics, 54, 55-78.
[7] Cai, Hongbin, J. Vernon Henderson and Qinghua Zhang (2013). Â“ChinaÂ’s Land Market Auctions:
Evidence of Corruption?Â” RAND Journal of Economics, 44(3), 488-521.
[8] Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2003). Â“The Role of Wages and Auditing During a
Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires.Â” Journal of Law and Economics, 46, 269-300.
[9] Faccio, Mara (2006). Â“Politically Connected Firms.Â” American Economic Review, 96(1), 369-386.
[10] Fisman, Raymond and Shang-Jin Wei (2004). Â“Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Imports in China.Â”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 471-96.

27

[11] Fisman, David, Raymond Fisman, Julia Galef, Rakesh Khurana and Yongxiang Wang (2012). Â“Estimating the Value of Connections to Vice-President Cheney.Â” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
& Policy, Vol. 13, No. 3, 1-20.
[12] Gould, Eric D., B. Peter Pashigian and Canice Prendergast (2005). Â“Contracts, Externalities, and
Incentives in Shopping Malls,Â” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3), 411-422.
[13] Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Klara S. Peter (2007). Â“Public Sector Pay and Corruption: Measuring
Bribery from Micro Data.Â” Journal of Public Economics, 91, 963-91.
[14] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti (2006). Â“Did Iraq Cheat the United Nations? Underpricing,
Bribes, and the Oil for Food Program.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 1211-48.
[15] Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995). Â“Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures.Â” Economics and Politics, 7, 207-227.
[16] Khwaja, Asim and Atif Mian (2005). Â“Do Lenders Favor Politically Connected Firms? Rent Provision
in an Emerging Financial Market.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4), 1371-1411.
[17] La Porta, Raphael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1999). Â“The Quality of Government.Â” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organizations, 15, 222-279.
[18] Mauro, Paolo (1995). Â“Corruption and Growth.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 681-712.
[19] McMillan, John and Pablo Zoido. (2004). Â“How to Subvert Democracy: Montesinos in Peru.Â” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 18(4), 69-92.
[20] Olken, Benjamin A. (2006). Â“Corruption and the Costs of Redistribution: Micro Evidence from Indonesia.Â” Journal of Public Economics, 90, 853-70.
[21] Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1993). Â“Why Is Rent-Seeking So Costly
to Growth?Â” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 83, No. 2, 409Â–14.
[22] Olken, Benjamin A. (2007). Â“Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.Â”
Journal of Political Economy, 115, 200-49.
[23] Olken, Benjamin A. (2009). Â“Corruption Perceptions vs. Corruption Reality.Â” Journal of Public Economics, 93, 950-64.
[24] Olken, Benjamin A. and Patrick Barron (2009). Â“The Simple Economics of Extortion: Evidence from
Trucking in Aceh.Â” Journal of Political Economy, 117, 417-52

28

[25] Olken, Benjamin A. and Rohini Pande (2011). Â“Corruption in Developing Countries.Â” Annual Review
of Economics, 4, 479-505.
[26] Pashigian, B. Peter, and Eric D. Gould (1998). Â“Internalizing Externalities: The Pricing of Space in
Shopping Malls.Â” Journal of Law and Economics, 41 (1), 115-142.
[27] Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson (2004). Â“Local Capture: Evidence from A Central Government
Transfer Program in Uganda.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 679-706.
[28] Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny (1993). Â“Corruption.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108,
No. 3, 599-617.
[29] Svensson, Jakob (2003). Â“Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from A Cross Section of
Firms.Â” Quarterly Journal of Economy, 118, 207-30.
[30] Svensson, Jakob (2005). Â“Eight Questions about Corruption.Â” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
19(5),19-42.
[31] Treisman, Daniel (2000). Â“The Causes of Corruption: A Cross-National Study.Â” Journal of Public
Economics, 76(3), 399-457.
[32] Zheng, Siqi, and Matthew E. Kahn (2013). Â“Does Government Investment in Local Public Goods Spur
Gentri cation? Evidence from Beijing.Â” Real Estate Economics, Vol 41, Issue 1, 1-28.
[33] Zhou, Li-An (2009). Incentives and Governance: ChinaÂ’s Local Governments. CENGAGE Learning.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Obs.

Mean

Standard

Min

Max

Deviation
Average housing price

1005960

3765.3

3195.5

1000

95700

1005960

.071

.258

0

1

Characteristics of Power
Bureaucrats
in high rank

1005960

.003

.057

0

1

in critical agencies

1005960

.004

.060

0

1

in provincial government

1005960

.001

.035

0

1

Gender (female=1)

1005960

.331

.471

0

1

Married

1005960

.694

.461

0

1

College education

1005960

.203

.402

0

1

Age

1005960

34.7

8.404

18

65

Monthly income (yuan)

1005960

5990

10179

700

249000

City of residence

1005960

.851

.356

0

1

Other cities in home province

1005960

.131

.337

0

1

Other provinces

1005960

.018

.134

0

1

Area (square meters)

1005960

113.2

46.571

21

797

Loan maturity (month)

1005960

188.5

73.622

12

360

Loan to value

1005960

.648

.121

.100

.800

Buyerâ€™s characteristics

Housing purchases from

Apartment and loan
characteristics

Table 2: Average Purchase Price (per Square Meter) by Power Status and Location
Bureaucrats Bureaucrats Bureaucrats
Region of purchase

All buyers

Bureaucrats

in critical

with higher

in provincial

agencies

rank

government

City of residence

3789

3659

3458

3650

5477

Other cities in home province

3471

3454

3534

3848

4354

Other provinces

4830

3802

3551

4996

5372

Table 3: Correlations in Characteristics between Bureaucrats and Apartments/Mortgage Loans
Dependent variable
(1)

Bureaucrats

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Size

Loan to

Loan

Monthly

Relative

(log)

Value Ratio

Maturity

Income

Complex

(log)

(log)

price

.0044***

-.0183***

.0480***

-.1414***

.0027

(.0018)

(.0007)

(.0015)

(.0041)

(.0030)

.0163***

-.0208***

.0481***

-.1465***

.0102

(.0053)

(.0023)

(.0056)

(.0164)

(.0068)

.0037***

-.0181***

.0480***

-.1411***

.0023

(.0013)

(.0007)

(.0016)

(.0042)

(.0031)

High rank

.0100***

-.0067***

.0367***

-.0900***

.0073

(.0044)

(.0024)

(.0075)

(.0099)

(.0130)

Low rank

.0054***

-.0190***

.0520***

-.1298***

-.0017

(.0013)

(.0007)

(.0016)

(.0043)

(.0031)

.0332

-.0352***

.0191

-.0942***

.0430

Critical agencies
Non-critical agencies

Provincial gov!t
Lower-level gov!t

(.0246)

(.0061)

(.0118)

(.0308)

(.0782)

.0039***

-.0180***

.0485***

-.1421***

.0020

(.0013)

(.0007)

(.0016)

(.0041)

(.0027)

Note: We run size, loan to value ratio, maturity, and monthly income on bureaucrats or in critical and
non-critical agencies or in high and low rank or in provincial government and lower-level government,
female, marital status, age, age squared, complex location, building, floor level, last digit of room
number, purchasing time, and residence province. We run relative complex price (i.e., average complex
price relative to the city average price) on the same set of explanatory variables as the previous three
regressions except that complex location dummies are replaced by city dummies. All standard errors
are clustered at the level of complex locations.

Table 4: The Characteristics of Bureaucrats in the Housing Market: Probit Model
Dependent variable: Bureaucrat=1
Relative complex price
Relative apartment size

(1)

(2)

(3)

.016***

.103***

.065***

(.007)

(.012)

(.012)

.063***

.138***

.083***

(.007)

(.009)

(.010)

-.180***

-.166***

(.005)

(.004)

.018***

.023***

(.005)

(.005)

College education

.560***

.545***

(.009)

(.009)

Age

.016***

.004**

(.002)

(.002)

Female
Married

Age squared
Monthly income (log)

1.09E-5

1.80E-4***

(2.34E-5)

(2.40E-5)

-.068***

-.062***

(.001)
Loan maturity (log)

(.001)
.178***
(.008)

Loan to Value

-.916***
(.016)

Purchasing time (month)

Y

Y

Y

Building

Y

Y

Y

Floor level dummy

Y

Y

Y

Room number dummy

Y

Y

Y

Residence province dummy

Y

Y

Y

Observations

1005960

1005960

1005960

Pseudo R-sq

.035

.085

.088

Note: Relative apartment size is defined as ratio of apartment size to mean apartment size in the
complex. We report robust standard errors. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by
***, **, and *.

Table 5: The Bureaucrat Discount of Apartment Prices
Dependent variable: ln(price)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0372***

-.0069***

-.0088***

-.0105***

(.0057)

(.0013)

(.0014)

(.0014)

-1.2432***

-1.1865***

(.0538)

(.0526)

Apartment area squared

.1416***

.1338***

(.0058)

(.0057)

Loan maturity (log)

.0361***

.0525***

(.0018)

(.0022)

-.0223***

-.0392***

(.0045)

(.0047)

Bureaucrats
Apartment area (log)

Loan to value
Female

.0139***

Married

.0020***

(.0007)
(.0007)
College education

.0150***
(.0013)

Age

-.0019***
(.0002)

Age squared

4.25E-5***
(3.44E-6)

Monthly income (log)

.0216***
(.0008)

Complex location

N

Y

Y

Y

Purchasing time (month)

N

Y

Y

Y

Building

N

Y

Y

Y

Floor Level

N

Y

Y

Y

Last digit of Room No.

N

Y

Y

Y

Residence province

N

Y

Y

Y

1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.000

.908

.911

.913

Observations
R-sq

Note: Apartment price is defined as the price per square meter. We report standard errors clustered at
the complex location level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 6: The Hierarchical and Critical Gradients of Power on Apartment Prices
Dependent variable: ln(price)
(1)
Bureaucrats in critical agencies

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0248***
(.0049)

Bureaucrats in non-critical
agencies

-.0097***
(.0014)

Bureaucrats in high rank

-.0138*
(.0071)

Bureaucrats in low rank

-.0103***
(.0013)

Bureaucrats in provincial

-.0390**

government

(.0179)

Bureaucrats in lower-level

-.0100***

government

(.0014)

Bureaucrats in critical

-.0371***

agencies*high rank

(.0195)

Bureaucrats in critical

-.0244***

agencies*low rank

(.0050)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

-.0123*

agencies*high rank

(.0072)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

-.0096***

agencies*low rank
Observations
R-sq

(.0013)
1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.913

.913

.913

0.913

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors
clustered at the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and
*.

Table 7: The Geographical Gradient of Power on Apartment Prices
Dependent variable: ln(price)
Bureaucrats

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0107***

-.0124***

-.0108***

-.0126***

(.0014)

(.0017)

(.0014)

(.0017)

Bureaucrats* buying in other cities
of home province

.0088***

.0091***

(.0024)

(.0024)

Bureaucrats*buying in other

.0093*

provinces

.0111**

(.0053)

(.0053)

Buying in other cities of home

.0074**

.0064*

.0074**

.0064*

province

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

.0172***

.0172***

.0166***

.0165***

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.913

.913

.913

.913

Buying in other provinces
Observations
R-sq

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors
clustered at the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and
*.

Table 8: Interactions of Geographical and Critical Dimensions of Powers:
Critical vs. Non-critical Agencies
Dependent variable: ln(price)
Bureaucrats in critical agencies
Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0252***

-.0273***

-.0254***

-.0276***

(.0049)

(.0059)

(.0049)

(.0060)

-.0099***

-.0116***

-.0101***

-.0118***

(.0014)

(.0016)

(.0014)

(.0016)

Bureaucrats in critical agencies*buying in

.0101*

other cities in home province

(.0059)

Bureaucrats in non-critical
agencies*buying in other provinces
Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies
*buying in other cities in home province

Observations
R-sq

.0170

(.0290)

(.0292)
.0091***

(.0024)

(.0024)

*buying in other provinces

Buying in other provinces

(.0060)
.0148

.0089***

Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies
Buying in other cities in home province

.0104*

.0089*

.0106**

(.0053)

(.0054)

.0075**

.0064*

.0075**

.0064*

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

.0172***

.0172***

.0167***

.0165***

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.913

.913

.913

.913

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors
clustered at the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and
*.

Table 9: Interactions of Geographical and Hierarchical Dimensions of Powers:
High vs. Low Rank Bureaucrats
Dependent Variable: ln(price)
Bureaucrats in low rank
Bureaucrats in high rank

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0105***

-.0121***

-.0107***

-.0123***

(.0013)

(.0016)

(.0013)

(.0016)

-.0142**

-.0199*

-.0148**

-.0210**

(.0071)

(.0103)

(.0071)

(.0103)

Bureaucrats in low rank *buying in other

.0084***

cities of the same province

.0086***

(.0024)

Bureaucrats in low rank *buying in other
provinces

(.0024)
.0088

.0104*

(.0056)

(.0056)

Bureaucrats in high rank *buying in other

.0179*

.0189*

cities of the same province

(.0109)

(.0110)

Bureaucrats in high rank *buying in other

.0174

provinces
Buying in other cities of the same province
Buying in other provinces
Observations
R-sq

.0235

(.0287)

(.0288)

.0074**

.0064*

.0075**

.0064*

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

.0172***

.0172***

.0167***

.0165***

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

(.0037)

1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.913

.913

.913

.913

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors
clustered at the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and
*.

Table 10A: Robustness Checks
Dependent variable: ln(price)

Bureaucrats
Buying in other cities of the
same province
Buying in other provinces

Sub-sample I

Sub-sample II

Number of transactions â‰¥ 10

At least one bureaucrat-buyer

for each complex

observed in each complex

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0109***

-.0129***

-.0135***

-.0176***

(.0014)

(.0017)

(.0018)

(.0024)

.0077**

.0066*

.0076**

.0060*

(.0038)

(.0038)

(.0036)

(.0037)

.0174***

.0167***

.0168***

.0157***

(.0038)

(.0038)

(.0036)

(.0036)

Bureaucrats* buying in other

.0093***

.0138***

cities of the same province

(.0025)

(.0030)

Bureaucrats*buying in other

.0105*

.0160***

provinces

(.0055)

(.0055)

Observations
R-sq

964996

964996

647649

647649

.911

.911

.901

.901

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors
clustered at the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and
*.

Table 10B: Robustness Checks
Dependent variable: ln(price)
Sub-sample III
At least one buyer from other cities

Sub-sample IV
Sub-sample II

âˆ© Sub-sample III

in the same province in each complex
Bureaucrats
Bureaucrats* buying in other
cities of the same province
Bureaucrats*buying in other
provinces

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0108***

-.0127***

-.0137***

-.0177***

(.0014)

(.0017)

(.0018)

(.0024)

.0078*

.0066

.0080**

.0063

(.0040)

(.0040)

(.0040)

(.0040)

.0206***

.0198***

.0204***

.0193***

(.0041)

(.0041)

(.0040)

(.0028)

Buying in other cities of the
same province
Buying in other provinces
Observations
R-sq

.0090***

.0137***

(.0025)

(.0030)

.0091**

.0138**

(.0053)

(.0055)

805640

805640

587191

587191

.906

.906

.896

.896

Note: Sub-sample IV include observations only if, in each complex, at least one buyer from other cities
in the same province and at least one bureaucrat-buyer. All regressions have same controls as in
Column 4 of Table 5. We report standard errors clustered at the complex level. The significance levels
of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 11A: The Information Advantage of Bureaucrats: General
Dependent variable: Whether to buy in the first 3 months
(1)
Bureaucrats
Buying in other cities in the same
province
Buying in other provinces

(2)

(3)

.0029

.0018

-.0082

(.0028)

(.0032)

(.0739)

-.0268***

-.0276***

-.0192**

(.0069)

(.0069)

(.0085)

-.0259***

-.0258***

-.0047

(.0082)

(.0145)

(.0082)
Bureaucrats *buying in other cities in the

.0066

.0025

same province

(.0065)

(.0109)

Bureaucrats *buying in other provinces

-.0016

.0527

(.0159)
Complex price growth

(.0553)
.0995***
(.0347)

Bureaucrats *complex price growth

.0200
(.0346)

Complex location

Y

Y

N

Purchasing time (month)

Y

Y

Y

Building

Y

Y

Y

Floor Level

Y

Y

Y

Last digit of Room No.

Y

Y

Y

Residence province

Y

Y

Y

380255

380255

380255

0.416

0.416

0.137

Observations
R-sq

Note: All regressions have controlled for female, marital status, income, education, age, age squared,
size (log), size (log) squared, loan to value ratio, and maturity. We report standard errors clustered at
the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 11B: The Information Advantage of Bureaucrats: Critical vs. Non-Critical Agencies
Dependent variable: Whether to buy in the first 3 months
(1)
Bureaucrats in critical agencies
Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies

(2)

(3)

-.0198***

-.0133

-.0683

(.0095)

(.0107)

(.1229)

.0041

.0026

-.0049

(.0028)

(.0032)

(.0760)

-.0268***

-.0276***

-.0192**

(.0069)

(.0069)

(.0085)

-.0259***

-.0258***

-.0047

(.0082)

(.0083)

(.0145)

Bureaucrats in critical agencies *buying in

-.0313

-.0252

other cities in the same province

(.0251)

(.0280)

Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies

-.0380

.0041

*buying in other cities in the same

(.0779)

(.0110)

.0088

.0280

(.0066)

(.0856)

Buying in other cities in the same
province
Buying in other provinces

province
Bureaucrats in critical agencies *buying in
other provinces
Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies

-.0005

.0531

*buying in other provinces

(.0164)

(.0569)

Complex price growth

.0995***
(.0347)

Bureaucrats in critical agencies *complex

.0608

price growth

(.1170)

Bureaucrats in non-critical agencies

.0177

*complex price growth

(.0748)

Complex location

Y

Y

N

Purchasing time (month)

Y

Y

Y

Building

Y

Y

Y

Floor Level

Y

Y

Y

Last digit of Room No.

Y

Y

Y

Residence province

Y

Y

Y

380255

380255

380255

0.416

0.416

0.137

Observations
R-sq

Note: All regressions have controlled for female, marital status, income, education, age, age squared,
size (log), size (log) squared, loan to value ratio, and maturity. We report standard errors clustered at
the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 11C: The Information Advantage of Bureaucrats: High vs. Low Rank
Dependent variable: Whether to buy in the first 3 months
(1)
Bureaucrats in high rank
Bureaucrats in low rank
Buying in other cities in the same
province
Buying in other provinces

(2)

(3)

-.0251

.0180

-.6770*

(.0237)

(.0223)

(.3979)

.0027

.0016

-.0175

(.0028)

(.0032)

(.0746)

-.0268***

-.0276***

-.0193**

(.0069)

(.0069)

(.0085)

-.0259***

-.0258***

-.0046

(.0082)

(.0083)

(.0145)

.1239

.1873

(.1385)

(.1509)

.0066

.0037

(.0065)

(.0109)

Bureaucrats in high rank *buying in other
cities in the same province
Bureaucrats in low rank*buying in other
cities in the same province
Bureaucrats in high rank *buying in other

.1047

.0238

provinces

(.1402)

(.0158)

Bureaucrats in low rank*buying in other

-.0004

.0461

provinces

(.0016)

Complex price growth

(.0568)
.0995***
(.0346)

Bureaucrats in high rank *complex price

.8891**

growth

(.3991)

Bureaucrats in low rank *complex price

.0272

growth

(.0733)

Complex location

Y

Y

N

Purchasing time (month)

Y

Y

Y

Building

Y

Y

Y

Floor Level

Y

Y

Y

Last digit of Room No.

Y

Y

Y

Residence province
Observations
R-sq

Y

Y

Y

380255

380255

380255

0.416

0.416

0.137

Note: All regressions have controlled for female, marital status, income, education, age, age squared,
size (log), size (log) squared, loan to value ratio, and maturity. We report standard errors clustered at
the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 11D: The Information Advantage of Bureaucrats: Provincial vs. Lower-Level Government
Dependent variable: Whether to buy in the first 3 months
(1)
Bureaucrats in provincial govt.
Bureaucrats in low-level govt.

(2)

(3)

-.0230

-.0135

-.1980

(.0205)

(.0223)

(.2091)

.0033

.0020

-.0062

(.0028)

(.0032)

(.0740)

-.0269***

-.0276***

-.0192**

(.0069)

(.0069)

(.0085)

-.0259***

-.0258***

-.0048

(.0082)

(.0083)

(.0145)

Bureaucrats in prov. govt. *buying in

-.0430

.0234

other cities in the same province

(.0600)

(.0587)

.0069

.0020

(.0065)

(.0109)

Bureaucrats in prov. govt. *buying in

-.0997

-.1073

other provinces

(.0811)

(.0638

.0023

.0586

Buying in other cities in the same
province
Buying in other provinces

Bureaucrats in lower-level govt.*buying
in other cities in the same province

Bureaucrats in lower-level govt.*buying
in other provinces

(.0016)

Complex price growth

(.0564)
.0995***
(.0346)

Bureaucrats in prov. govt. *complex price

.1500

growth

(.1973)

Bureaucrats in lower-level govt.*complex

.0188

price growth

(.0728)

Complex location

Y

Y

N

Purchasing time (month)

Y

Y

Y

Building

Y

Y

Y

Floor Level

Y

Y

Y

Last digit of Room No.

Y

Y

Y

Residence province
Observations
R-sq

Y

Y

Y

380255

380255

380255

0.416

0.416

0.137

Note: All regressions have controlled for female, marital status, income, education, age, age squared,
size (log), size (log) squared, loan to value ratio, and maturity. We report standard errors clustered at
the complex level. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 12: The Information Advantage of Bureaucrats: Price Dispersion
Dependent variable: ln(price)
(1)
Bureaucrats

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.0367***
(.0079)

Bureaucrats in critical

-.0356*

agencies

(.0192)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

-.0365***

agencies

(.0079)

Bureaucrats in high rank

.0468
(.0534)

Bureaucrats in low rank

-.0419***
(.0073)

Bureaucrats in provincial

-.2599**

government

(.1033)

Bureaucrats in lower-level

-.0352***

government
Bureaucrats* city dispersion

(.0079)
.0129***
(.0037)

Bureaucrats in critical

.0052

agencies * city dispersion

(.0098)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

.0131***

agencies * city dispersion

(.0037)

Bureaucrats in high rank *

-.0297

city dispersion

(.0030)

Bureaucrats in low rank *

.0154***

city dispersion

(.0033)

Bureaucrats in provincial

.0947***

government * city dispersion

(.0353)

Bureaucrats in lower-level

.0123***

government * city dispersion
Observations
R-sq

(.0037)
1005960

1005960

1005960

1005960

.913

.913

.913

0.913

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report robust standard errors.
The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

"
"
"
"
"

Table 13: Price Appreciation of Later Units and the Fraction of Bureaucrat Buyers in the Initial
Offering

"
Dependent Variable: Ln (Average price in the Nth Offering/Average Price in
the 1st Offering)
(1)
Fraction

Bureaucrats

in

1

st

Offering

(2)

(4)

-.154
(.127)

Fraction

Bureaucrats

from

.377

st

Critical Agencies in 1 Offering

(.442)

Fraction Bureaucrats with High

.001

st

Ranks in 1 Offering
Fraction

(3)

Bureaucrats

(.325)
from

-.952

Provincial Government in 1st

(2.880)

Offering
Obs.

1230

1230

1230

1230

R-sq

.357

.355

.355

.355

Notes: An observation is a development project with multiple offerings. Regressions also include
dummies for city, offering time and the numerical order of the offering. The Robust standard
errors are clustered at the city level.

Table 14A: Access to the Purchase of Apartment Units as Bribes?
Bureaucrats vs. Non-Bureaucrats
Dependent variable: ln(price)
Bureaucrats
Price growth in 6 months

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.0105***

-.0133

-.0105***

-.0149*

-.0100***

-.0110

(.0015)

(.0098)

(.0015)

(.0087)

(.0015)

(.0077)

-.014*

-.014*

(.008)

(.008)
.001

.003***

(.007)

(.007)
.158***

.159***

(.0108)

(.0118)

Price growth in 12 months
Price growth in 24 months
Bureaucrats * Price growth

.0027

in 6 months

(.0089)

Bureaucrats * Price growth

.0040

in 12 months

(.0075)

Bureaucrats * Price growth

.0008

in 24 months
Observations
R-sq

(.0061)
794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

.916

.916

.917

.917

.918

.918

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report robust standard errors.
The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 14B: Access to the Purchase of Apartment Units as Bribes?
Critical vs. Non-Critical Agencies
Dependent variable: ln(price)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Bureaucrats in critical agencies

-.0239***

-.0405

-.0239***

-.0529

-.0238***

-.0512*

(.0057)

(.0321)

(.0057)

(.0384)

(.0057)

(.0280)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

-.0098***

-.0120

-.0098***

-.0130

-.0093***

-.0090

agencies

(.0015)

(.0100)

(.0015)

(.0086)

(.0015)

(.0078)

Price growth in 6 months

-.0137*

-.0137***

(.0080)

(.0080)
.0006

.0003

(.0074)

(.0074)
.1579***

.1579***

(.0108)

(.0108)

Price growth in 12 months
Price growth in 24 months
Bureaucrats in critical agencies *

.0156

Price growth in 6 months

(.0312)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

.0021

agencies * Price growth in 6

(.0091)

months
Bureaucrats in critical agencies *

.0264

Price growth in 12 months

(.0322)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

.0029

agencies * Price growth in 12

(.0076)

months
Bureaucrats in critical agencies *

.0224

Price growth in 24 months

(.0214)

Bureaucrats in non-critical

-.0002

agencies * Price growth in 24

(.0062)

months
Observations
R-sq

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

.916

.916

.917

.917

.918

.918

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report robust standard errors.
The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 14C: Access to the Purchase of Apartment Units as Bribes?
High vs. Low Rank
Dependent variable: ln(price)
Bureaucrats in high rank
Bureaucrats in low rank
Price growth in 6 months

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-.0187

.0953*

-.0188

.1776**

-.0186

-.0981

(.0141)

(.0537)

(.0141)

(.0849)

(.0140)

(.0834)

-.0102***

-.0138

-.0102***

-.0163*

-.0096***

-.0095

(.0014)

(.0097)

(.0014)

(.0088)

(.0014)

(.0097)

-.0135*

-.0137*

(.0079)

(.0079)
.0006

.0003

(.0074)

(.0073)
.1579***

.1579***

(.0108)

(.0108)

Price growth in 12 months
Price growth in 24 months
Bureaucrats in high rank * Price

-.1136*

growth in 6 months

(.0600)

Bureaucrats in low rank * Price

.0034

growth in 6 months

(.0090)

Bureaucrats in high rank * Price

-.1852**

growth in 12 months

(.0890)

Bureaucrats in low rank * Price

.0056

growth in 12 months

(.0076)

Bureaucrats in high rank * Price

.0610

growth in 24 months

(.0549)

Bureaucrats in low rank *

-.0001

Price growth in 24 months

(.0062)

Observations
R-sq

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

.916

.916

.917

.917

.918

.918

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report robust standard errors.
The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 14D: Access to the Purchase of Apartment Units as Bribes?
Provincial vs. Lower-Level Government
Dependent variable: ln(price)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Bureaucrats in provincial

-.0458*

-.1079

-.0458*

-.2380*

-.0451

-.1411

government

(.0278)

(.1355)

(.0278)

(.1378)

(.0277)

(.1038)

-.0099***

-.0120

-.0099***

-.0100

-.0094***

-.0085

(.0014)

(.0079)

(.0014)

(.0075)

.1579***

.1578***

(.0108)

(.0108)

Bureaucrats in lower-level
government

(.0014)

(.0094)

Price growth in 6 months

-.0135*

-.0137*

(.0079)

(.0080)

Price growth in 12 months

.0006

.0004

(.0074)

(.0074)

Price growth in 24 months
Bureaucrats in provincial

.0582

government * Price

(.0123)

growth in 6 months
Bureaucrats in lower-level

.0020

government * Price

(.0087)

growth in 6 months
Bureaucrats in provincial

.1757*

government * Price

(.1066)

growth in 12 months
Bureaucrats in lower-level

.0001

government * Price

(.0069)

growth in 12 months
Bureaucrats in provincial

.0777

government * Price

(.0697)

growth in 24 months
Bureaucrats in lower-level

-.0008

government * Price

(.0060)

growth in 24 months
Observations
R-sq

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

794271

.916

.916

.917

.917

.918

.918

Note: All regressions have same controls as in Column 4 of Table 5. We report robust standard errors.
The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **, and *.

Table 15: Price Discounts of Bureaucrats and Firmsâ€™ Expenditure on ETC
Dependent variable: Coefficient on â€œBureaucrats in critical
agencies#
Average Entertainment Expenditures (log)

(1)

(2)

-.038**

-.031*

(.018)

(.017)

Average Meeting Expenditures (log)
City GDP per capita (log)

(3)

(4)

-.042*

-.038*

(.023)

(.023)

-.022

-.018

(.020)
Observations
R-sq

(.019)

99

99

99

99

.067

.074

.132

.137

Note: The dependent variable is coefficient estimate for the dummy variable â€œBureaucrats in critical
agenciesâ€ in regression specification reported in Column 1 of Table 6, for each of the 99 cities in our
sample. The results are robust to inclusion of additional city-level controls such as the fraction of city
employment in financial sector, etc. The significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% are noted by ***, **,
and *.

$%$$&"
'$$(,+"
'$$(,'"
'$$(,-"
'$$(,("
'$$.,+"
'$$.,'"
'$$.,-"
'$$.,("
'$$),+"
'$$),'"
'$$),-"
'$$),("
'$$/,+"
'$$/,'"
'$$/,-"
'$$/,("
'$$*,+"
'$$*,'"
'$$*,-"
'$$*,("
'$$0,+"
'$$0,'"
'$$0,-"
'$$0,("
'$+$,+"
'$+$,'"
'$+$,-"
'$+$,("

+'%$$&"

+$%$$&"

*%$$&"

)%$$&"

(%$$&"

'%$$&"

Figure 1: The Share of Bureaucrats in Housing Purchasers: 2004-2010

+$&"
0&"
*&"
/&"
)&"
.&"
(&"
-&"
'&"
+&"
$&"
'$$("

'$$."

'$$)"

'$$/"

'$$*"

'$$0"

'$+$"

Figure 2: Average Percentage Difference in Per Square Meter Prices by
Bureaucrat Buyers and Non-Bureaucrat Buyers, by Year.

"

"

"
123456"-7"892:6;6"<=4;2:3"8=>?@6A6;7"B"C9=D="

