                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     APPLYING INSIGHTS FROM BEHAVIORAL ECONOMICS TO POLICY DESIGN

                                          Brigitte C. Madrian

                                         Working Paper 20318
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20318


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




I acknowledge financial support from the National Institute on Aging (grants P30-AG-034532, R01-AG-
021650, and P01-AG-005842). Comments from Caroline Hoxby, Todd Rogers, students at Harvard
University, and seminar participants at the Brookings Institution are very much appreciated. I also
thank Tarah Barzanji and Colin Gray for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein
are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Institute on Aging, the National
Bureau of Economic Research, or Harvard University. See my website for a list of my outside activities.
When citing this paper, please use the following: Madrian BC. 2014. Applying Insights From Behavioral
Economics To Policy Design. Annual Review of Economics 6:30.1-30.26.
doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080213-041033.

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Brigitte C. Madrian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Applying Insights from Behavioral Economics to Policy Design
Brigitte C. Madrian
NBER Working Paper No. 20318
July 2014
JEL No. D03,D04,H2,H3

                                            ABSTRACT

The premise of this article is that an understanding of psychology and other social science disciplines
can inform the effectiveness of the economic tools traditionally deployed in carrying out the functions
of government, which include remedying market failures, redistributing income, and collecting tax
revenue. An understanding of psychology can also lead to the development of different policy tools
that better motivate desired behavior change or that are more cost-effective than traditional policy
tools. The article outlines a framework for thinking about the psychology of behavior change in the
context of market failures. It then describes the research on the effects of a variety of interventions
rooted in an understanding of psychology that have policy-relevant applications. The article concludes
by discussing how an understanding of psychology can also inform the use and design of traditional
policy tools for behavior change, such as financial incentives.


Brigitte C. Madrian
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
Brigitte_Madrian@Harvard.edu
       “A lot of our policy models traditionally are based on a rather naïve
       understanding of what drives behavior. But if you have a more intelligent,
       nuanced account of how people make decisions, you can design policy that is
       more effective, less costly, and makes life easier for most citizens.”

                —David Halpern, Director of the UK Behavioural Insights Team
               (quoted in Bell 2013)




1. INTRODUCTION

       Market failures occur when markets, left to their own devices, generate an inefficient

allocation of resources: In short, when Q ≠ Q* in the familiar Econ 101 graphs of supply and

demand. A primary goal of public policy is to increase market efficiency by remedying market

failures (to the extent possible). The typical taxonomy of market failures—public goods,

externalities, information asymmetries, and market power—focuses on inefficiencies that relate

to either market structure or the incentives of market participants and gives rise to policy tools

designed to change either market structure or the incentives of market participants. The tools

conventionally employed in this effort include shifting market prices through either taxes or

subsidies, regulating output, and mandating information disclosure. The traditional analysis of

market failures and the impact of public policy on market outcomes assumes that market

actors—consumers and firms—are rational in their behavior, carefully weighing their own costs

and benefits in making economic decisions.

       More recent research on behavioral economics highlights another potential source of

market inefficiency: consumers’ cognitive limitations and psychological biases. Congdon et al.

(2011) delineate three broad categories of psychological biases: imperfect optimization, bounded




                                                  3
self-control, and nonstandard preferences.1 The first, imperfect optimization, arises because

consumers have limited attention and cannot possibly focus on all of the information relevant for

all of the decisions they are called upon to make. They have limited computational capacity,

which leads them to apply simplifying heuristics to complicated choice problems. And their

reasoning is often biased. The second, bounded self-control, is manifest in the discrepancy

between the intentions consumers have and their actual behavior. Consumers often plan to

behave in a certain way but end up doing otherwise. They procrastinate, their choices may vary

depending on their emotional state, and small barriers may in fact constitute significant

deterrents to action. Finally, consumer preferences are often context dependent. Individuals

exhibit a bias toward the status quo. Their choices are sensitive to how decisions are framed.

They evaluate outcomes not in terms of absolutes but relative to (endogenous) reference points.

Consumer preferences are also other regarding. Individuals care to some degree about others.

They also care about what others think of them (and their choices). They adhere to social norms

and are concerned about fairness.

           Cognitive bias does not necessarily imply market failure. Barr et al. (2013) note that in

some contexts, firms may have incentives to help mitigate consumers’ behavioral biases and

limit any resulting market failures. But firms may also exploit behavioral biases in ways that

create or exacerbate market failures.

           A leading example of a behavioral bias that impedes market efficiency is present bias, or

the tendency of individuals to place much less weight on the future relative to the present than

would be predicted by standard models of time discounting. Present bias can lead individuals to

make decisions today that reduce future welfare in ways that individuals will later regret (Strotz

1
    DellaVigna (2009) articulates a slightly different categorization of these psychological biases.
2
    There is substantial persistence and the default asset allocation as well.	  


                                                             4
1955, Laibson 1997). Analogous to an externality, the situation in which an individual’s decision

in the moment creates negative future consequences is sometimes referred to as an internality.

Present bias is posited as an explanation for behaviors ranging from a failure to save to smoking.

These behaviors can constitute a market failure if there are social costs from individuals saving

too little or smoking too much.

       The optimal response to market failures may also depend on psychological

considerations. For example, Campbell et al. (2011) note that mandated information provision or

disclosure is a policy tool often used to mitigate asymmetric information, reduce search costs and

limit market power, and remedy the underprovision of information-based public goods. But the

effectiveness of mandated information provision will be limited if consumers do not understand

the information, believe that it is not relevant to their decision making, or do not know how to

access or use it. Campbell et al. (2011) cite the following example: “If consumers mistakenly

believe that they will pay their credit bill on time every month, clear and transparent disclosure

of late fees and interest rates may not change behavior because consumers deem the information

irrelevant at the time they make a purchase.” An understanding of psychology can thus inform

how effective the tools traditionally deployed in the case of market failure will be. It can also

lead us to the development of different policy tools that better motivate desired behavior change

or that are more cost-effective than traditional policy tools.

       Efforts to incorporate behavioral economics into the design of more effective policy

solutions are underway across the globe. The best known initiative on this front is the

Behavioural Insights Team in the United Kingdom, more commonly referred to as the Nudge

Unit, whose self-proclaimed mission is to apply “insights from academic research in behavioural

economics and psychology to public policy and services” (for more information on the UK



                                                  5
Behavioral Insights Team, see https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/behavioural-

insights-team). The success of the Nudge Unit at devising, implementing, and testing new

approaches to achieving policy goals in domains ranging from tax collection to unemployment to

energy conservation has been widely touted. Several countries are using the UK Behavioural

Insights Team as a model for their own efforts to implement more behaviorally informed

approaches to policy design, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Saudi Arabia,

Singapore, and the United States (Bell 2013, Subramanian 2013).

       This article uses the lens of behavioral economics to examine a range of tools at the

disposal of policy makers to effect behavior change. I begin by setting up a framework for

evaluating traditional versus behaviorally informed policy tools (Section 2). I then discuss an

assortment of behaviorally informed policy tools and provide evidence on their impact drawn

from a variety of different policy domains. These tools can be broadly categorized as tools that

help individuals execute their stated preferences (Section 3) or tools that change either how

individuals evaluate the costs versus the benefits of behavior change or how individuals evaluate

their preferences (Section 4). Section 5 then considers how behavioral economics informs the use

and design of one traditional policy tool—financial incentives. Section 6 concludes with a

discussion of some of the factors that matter in evaluating which interventions are most

appropriate in a given context.


2. A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING POLICY TOOLS

       Consider first a market with a positive externality such as that for influenza vaccines. A

traditional analysis of such a market would assume that all actors are fully rational and make

decisions that maximize their own private benefit. An introductory economics textbook might

depict the outcome in this market as shown in Figure 1.


                                                 6
                                                  FIGURE'1'
                             Market'Failure'in'the'Case'of'a'Posi9ve'Externality'

                  Vaccine%price%

                                                                   S%




                                           DWL%
                        ABCD%=%
                        Cost%of%Subsidy%
                                                              D2%=%Marginal%Social%Beneﬁt%
                                                              D3%=%True%Marginal%Private%Beneﬁt%

                                                              D1%=%Observed%Market%Demand%
                                                              %%%%%%%%(Presumed%Marginal%Private%Beneﬁt)%
                                        Q1%     Q*%                     Vaccine%quan9ty%
                                      Market% Social%%
                                     Outcome% Op9mum%


        1
	  D       shows the observed market demand curve, traditionally taken as the marginal private benefit

to consumers from being vaccinated against the flu, whereas D2 shows the marginal social

benefit that accrues to society from vaccination. Because this is a market with a positive

externality, D2 lies above D1. The socially optimal quantity of vaccines, Q*, equates the marginal

cost of vaccines (as indicated by the supply curve, S) with their social marginal benefit, but this

exceeds the quantity that will prevail in the private market, Q1, when individuals make

vaccination decisions purely on the basis of their own private marginal benefit. The triangle

denoted DWL shows the social deadweight loss from the underprovision (relative to what is

socially optimal) of flu vaccines in this market.

               The traditional policy tools that an introductory economics textbook would advocate in

such a market are either (a) to subsidize vaccination (change the price) or (b) to mandate a



                                                       7
vaccination level equal to Q* (regulate the quantity). The first option, a subsidy, could be

directed to either consumers or suppliers of the vaccine. In either case, the impact of the subsidy

is to drive a wedge between the supply curve, S, and the observed demand curve, D1, equal to the

amount of the subsidy, s. Suppose the subsidy is given to consumers. Their private marginal

benefit from vaccination now increases from its previous level by the amount of the subsidy. If

the subsidy is set at its socially optimal level, the private marginal benefit curve shifts up from

D1 to D2, and the new equilibrium is the socially optimal vaccination level, Q*. There is,

however, a cost to provide the subsidy that moves the market from Q1 to Q*. The subsidy, s, is

paid to all consumers of the flu vaccine for a total cost equal to the area of rectangle ABCD in

Figure 1. If funding this subsidy requires distortionary taxation, economic efficiency can be

improved if there is a lower-cost way to shift vaccination demand to the socially optimal level.

       The traditional rational actor framework assumes that individuals make vaccination

decisions by comparing the marginal benefit of vaccination with the marginal cost. If the private

marginal benefit exceeds the private marginal cost, consumers get the vaccine; otherwise, they

do not. In this framework, providing a subsidy to consumers increases their marginal benefit,

while providing a subsidy to suppliers decreases the marginal cost. But there are other factors

that also influence vaccine demand—the ceteris paribus in our economic models. One of these

factors is the psychology that underlies how individuals do, or do not, think about decision tasks

such as whether to get a flu vaccine. This is where insights from behavioral science can help

shape more cost-effective public policy. Modifying the ceteris paribus may be a less expensive

approach to behavior change than applying the policy tools traditionally wielded by economists.

       For example, although there may be a significant gap between Q* and Q1, not all of that

gap may result from a wedge between the private and social marginal benefit of vaccination. For



                                                  8
example, individuals may intend to get a flu vaccine but fail to follow through (e.g., their

employer may offer a free workplace clinic, but they forget which day the clinic is open). In the

context of Figure 1, there may be a much smaller wedge between the private marginal benefit

and the social marginal benefit of getting a flu shot; rather, individuals may fail to act on their

private marginal benefit because they are inattentive, and it is this inattention that drives most of

the wedge between D1 and D2. In this scenario, D3 is the true private marginal benefit curve, but

D1 is the demand curve that we observe; the difference between the two results from consumers’

inattention. Providing a subsidy may do little to change market outcomes in this case; if most

consumers already perceive the marginal benefit as close to the marginal cost, further increasing

the marginal benefit does not change the calculus about whether or not to get a flu shot. If

attention is endogenous, then a subsidy may effect some behavior change by motivating greater

vigilance about when and where the vaccination clinic will occur. But if attention is the primary

problem, and the problem is not that the private marginal benefit is less than the marginal cost,

there may be lower-cost policy interventions to redirect attention (the shift observed in demand

from D1 to D3) and move the market equilibrium closer to Q*. Possible interventions that directly

address the problem of attention include reminding individuals more frequently or making

reminders more salient, encouraging individuals to make a concrete plan about when and where

they will get their flu shot, and moving the vaccination clinic to a central location to increase

visibility. The first two interventions are practically free; the third, changing the location of the

vaccination clinic, may impose some costs, but these costs are potentially much lower than the

costs of providing a subsidy to everyone who gets an influenza vaccine.

       Note that there may still be a role for traditional policy tools such as subsidies to change

behavior. In reality, we may have heterogeneous consumers who vary both in their degree of



                                                   9
inattentiveness and in the extent to which they internalize the positive externalities of

vaccination. For those individuals whose private marginal benefit is substantially lower than

their marginal cost, interventions to remind or help them plan to get vaccinated are unlikely to

change behavior because they fail to make vaccination attractive. In this case, a policy

intervention that changes the individual cost-benefit calculus is needed. A subsidy to consumers

will make getting the flu shot more attractive by increasing the private marginal benefit.

Similarly, a subsidy to providers will decrease the marginal cost and make it more likely that the

benefit to consumers of vaccination exceeds the cost. If part of the cost of getting a flu shot is the

time cost of getting to the vaccination clinic, then moving the clinic to a central location is an

intervention that potentially kills two birds with one stone: For attentive consumers who fail to

vaccinate because the cost (inclusive of time) exceeds their private benefit, changing the location

of the clinic reduces their marginal cost; for inattentive consumers who fail to vaccinate because

they forget when the flu clinic is, changing the location of the clinic provides an effective visual

reminder to get a flu shot.

       More generally, in thinking about what types of policy tools are likely to be most

effective at generating behavior change, a useful starting point is to examine how aligned

individual preferences are with the socially optimal outcome. Sometimes individual preferences

may be much closer to the social optimum than what is observed in the market. If so, there must

be some barrier to behavior change other than the private marginal cost exceeding the private

marginal benefit; in this case, helping individuals execute on their preferences may go a long

way toward social efficiency. Section 3 evaluates several different types of interventions in this

vein. If, alternatively, there is a significant wedge between what is individually and what is

socially optimal, then there may be a role for policy in changing the cost-benefit calculation. In



                                                 10
some cases, this may be best accomplished through the traditional tools of public policy. In

others, there may be more cost-effective approaches to increasing the private marginal benefit or

decreasing the marginal cost to effect behavior change; behaviorally informed interventions that

target perceived costs and benefits are examined in Section 4. But the bottom line is that in

almost any circumstance, understanding what impedes individuals from taking a desired action

helps inform the most productive margins along which to target a policy intervention.


3. BEHAVIORALLY INFORMED POLICY TOOLS TO HELP AGENTS EXECUTE

THEIR PREFERENCES

       As suggested in the preceding section, in some cases in which markets yield inefficient

outcomes, market participants may in fact have interests that are aligned (or more aligned) with

social optimality but may simply fail to execute on their preferences. For example, individuals

may want to get a flu shot, or vote in the next election, or save more, or eat a healthier diet, or

exercise more, or reduce their home energy consumption but may fail to follow through on their

intentions for a variety of reasons, including present bias, the complexity of the task at hand,

inattention, and temptation. Research has evaluated several different types of interventions

designed to help individuals carry out the intentions they themselves have, many of which have

been or could be fruitfully incorporated into public policy.

       The intervention that has received perhaps the most attention in academic, media, and

policy circles is changing the default option—the outcome that happens if agents do nothing. In

standard economic models, as long as transaction costs are small, defaults should have little

impact on economic outcomes; agents will opt out of any default that is not consistent with their

preferences. In practice, however, defaults can significantly impact outcomes, even in domains in

which the outcome is consequential (financially or otherwise) and even when the direct


                                                  11
transaction costs of opting out of the default are small. One such domain is savings. In the United

States, savings plan participation rates are substantially higher when the default is automatic

enrollment in the savings plan (i.e., individuals must opt out if they prefer not to save) than they

are when individuals must take action to participate in the savings plan. In the first study of the

impact of automatic enrollment on savings outcomes, Madrian & Shea (2001) document a 50–

percentage point increase in savings plan participation for newly hired employees at a large

employer that switched from an opt-in to an opt-out automatic enrollment regime. Other

subsequent studies document similar participation rate increases (Choi et al. 2004, 2006;

Beshears et al. 2008; Vanguard Group 2013). In related research, Thaler & Benartzi (2004) show

that enrolling individuals in a program that automatically increases savings plan contributions

each year substantially raises deferrals over a four-year period.

       These findings have motivated several policy reforms to increase retirement savings. In

the United States, the Pension Protection Act of 2006 incorporated provisions to encourage

employer adoption of automatic enrollment with automatic contribution escalation (see Beshears

et al. 2010 for a discussion of how economic research influenced this legislation). In 2007, New

Zealand implemented KiwiSaver, a program that automatically enrolls employees into a national

savings plan (see Toder & Khitatrakun 2006). And recent pension reform legislation in the

United Kingdom requires firms to automatically enroll employees in occupational pensions (see

UK Department for Work and Pensions 2012).

       Although automatic enrollment leads to unambiguous increases in savings plan

participation, its effects on asset accumulation and social welfare are less certain. First, the

savings plan contribution rate set as the default under automatic enrollment is extremely

persistent so that asset accumulation is very dependent on whether the default contribution rate is



                                                  12
set high or low.2 In the United States, most employer savings plans with automatic enrollment

have a low default contribution rate of 2–4% of pay. The default contribution in New Zealand’s

KiwiSaver program is 3%. Research suggests that some individuals who persist at these low

default contribution rates would have chosen a higher savings rate in the absence of automatic

enrollment (Madrian & Shea 2001, Choi et al. 2004). Thus, although automatic enrollment

increases asset accumulation within the plan for individuals who would otherwise have been

nonparticipants, it may have the perverse effect of lowering asset accumulation for some

individuals who would have saved on their own at a contribution rate higher than the default in

the absence of automatic enrollment (those who do not opt out of the default contribution rate).

Second, the increased asset accumulation in savings plans subject to automatic enrollment could

be offset by leakage from the savings plan before retirement, by lower savings elsewhere, or by

increased household debt. There is little evidence on the magnitude of these potential offsets,

although a recent study by Chetty et al. (2014) on the impact of a short-term mandatory savings

program in Denmark suggests that the extent of crowd out for that program was quite limited.

Finally, automatic enrollment may induce some individuals to save who might actually be worse

off as a result.

            A second policy-relevant domain in which defaults have significantly impacted outcomes

is organ donation (Johnson & Goldstein 2003). In many countries, individuals must sign up to be

potential organ donors at their death (informed consent), and as with savings plan participation

rates when individual must opt in, the fraction of people who sign up to be organ donors is

relatively low. Other countries have a system of presumed consent (individuals must opt out if

they do not wish to be organ donors), and in these countries, the fraction of people who opt out


2
    There is substantial persistence and the default asset allocation as well.	  


                                                                13
of organ donation is extremely low. Abadie & Gay (2006) show that actual organ donation rates

are 25-30 percentage points higher in presumed-consent countries relative to informed-consent

countries, a finding that has precipitated calls for a switch from informed to presumed consent in

the former countries.

       Although savings and organ donation are the domains in which defaults have received the

most attention, there are several other policy-relevant domains in which defaults impact

outcomes. In the health arena, influenza vaccines are an intervention for which the estimated

benefits exceed the costs of provision (see Nichol et al. 1994, Wilde et al. 1999), yet vaccination

rates are well below recommended guidelines. Chapman et al. (2010) estimate that giving

individuals a default flu shot appointment time increases vaccination rates by 12 percentage

points relative to a baseline vaccination rate of 33%. In the domain of household finance,

defaults have been found to impact payday loan repayment. In Colorado, 86% of payday

borrowers follow the default option of a 180-day installment loan after their initial loan term,

relative to only 10% in Washington, where an installment loan is merely an option rather than a

default (Pew Charit. Trusts 2013). Motivated by a desire to reduce consumer use of expensive

overdraft coverage, the 2009 CARD Act mandates that financial institutions require consumers

to proactively opt in to overlimit coverage on debit and credit card accounts rather than opt out,

which had been the prevailing norm. Defaults also impact environmental conservation outcomes;

Sunstein (2013b) cites dramatic differences in green energy use in German cities where

consumers must opt in versus opt out of purchasing their energy from so-called green sources.

       Despite the large body of evidence that defaults impact economically important

outcomes, the academic literature has given little consideration to what constitutes an optimal

default. Under what conditions is presumed consent socially preferable to informed consent? Do



                                                14
the benefits of higher influenza vaccination rates when individuals are given a default

appointment outweigh the costs that accrue when the majority of such individuals fail to show up

or cancel their appointment? Should the default contribution rate in a savings plan with

automatic enrollment be high or low? And how does changing the default compare to other

policy options that could be used to change behavior? Characterizing the nature of optimal

defaults is a worthy area of future research.

       Carroll et al. (2009) posit that in the case of substantial heterogeneity in consumer

preferences, specifying a default may be suboptimal because any default is unlikely to align well

with consumer preferences for more than a small minority of individuals. If present bias is an

important barrier to consumers’ implementing their preferences in the presence of heterogeneity,

one intervention that counters procrastination while respecting the diversity of preferences is to

require an active choice. In the savings domain, Carroll et al. (2009) compare the outcomes in an

employer-sponsored savings plan before and after employees were compelled to make an active

choice about whether to participate. They find that when not required to make a choice (opt in),

only 41% of newly hired employees enrolled in the savings plan. In contrast, when required to

make an active choice about savings plan participation (which could include not participating in

the savings plan), 69% enrolled. The 28–percentage point increase in savings plan participation,

although not as large as the effects estimated from moving from opt-in to opt-out enrollment,

preserves greater heterogeneity in savings plan contribution rates than does automatic

enrollment, which tends to corral participants into the contribution rate specified as the default.

In the domain of health, in which there is likely to be substantial preference heterogeneity,

Beshears et al. (2013a) examine an active choice mechanism to initiate home delivery for long-

term prescription drug medications. Under an opt-in regime, take-up of home delivery is low,



                                                 15
around 6% of those eligible. The adoption of an active choice approach leads to a sizeable 35–

percentage point increase in home delivery adoption. Because home delivery is cheaper than

retail pharmacy pick up for many drugs, the switch from retail pick up to home delivery leads to

a meaningful reduction in prescription drug expenditures. Similarly, Keller et al. (2011) find that

requiring an active choice leads to substantive increases in enrollment in an automatic

prescription drug refill program. Active choice has been advocated as a way to increase consent

rates for organ donation (Spital 1995) and has been implemented with some success on this front

in the United Kingdom, California, and Texas as a part of the driver’s licensing process (see

http://nudges.org/tag/organ-donation/ ).

       Interventions involving active choice forestall procrastination by requiring (or strongly

encouraging) individuals to make a decision. A related idea is to constrain the time window in

which individuals can take action without necessarily requiring a choice. O’Donoghue & Rabin

(1999) suggest such an approach as a way to encourage timely retirement savings plan

investment reallocation; similarly, Johnson et al. (2012) propose using time-limited windows for

policy initiatives such as home energy-efficiency improvement tax credits.

       One factor that may generate procrastination in the execution of personally and socially

desirable behaviors is the complexity of the task involved. If complexity is the barrier to action,

then a natural solution is to simplify the task at hand. One example that has received a fair

amount of attention is the process of applying for college financial aid in the United States

(Dynarski & Scott-Clayton 2006). Until fairly recently, the gateway to financial aid, the FAFSA

form, was eight pages long and included over 100 questions. As a consequence, a sizeable

fraction of eligible students did not even bother to apply for financial aid. Bettinger et al. (2012)

study a field experiment designed to simplify the financial aid application process by having paid



                                                 16
tax preparers help individuals complete the FAFSA form at the time when applicants file their

federal taxes. They find that this approach to simplifying the aid application process increases

the fraction of targeted families with high school seniors who apply for college financial aid by

16 percentage points; it also increases the fraction of children who actually attend college by 7

percentage points. The effects of this relatively inexpensive intervention are large relative to the

estimated effects of changing the price of college (Hansen 1983; Kane 1995; Dynarski 2000,

2003; Seftor & Turner 2002). The US Department of Education has subsequently implemented

its own efforts to simplify the financial aid application process.

       Hastings & Weinstein (2008) study the impact of simplifying information provision on

school choice outcomes in the Charlotte-Mecklenberg school district, which implemented a

school choice program in 2002. Initially, the information provided to facilitate choice was

unwieldy—more than 100 pages of descriptions provided by the schools with no objective data

and no tools to facilitate direct comparisons. The district eventually moved to providing families

with a much shorter, three-page list of test scores sorted alphabetically and subsequently

cooperated in a field experiment to test the provision of an even simpler one-page information

sheet with test score data confined only to schools relevant to each student. Hastings &

Weinstein (2008) estimate a sizeable 5– to 7–percentage point increase in the fraction of families

choosing a nonguaranteed school in response to simplified information provision (although they

find no difference between the three- and one-page information disclosures); importantly, the

parents who exercise the choice option also choose better-performing schools when they receive

the simplified disclosures.

       Simplification is an approach that has also been successfully applied to increase savings

plan participation and contribution rates. The essence of these interventions is to send individuals



                                                 17
a simple form with a single box and instructions to “check here” to initiate participation in the

savings plan at a prespecified default contribution rate and asset allocation or, in a separate form,

to increase savings plan contributions to the match threshold in the plan. Choi et al. (2010)] and

Beshears et al. (2013b) find an approximately 10–percentage point increase in the targeted

behaviors in response to the simplified enrollment and contribution rate change campaigns.

Moreover, they find that these effects diminish only somewhat over time so that repeated

simplified messaging results in even larger increases accumulated over time.

        In the book Simpler, Sunstein (2013a) articulates many ways that the US federal

government used behavioral insights to streamline and simplify government regulation under the

Obama administration’s first term. The tax code, unfortunately, is one area that was not

successfully reformed with an eye toward simplification, although many have called for such

changes.3 Other countries are following suit in simplifying regulation. For example, Mexico

recently restricted the types of fees that investment providers in its privatized social security

system are allowed to charge in an attempt to facilitate easier comparison of the fees being

charged and thereby stimulate greater market competition between investment providers to lower

fees (Duarte & Hastings 2012).

        Complexity has also been cited as a potential explanation for low take-up among those

eligible for social safety net programs such as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,

Supplemental Security Income, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, and the Earned

Income Tax Credit (EITC). Bhargava & Manoli (2011) ran a field experiment in conjunction

with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to evaluate the effectiveness of different approaches to

communicating EITC eligibility to taxpayers who did not claim the EITC but appeared eligible.

3
  Readers are referred to the recommendations of The President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (2005) as
just one example of many calling for a simpler US federal tax code.


                                                      18
The most effective intervention studied was replacing the standard IRS mailing with one that

incorporated a simplified message about potential eligibility and a simplified worksheet for

calculating the potential amount of the credit. This approach increased EITC take-up by 10

percentage points relative to a baseline take-up rate of 16% among those who received the

traditional IRS notices.

       Note that there is a fundamental tension in simplifying the process for obtaining

government aid. On the one hand, a complicated procedure creates a hassle cost that will ideally

reduce the incentives to feign eligibility by those who are not (Nichols & Zeckhauser 1982); on

the other hand, a complicated procedure also creates a hassle cost for those who are eligible,

leading many eligible not to apply, with potential implications for their economic well-being as

well as for program costs. The policy tool then is best characterized as the level of procedural

complexity, which can be set high or low to achieve different policy outcomes.

       The three types of interventions discussed above—changing the default, requiring an

active choice, and simplifying—are examples of what Thaler & Sunstein (2008) call choice

architecture, the design of the environment in which people make choices. There are several

additional choice architecture tools that policy makers can use to facilitate decision making that

better aligns outcomes with consumer preferences (see Thaler & Sunstein 2008 and Johnson et

al. 2012 for longer treatments on the tools of choice architecture). These include the following:

   •   A reduced number of options in a choice set. Toffler (1970) coined the phrase choice

       overload to describe the effects of having too many options from which to choose. These

       effects include procrastination, avoidance, dissatisfaction, reliance on imperfect

       heuristics, and potentially mistakes.




                                                19
    •    Decision aids. When choice is complicated, giving individuals access to tools or decision

         aids to facilitate the selection of the best option from a larger choice set can improve

         choice outcomes. Many popular websites (Amazon, Netflix, Google) use complicated

         algorithms to predict which options will be of most interest to consumers, but such

         approaches have relevance in the policy domain as well. For example, the Medicare.gov

         Medicare Plan Finder, which is designed to help seniors select the most appropriate

         prescription drug plan, is one example of such a tool in the policy domain of health.4

    •    Personalized information. When the optimality of a specific option depends on individual

         attributes of a given consumer, providing personalized information specific to the choice

         context can improve decision outcomes. For example, Kling et al. (2012) find that

         providing seniors with individualized information on lower-cost Medicare Part D

         prescription drug plans induces greater switching to a lower-cost plan (an 11–percentage

         point increase) than providing generic information about the opportunity to switch drug

         plans (and results in lower expected costs to consumers as well).

    •    The presentation of attributes in a way that facilitates informed consumer decision

         making. Larrick & Soll (2008) show that consumers make more accurate decisions about

         automobile fuel savings when fuel efficiency is expressed as gallons per 100 miles than

         with the more traditional miles per gallon measure (the so-called MPG illusion). This is

         because the relationship between gallons per mile (the measure that matters for

         determining relative fuel efficiency) and miles per gallon (the measure that matters if you

         want to know how far you can drive on a full tank of gas) is nonlinear, and consumers do

         poorly in evaluating nonlinear relationships. The US Environmental Protection Agency

4
  Health care is a domain that has seen the development of several decision aids designed to help consumers make
better informed choices about their medical treatment. Ubel (2013) discusses the inherent difficulties in assessing
the effectiveness of the many decision aids in this context.


                                                         20
    has recently revised its fuel economy labeling requirements to increase the prominence of

    expected annual fuel expenditures to help facilitate better fuel economy comparisons.

    Stango & Zinman (2009) show a related phenomenon in household financial decision

    making: Individuals linearize exponential functions, which leads them to underappreciate

    the cumulative interest costs of long-term debt and the long-term gains from savings due

    to compounding. The CARD Act of 2009 mandates changes in credit card statements to

    help consumers better recognize the costs of debt: Financial institutions must report the

    time it would take to pay off a credit card balance if making only the minimum monthly

    payment as well as the monthly payment required to pay off the balance in three years.

•   Standardized options to increase comparability. Gabaix & Laibson (2006) posit that firms

    engage in intentional obfuscation of relevant product attributes to reduce the ability of

    consumers to directly compare the costs and benefits of different options (shrouded

    attributes). This obfuscation can be a source of market power to firms and can also

    increase the likelihood that consumers make mistakes in their decision making. One

    regulatory approach to facilitate comparison shopping is to standardize product attributes.

    For example, supplemental Medigap insurance coverage for senior citizens must conform

    to one of 10 profiles (denominated with letters of the alphabet) delineated by the Centers

    for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

•   Feedback. For some decisions, consumers may have difficulty linking their actions with

    the outcomes they experience and the outcomes they desire. For example, consumers may

    see their monthly utility bills and have little understanding about which behaviors will be

    most cost-effective in reducing future energy consumption. One approach in such settings

    is to provide better feedback about the link between actions and outcomes. Darby (2006)




                                             21
         reviews the literature on providing consumers with feedback on home energy

         consumption. In general, the studies suggest that direct feedback (e.g., a real-time energy

         use display monitor) reduces energy consumption by 5–15%, whereas indirect feedback

         (e.g., better information on energy consumption as part of the monthly bill) reduces

         energy consumption by 0–10%.

         Commitment devices represent another category of interventions that can help individuals

execute their preferences in contexts in which they are likely to succumb to temptations that

generate short-run benefits that are outweighed by longer-term costs.5 In the most influential

paper in the literature on commitment devices, Ashraf et al. (2006) evaluate a field experiment

that offered a commitment savings account to clients of a local bank in the Philippines.

Participating clients who opted for the commitment savings product voluntarily restricted their

right to withdraw their savings until reaching either an individually chosen goal date or an

individually chosen goal amount. Relative to a control group not offered the commitment savings

product, those offered the commitment account had bank balances that were 82% higher 12

months later. Corroborating work on commitment savings products in other countries includes

Gugerty (2007), Ashraf et al. (2011), Brune et al. (2011), and Dupas & Robinson (2013). This

research provides a rationalization for restrictions on the ability to access retirement savings

account balances before reaching retirement age.

         Soman & Cheema (2011) evaluate an interesting variant of a commitment savings

technology in a field experiment targeted at unbanked construction laborers in rural India who

are paid cash wages. Individuals earmarked a certain amount of their weekly wages as savings

5
 Readers are referred to Bryan et al. (2010) for a review of the literature on the theoretical motivations for
commitment devices, the experimental and field evidence on the demand for commitment, and the impact of
commitment devices on outcomes.



                                                         22
that was then set aside in either one (nonpartitioned) or two (partitioned) sealed envelopes.

Realized savings was 39–216% higher for workers whose savings were partitioned into two

envelopes rather than put all into one envelope. The authors hypothesize that opening a savings

envelope, or violating the partition, induces guilt. Having multiple accounts, or partitions,

increases the psychological cost of spending money set aside for a specific purpose and

consequently increased the amount saved. The results of this study suggest that having multiple

purpose-specific savings accounts may be a more effective way to encourage savings than

having individuals rely on multipurpose savings accounts (e.g., having both a retirement income

account and a retirement health account may induce higher savings than a single generic

retirement account).

       Agricultural productivity is another policy domain in which commitment products have

policy relevance. Duflo et al. (2011) study several approaches to increasing fertilizer use by

farmers in rural Kenya. The context is interesting because there are clear benefits to fertilizer

usage, and most farmers understand these benefits and plan to use fertilizer, yet only a minority

do so, citing limited financial resources when the time comes to apply fertilizer. Some farmers

were given the opportunity to prepay for the next season’s fertilizer at the end of this season’s

harvest when financial constraints are less binding, essentially precommitting to fertilizer usage

by prepaying. Fertilizer utilization the next season was approximately 20 percentage points

higher for those offered the prepay option relative to farmers in a control group; fertilizer

utilization was also higher relative to famers who were offered a price subsidy in the next season

(but not the option to prepay at the end of the previous season’s harvest). These results suggest

both that there is a demand for commitment and that commitment devices can result in

meaningful changes in behavior.



                                                 23
         Research in psychology has identified a lack of planning as another barrier that impedes

individuals from executing on their preferences (Gollwitzer 1999, Gollwitzer & Sheeran 2006).

Without a plan for implementation, individuals who face competing demands for their attention

are prone to forget what it is they wanted to do. Encouraging people to form a plan to carry out

their intentions has been shown to increase the attainment of desired goals in a variety of policy-

relevant domains.6 For example, Lusardi et al. (2009) study the impact of helping employees

form and implement a savings plan through the provision of a planning aid that (a) encourages

individuals to set aside a specific time for enrolling in their savings plan, (b) outlines the steps

involved in enrolling in a savings plan (e.g., choosing a contribution rate and an asset allocation),

(c) gives an approximation of the time each step will take, and (d) provides tips on what to do if

individuals get stuck. This planning aid increased enrollment in the studied employer-sponsored

savings plan by 12–21 percentage points for newly hired employees.

         Nickerson & Rogers (2010) evaluate the effectiveness of prompting individuals to make a

concrete voting plan by asking them a series of questions: (a) “Around what time do you expect

to head to the polls on Tuesday?” (b) “Where do you expect you will be coming from when you

head to the polls on Tuesday?” (c) “What do you think you will be doing before you head out to

the polls?” They find a 9–percentage point increase in voter turnout among voters from single-

voter households, who they posit are less likely to have other support mechanisms in place to

encourage voting (this effect is more than twice as large as the next best get-out-the-vote script);

they find no effect of this intervention among individuals in multivoter households, presumably

because, in these households, individuals encourage and remind each other to vote and

effectively substitute for the formal planning prompt. In the health domain, Milkman et al.

6
 Readers are referred to Rogers et al. (2013) for a review of the literature on implementation intentions (planning)
and a discussion of the psychology around how plan making impacts behavioral outcomes.	  


                                                         24
(2011) evaluate the impact of prompting employees to make a concrete plan for the date and time

they will get a seasonal flu shot and find a 4–percentage point increase in vaccination rates

relative to a baseline rate of 33% among members of the control group. Other studies similarly

find that prompting individuals to make a plan increases the frequency of other prompted health

behaviors, including tetanus shots (Leventhal et al. 1965), cancer screening (Sheeran & Orbell

2000), healthy eating (Gollwitzer & Sheeran 2006), colonoscopy (Milkman et al. 2013), and

mammography (Rutter et al. 2006). In the educational domain, Duckworth et al. (2011) show

that having an implementation plan increases the test preparation efforts of high school students.

From a policy standpoint, these types of interventions have the attractive feature that they are

low cost so that even if their effects on behavior are modest, they may rank highly on the basis of

cost-effectiveness relative to other potential interventions. Such interventions could be effective

at encouraging a variety of other socially desirable behaviors, such as purchasing life insurance,

procuring a will, or switching to energy-efficient light bulbs.

       A natural complement to planning aids is the provision of reminders to follow through on

a desired course of action. Both planning prompts and reminders are extremely low cost and

scalable interventions that address the procrastination that arises because of limited attention.

Reminders can take a variety of forms. Austin et al. (2006) show that a verbal reminder

immediately before entering a car increases the fraction of drivers buckling their seat belt by 25

percentage points, whereas a reminder given several minutes beforehand has almost no impact.

Reminder letters are among the most cost-effective ways to encourage immunization, increasing

immunization rates by 8 percentage points on average (Briss et al. 2000, Szilagyi et al. 2000).

Reminders have also been effective at encouraging savings. Karlan et al. (2013) evaluate the

impact of providing reminders, either text messages or letters, on savings goal attainment in



                                                 25
Bolivia, Peru, and the Philippines. They find that reminders increase the likelihood that

individuals achieve their savings goals by 3 percentage points and increase the amount saved by

6 percentage points. Similarly, in a savings field experiment conducted in Chile, Kast et al.

(2012) find that individuals who received text message reminders saved substantially more than

individuals who did not. Soman & Cheema (2011) study visual reminders; they find that low-

income laborers in India saved 15% more when the envelope with their earmarked savings was

covered with a picture of their children than when it had no picture. A combination of planning

aids and reminders could be an effective way to encourage more active job seeking for workers

who have lost a job or to encourage more environmentally conscious behavior on the part of

consumers.


4. BEHAVIORALLY INFORMED POLICY TOOLS TO CHANGE HOW INDIVIDUALS

EVALUATE COSTS AND BENEFITS

       The preceding section of the article focuses on interventions to help individuals execute

their preferences that may be aligned with, or are closer to, socially optimal outcomes than what

may be observed in the market. Sometimes, however, individual preferences do not align with

socially optimal outcomes. In these cases, a different set of policy tools may be called for. As

noted in Section 2, the tools traditionally used to change behavior are price mechanisms

(taxes/fines to inhibit behavior or subsidies to encourage it), information provision, or regulation.

But an understanding of psychology may help inform a set of more cost-effective mechanisms to

change behavior than these traditional tools. The previous section discusses how choice

architecture can be used to help individuals execute their preferences. Choice architecture can

also be used to change how individuals evaluate the costs and benefits of different choice




                                                 26
outcomes. Alternatively, choice architecture could be viewed as a way of impacting how

individual preferences are constructed or expressed (Payne & Bettman 1999).

       For example, one reason for the persistence of defaults noted above is that decision

makers, unsure of the best course of action, may take the default as an implicit recommendation

set by a benevolent planner. If so, a naïve decision maker may see little reason to move away

from a default. The perception of an endorsement increases the perceived benefit of the default

outcome. There is evidence that defaults do create such endorsement effects in the context of

savings (Madrian & Shea 2001, Choi et al. 2004).

       There are several other tools of choice architecture for changing how individuals evaluate

the costs and benefits of their actions. One insight from psychology is that individuals do not

make absolute evaluations when making judgments. Rather, they make evaluations relative to a

reference point. As consequence, policy can be used to help set the reference points that

individuals use, a process called framing (Kahneman & Tversky 1984). One of the foundational

theories in behavioral economics, prospect theory, posits that individuals are twice as sensitive to

losses as they are to gains of an equal magnitude and that gains and losses are evaluated relative

to an endogenously chosen reference point (Kahneman & Tversky 1979). A natural consequence

of this theory is the possibility of influencing behavior by changing whether individuals perceive

an outcome as a gain or a loss. One area of policy application is tax collection. A natural

reference point for taxpayers at the time of tax filing is whether they owe additional tax (relative

to what has already been collected) or expect a refund. Engström et al. (2013) find that in

Sweden, taxpayers are more aggressive about claiming deductions when they owe additional tax

at the time of filing than when they expect a refund, consistent with the predictions of prospect

theory. An obvious policy implication is that a tax collection strategy that relies on



                                                 27
overwithholding followed by refunds at the time of tax filing may increase tax compliance and

total taxes paid. Interventions that recognize individuals’ aversion to loss have also been studied

in the policy domains of education (Fryer et al. 2012) and re-employment following periods of

unemployment (Bloom et al. 2001).

         Framing need not be relative to a reference point to have an impact, as in the previous

example. For example, Bryan et al. (2011) compare the impact of different ways of framing

voting on turnout in two significant elections. They find that voter turnout is several percentage

points higher when the importance of voting is framed as a noun (“to be a voter”) rather than as a

verb (“to vote”). They posit that the noun formulation of voting invokes a valued personal

identity and, by so doing, motivates higher turnout. One can easily imagine natural extensions to

other policy-relevant domains: to be a saver, to be environmentally conscious, to be healthy, to

be honest, and so on.7

         A policy-relevant variant of framing involves the labels used to name or describe

government programs. For example, Saez (2009) studies the impact of framing a financial

incentive to open an Individual Retirement Account (IRA) at the time of tax filing either as a

match or as a tax credit. This inquiry was motivated by a presumption that the Saver’s Credit, a

feature of the US tax code designed to encourage lower-income households to save, is largely

ineffective because people do not understand tax credits. He finds that framing the incentive as a

match is indeed more effective; doing so results in more individuals opening an IRA and

increases the unconditional contributions to IRA accounts.




7
 Readers are referred to Bryan et al. (2013) for experimental evidence showing that individuals are more likely to
cheat when dishonesty is framed in terms of cheating rather than being a cheater.


                                                        28
       There has been a long literature on flypaper effects in economics—money tends to stick

where it lands, even if it is otherwise fungible. A related finding is that how money is labeled

also impacts how it is spent. In a policy context, the designated use of government transfers

impacts how money is spent even if, in reality, the money is fungible. For example, Kooreman

(2000) finds that the marginal propensity to consume children’s clothing is 10 times larger out of

income designated as a “child benefit” than out of other income sources; in contrast, the marginal

propensity to consume adult clothing is highly significant for other income sources but is

negligible for income from designated child benefits. The labeling of income as a “child benefit”

apparently creates in parents a moral obligation to actually spend that money on their children.

Similarly, Benhassine et al. (2013) evaluate the impact on school enrollment of a labeled cash

transfer program in Morocco that designated the funds for children’s education, although the

funds could be used for other purposes. They find a sizeable increase in elementary school

attendance by children in families who received the labeled cash transfer relative to children in

control households who received nothing. They also find that a labeled cash transfer is as

effective, indeed for some measures is more effective, at promoting school attendance than is a

conditional cash transfer in which payments are made only if a child does in fact attend school

(and is significantly less expensive to administer than a conditional cash transfer program).

       These results clearly suggest that careful consideration should be given to the names

attached to any government program. For example, consider how the names of three different

programs that direct resources toward the unemployed might impact behavior. In the United

States, these programs are referred to as unemployment insurance, a label that reinforces a

recipient’s status as unemployed; in contrast, in the United Kingdom, these benefits are referred

to as a jobseeker’s allowance, a name that emphasizes a recipient’s attachment to and activity in



                                                29
the labor force. In Australia, these benefits were for a time referred to as work for the dole, a

label that emphasizes the receipt of government benefits and has a pejorative ring to it.

       Another application of how choice architecture can be used to change how individuals

evaluate costs and benefits comes from the literature on ballot order and election outcomes. In

many political jurisdictions, incumbents are listed on the ballot first. California has adopted a

different approach to ballot order: Candidates are randomized to their position on the ballot. Ho

& Imai (2008) use the naturally occurring variation in ballot order across the state to estimate the

impact of ballot order on election outcomes. They find that being listed first on the ballot has an

impact on general election outcomes only for nonpartisan candidates; ballot order has a much

larger impact in primary elections, where all candidates benefit from being listed first, and minor

party candidates benefit most.

       Shu et al. (2012) document another example of ordering effects. They find that asking

consumers to sign a statement affirming that the information provided on an insurance form is

true before filling out the form were more honest than consumers who were asked to sign the

statement affirming their honesty after filling out the form. Yet most forms that request a

signature affirming that the information provided is correct ask for this confirmation at the end.

Moving the position of this signature request from the end to the beginning of the form has

relevance in many policy areas, including tax filing and applications for a myriad of public

assistance programs.

       The importance of order effects in the outcomes discussed above suggests that other

structural features of choice menus may also be relevant in policy design. In the field of financial

security, the mix of retirement investment options selected by employees is responsive to

changes in menu design. Benartzi & Thaler (2001) find that people exhibit a bias toward


                                                 30
diversification and, in the extreme, apply a 1/N rule to decisions involving investments across an

array of asset categories. Given that the financial impact of such a diversification bias depends

on the mix of asset categories, employers could be encouraged by policy makers to offer

retirement investment options that parse out favored investment categories.

       The different choices and behavior of individuals in response to ad hoc or subjective

categorizations are also visible in the field of health. Fox et al. (2005) find that offering

individuals a selection from multiple categories of healthy foods and only one category of

unhealthy food increased healthy food choices when compared to offering a selection from

multiple categories of both healthy and unhealthy foods. Positive health choices have also been

observed in response to the structural presentation of healthy options in ways that enable their

convenient selection. For example, featuring healthy or unhealthy sandwich options at the start

of a menu was found to substantially alter the likelihood of choosing a healthy sandwich by

study participants (Wisdom et al. 2010). Research conducted for the US Department of

Agriculture suggests that government-funded nutrition programs could use packaging or other

presentation methods to help individuals monitor and control the volume of their food

consumption (Just et al. 2007).

       A final category of behaviorally informed interventions used to impact outcomes derives

from the observation that individuals care not just about their own behavior in isolation, but

rather evaluate it in a social context, that is, in terms of what others around them are doing and

the judgments that others may pass on their behavior. For example, Gerber & Rogers (2009)

show that voter turnout is higher when individuals are led to believe that expected voter turnout

will be high rather than low. Similarly, Gerber et al. (2008) find that voter turnout is several

points higher when individuals are led to believe that their neighbors will be informed ex post



                                                  31
about whether they voted. The use of social comparisons has been widely used to influence

household behavior in the domain of energy use and the environment. Alcott (2011), Alcott &

Rogers (2014), and Costa & Kahn (2013) examine the impact of providing consumers with

information on their own energy consumption and that of their similarly situated neighbors. They

all find that sending consumers home energy reports, which contain a social comparison element,

diminishes home energy consumption.8 Social norms have also been used to encourage tax

compliance. In a recent test of a social norms approach to reducing tax delinquency, the UK

Behavioral Insights Team finds that providing information to delinquent taxpayers on the

fraction of people who pay their taxes on time increases tax compliance by almost 15 percentage

points (Behav. Insights Team 2012). Although social norms hold some promise for changing

behavior at relatively low cost, the effects do not always operate in the way predicted. For

example, Beshears et al. (2013c) evaluate whether conveying social norms around savings can be

used as a way to increase savings plan participation and contributions. They find a somewhat

paradoxical result: Employees who received information on the fraction of their coworkers

saving were actually less likely to save as a result. This raises questions about the contexts in

which social norms will and will not impact consumer behavior, which is worthy of future

research.


5. BEHAVIORALLY INFORMED INCENTIVES

        In addition to the many nontraditional behaviorally informed policy tools for behavior

change discussed in Sections 3 and 4, there is still a role for traditional policies such as financial

incentives in the realm of behavior change. As noted in Section 2, if the impediment to behavior


8
  Although the home energy reports evaluated in these studies have a social norm element, and the framing of these
papers is largely around social norms, the home energy reports do have other elements that could contribute to
reduced energy utilization.


                                                        32
change is that the cost of undertaking a socially desirable action exceeds the private benefit,

incentives, either positive or negative, provide one option that can better align benefits with costs

to make behavior change attractive. But even within the realm of incentives, there are insights

from behavioral economics that can help inform us about when to use incentives and how to

structure them. Kamenica (2012) provides a more comprehensive review of the literature on

behavioral economics and incentives; I focus here on a few insights that seem particularly

relevant for evaluating incentives as a tool for changing behavior from a public policy

standpoint.

       Although incentives clearly have a role in economic life—many of us would not be

working in our current jobs absent any compensation—nonfinancial incentives can be strong

motivators in some contexts and may be less expensive than the financial incentive that would be

required to generate a similar degree of behavior change. For example, Levitt et al. (2012)

examine the effectiveness of several different incentive schemes to motivate student performance

on standardized exams. They find that giving students a trophy for meeting performance targets,

at a cost of about $3 per student, has roughly the same impact on test scores as a direct financial

incentive of either $10 or $20, and in some cases is more effective.

       Grant & Gino (2010) study the effort of salaried employees working in a university

development office. Some were randomized into a business-as-usual treatment arm, while others

were randomized into an “expression of thanks” arm. Employees in both groups received daily

feedback on the number of fundraising calls they had made; in addition, employees in the second

condition were visited by the director of annual giving who personally thanked them for their

efforts with the following message: “I am very grateful for your hard work. We sincerely

appreciate your contributions to the university.” The number of phone calls made each week



                                                 33
increased by 50% for employees in the latter group after they were thanked, whereas the

productivity of employees in the business-as-usual arm did not change over time. This study did

not compare the impact of giving thanks with the impact of a financial incentive, but few studies

on financial incentives in other contexts find productivity increases anywhere near this

magnitude (and the cost of expressing thanks is virtually free).

       Not only can nonfinancial incentives serve as effective motivators in certain contexts,

financial incentives can sometimes backfire by crowding-out intrinsic motivation. Gneezy &

Rustichini (2000b) show that providing small incentives for behaviors that otherwise tend to

carry some level of personal reward can reduce intrinsic motivation and lead to lower

performance relative to having no incentive at all. In a related paper, the same authors show that

penalizing undesired behavior can also backfire (Gneezy & Rustichini 2000a); when a daycare

provider started issuing fines to parents for picking up their children late, the number of late pick

ups actually increased. Evidently, attaching a price to late pick up legitimized the behavior in the

mind of parents (as long as they were willing to pay). Similarly, Frey & Oberholzer-Gee (1997)

find that offering compensation for prosocial behaviors that are personally costly (in their study,

the willingness to accept having a nuclear waste repository cited locally) dramatically decreases

civic-minded behavior. Although the message of these papers is certainly not that financial

incentives never work, they do suggest that incentives must be approached very carefully when

the desired behavior has a prosocial element or provides some degree of intrinsic motivation.

       Nonetheless, money may be a powerful motivator in many contexts. Lacetera et al.

(2014) evaluate a large-scale field experiment that provided varying levels of compensation to

donate blood. They find that donation rates increase with the size of the financial incentive. But

consistent with the research on intrinsic motivation and incentives, they find that for individuals



                                                 34
unaware of the reward when they showed up to donate blood, subsequent donation rates are

lower relative to the case when there is no reward. In a study comparing financial and

nonfinancial incentives, Just & Price (2014) evaluate a set of interventions around motivating

elementary school children to eat more fruits and vegetables at lunch. Children in some schools

were offered a financial incentive (25 cents) each day they consumed a fruit or vegetable, while

children in other schools were given a lottery ticket entitling the winner to a tangible prize of

roughly equivalent expected value. In this study, the quarter was more motivating than the

chance to win a prize, although it is impossible to know whether the prize was less motivating

because the students perceived it as being less valuable or because the uncertainty about whether

the students would receive a prize made it less attractive.

       In contexts in which incentives are a potentially cost-effective approach to change

behavior, behavioral economics can inform us how to design incentives to make them maximally

effective. For example, lottery-like incentives such as the one discussed above may actually be

more motivating than linear financial rewards because individuals tend to overweight small

probabilities and underweight larger probabilities in their decision making (this is referred to as

probability weighting in the prospect theory model of Kahneman & Tversky 1979). The

implication is that if there are two payments of equivalent expected value, a small guaranteed

payment and a much larger uncertain amount with a low probability of payment, the latter will

be preferred because individuals overweight the low probability of the uncertain payout and act

as if it has a higher expected value. In the health domain, lottery-based incentive schemes have

been studied as inducements for weight loss (Volpp et al. 2008a), medication adherence (Volpp

et al. 2008b), and blood donation (Goette & Stutzer 2008). The results indicate that lottery-based

incentives generate greater compliance with the motivated behavior than the absence of an



                                                 35
incentive, although none of these studies includes a linear payment condition; as a result, a

comparison between lottery-based incentives and linear incentives with the same expected value

cannot be made. Prospect theory probability weighting is also the motivation behind prize-linked

savings products that are generally illegal in the United States but that have a long history and

some popularity in other counties where they are allowed (Kearney et al. 2010). Whether prize-

linked savings products actually increase savings is an open empirical question, although one

recent paper finds suggestive evidence from a laboratory experiment that lottery-like payouts

lead to greater consumption deferrals than do standard linear interest rates (Filiz-Ozbay et al.

2013).

         The timing of incentive payments can also impact their effectiveness in motivating

behavior change, more so than would be implied by standard discounting. If individuals have

present bias, temporally proximate incentives will have a much greater impact than those in the

future. Just & Price (2014) find that elementary school students are much more likely to eat a

fruit or vegetable at lunch if offered an immediate incentive for doing so (a quarter today)

relative to a slightly delayed incentive (a quarter in two weeks). Similarly, List et al. (2012)

compare immediate versus delayed incentives for students’ exam performance and find that

exam performance improves when students are offered an immediate incentive, but delayed

incentives have no impact at all. The delayed payment of incentives could help explain why

some studies of student incentives for school performance find almost no effect on outcomes

(e.g., Fryer 2011). These findings also suggest that providing incentives for certain behaviors

through the tax code, which almost necessitates a temporal delay, may not be the most cost-

effective approach to providing financial motivation.




                                                 36
       Another factor that can impact the effectiveness of incentives is whether they are

structured such that they are perceived as a gain or as a loss. Levitt et al. (2012) find that student

incentives for test performance are more effective using a loss framing (students are given the

reward and then told they will have to give it back if performance is inadequate) than a gain

framing (students are told that if exam performance is adequate, they will receive a reward).

Similarly, Fryer et al. (2012) compare the effectiveness of financial incentives to teachers for

improving student exam performance using a gain framing (the incentive is paid to teachers at

the end of the school year after student performance on the incentivized test has been measured)

versus a loss framing (the incentive is paid to all teachers at the start of the school year, and

teachers are told that they will be required to return the payment at the end of the school year if

student exam performance targets are not met). They find that structuring the teacher

performance incentive as a loss if targets are not met is almost twice as effective at raising exam

performance as structuring the incentive as a gain.

       For socially desirable outcomes that are the result of a complicated production process

(e.g., education), another important factor in the design of an incentive scheme is the behavior or

outcome to which the incentive is tied. Two studies on incentives in education in developing

countries where pervasive teacher absenteeism is a significant impediment to educational

improvement provide an interesting contrast in how to approach this issue. Duflo et al. (2012)

study an incentive scheme in India that tied teacher pay to the number of days actually spent in

the classroom each month rather than guaranteeing teachers a fixed monthly salary. They find a

21–percentage point decrease in teacher absenteeism with the incentive scheme compared to the

fixed salary. In addition, higher teacher attendance also translated into improved test scores.

Glewwe et al. (2010) study a teacher incentive scheme in Kenya where teacher absenteeism is



                                                  37
also a problem. The scheme provided incentives to teachers for raising student test performance

on a specific exam. They find increased student performance on the incentivized exam, but no

better student performance on exams not tied to any incentive, and no change in teacher

attendance, homework, or other pedagogy practices. The conclusion is that teachers are teaching

to the test or perhaps, more precisely, are channeling effort only into those activities that directly

impact their incentive payments. Although these studies are only two in a long literature on

incentives in education and other domains, they suggest that incentives work better when tied to

behaviors that directly impact the outcome desired.

       Overall, financial incentives appear to work best at motivating behavior change if they

are simple, tied to controllable outcomes, the outcome matters, and the incentives reinforce what

individuals already want to do. Incentives work less well when the structure of the incentive is

complicated and when the link between effort and outcomes is less clear (the multitasking

problem). And in some cases, incentives can backfire because they are too low or because they

crowd out intrinsic motivation.


6. CONCLUSION

       This article evaluates the implications of behavioral economics for the design of policy

solutions to remedy market failures, redistribute resources, and collect tax revenue. There are at

least three substantive insights that come from reviewing the behavioral economics literature as

it relates to public policy. First, the psychological biases of consumers can generate market

inefficiencies beyond the traditional taxonomy of market failures. Second, the effectiveness of

traditional policy tools may be impacted by psychological considerations. And third, an

understanding of psychology can expand the scope of policy tools available to remedy market

failures, redistribute resources, and collect government revenue.


                                                  38
         One policy domain long encouraged by traditional policy tools and more recently by

behaviorally informed policy tools is retirement savings. Public policy has historically promoted

private saving for retirement using financial incentives. In the United States, the primary

inducement to save is the exemption of retirement savings plan contributions (up to a limit) from

taxable income. The Joint Committee on Taxation places the magnitude of this tax expenditure

in 2014 at $127.2 billion annually (Joint Comm. Tax. 2013). Lower-income taxpayers are also

eligible for a refundable tax credit, the Saver’s Credit, as a further enticement to save. In

addition, public policy encourages employers who sponsor retirement savings plans to provide

their own financial inducements for employees to save, namely the provision of an employer

match.

         A large body of literature has examined the price elasticity of savings. A rather consistent

finding from this literature is that the behavioral response to changes in the price of saving is not

particularly large. Madrian (2013) surveys the literature on the impact of one kind of financial

incentive, matching, on savings plan participation and contributions. The studies using the most

credible empirical methods find strikingly similar results in a variety of different contexts using a

variety of different data sources: A matching contribution of 25% increases savings plan

participation by roughly 5 percentage points. In statistical parlance, although the matching

contribution t-statistic is significant, its partial R2 is small.

         The relatively small impact of financial incentives on savings plan participation suggests

that a failure to save is not primarily the result of inadequate financial incentives. Rather, there

are other barriers to saving not accounted for by traditional economic models and not addressed

by traditional policy solutions. The literature on behavioral economics and savings outcomes

points to a myriad of psychological frictions that impede savings, including present bias,



                                                     39
complexity, inattention, and temptation. In many cases, countering these frictions leads to

increases in savings plan participation and asset accumulation that surpass the effects of a

matching contribution alone. This article reviews several behaviorally informed interventions to

encourage increased savings that have a greater impact on savings outcomes than do financial

incentives: providing defaults (automatic enrollment and contribution escalation), requiring an

active choice, simplifying the enrollment process, providing individuals with planning aids,

making commitment savings products available, and dividing savings into different partitions. A

final behaviorally informed intervention—reminders—has a similar impact to providing

financial incentives but is virtually free. All these interventions can be implemented at relatively

low cost, at least in comparison to the financial incentive that would be required to generate the

same degree of behavior change.

       The example of savings shows the power of behavioral economics to help shape more

cost-effective policy solutions. Savings is but one of the many domains discussed in this article

in which behavioral economics has had, or has the potential to have, an impact on consequential

policy outcomes. An important question for policy design is assessing which interventions,

whether traditional or behaviorally informed, are most appropriate in which contexts. Several

context-specific factors warrant consideration in such an analysis.

       In some contexts, individual preferences may be aligned with what is socially optimal,

but individuals may have trouble executing those preferences. If this is true across the board,

then policy interventions that move individuals in the direction of what is both individually and

socially optimal can be Pareto improving—they can make everyone better off without making

anyone worse off. Such interventions can be judged by their cost-effectiveness—how much bang

for the buck do they deliver? Similarly, individual behavior may be privately optimal but may



                                                 40
deviate from what is socially optimal in a fairly uniform fashion. For example, everyone may

engage too much in activities that generate negative externalities (e.g., pollution) and too little in

activities that generate positive externalities (e.g., vaccinations). In this case as well, policy

interventions that move individuals in the direction of what is socially optimal can improve

social welfare and can be judged by their cost-effectiveness.

        The most interesting set of contexts involves those where there is heterogeneity in the

extent to which individual outcomes deviate from what is individual and/or socially optimal. For

example, some individuals may be saving at a socially optimal level, while others may be saving

too little. In these situations, policy interventions may generate distributional effects that warrant

consideration. Of particular concern is the potential that a policy intervention may in fact cause

harm to some individuals. For example, one criticism of using a change in the default to

influence outcomes is that many individuals tend to persist at the default option. Indeed, it is this

feature of defaults that makes them so attractive from the perspective of trying to effect behavior

change. If those for whom the default is socially optimal persist at the default, while those for

whom it is not opt out, there may be little cause for concern. But it may be that the default

outcome is most persistent for those who are least well informed, and as a result, individuals for

whom it is not appropriate could be made worse off.

        The interventions enumerated in this article vary in their potential to do harm. Some seem

unlikely candidates to reduce welfare for anyone: providing individualized information, giving

feedback about the relationship between behavior and observed outcomes (e.g., energy

consumption), and presenting attributes in a way that facilitates informed decision making.

Others have a greater potential for harm: changing the default option, framing, introducing social

influence, and providing commitment devices. When interventions have a heterogeneous impact,



                                                   41
and there is potential for harm, the benefits to individuals who are made better off must be

weighed against the costs to those who are harmed in determining which interventions have the

greatest impact on overall social welfare. In assessing the scope for harm, an important

possibility is that the loss function may not be symmetric. For example, the harm from donating

the body organs of a deceased individual whose family is opposed to organ donation may differ

from (and likely exceed) the harm of not donating the body organs of a deceased individual

whose family supports organ donation. A different set of policy tools may be called for in

contexts in which there is little scope for harm or the scope for harm is limited relative to

contexts in which the scope for harm is more sizeable, in terms of either the number of

individuals affected or the magnitude of the harm to those hurt.

Although this article cites many examples of behaviorally informed interventions that have had

have had an impact on policy-relevant outcomes, there are still many fruitful directions for future

research in this area. First, we need more evidence comparing different behaviorally informed

policies to each other and to the traditional tools of public policy. Second, we need more

theoretical and empirical research into the contexts that best lend themselves to different types of

interventions (e.g., when is a default preferable to using social influence and vice versa).

Relatedly, we need more research on the contexts in which behaviorally informed interventions

work well, do not work at all, or can actually backfire. Third, we need more research into the

long-term impacts of behaviorally informed policy interventions. To what extent do the (mostly)

short-term effects documented in the existing literature persist, and to what extent are they

undone or attenuated with time?9 Finally, we need more research calibrating the impact of

behaviorally informed interventions to the benchmark of social optimality rather than to the

9
 Readers are referred to Rogers & Frey (2014) for a framework for thinking about short-term versus persistent
changes in behavior.


                                                        42
status quo. This of course requires taking a stand on what is socially optimal, a task that

admittedly is easier said than done.




                                                 43
LITERATURE CITED

Abadie A, Gay S. 2006. The impact of presumed consent legislation on cadaveric organ
donation: a cross-country study. J. Health Econ. 25:599–620

Alcott H. 2011. Social norms and energy conservation. J. Public Econ. 95:1082–95

Alcott H, Rogers T. 2014. The short-run and long-run effects of behavior interventions:
experimental evidence from energy conservation. Am. Econ. Rev. In press

Ashraf N, Aycinena D, Martinez C, Yang D. 2011. Remittances and the problem of control: a
field experiment among migrants from El Salvador. Work. Pap., Univ. Mich., Ann Arbor

Ashraf N, Karlan D, Yin W. 2006. Tying Odysseus to the mast: evidence from a commitment
savings product in the Philippines. Q. J. Econ. 121:635–72

Austin J, Sigurdsson SO, Rubin YS. 2006. An examination of the effects of delayed versus
immediate prompts on safety belt use. Environ. Behav. 38:140–49

Barr MS, Mullainathan S, Shafir E. 2013. Behaviorally informed regulation. In Behavioral
Foundations of Public Policy, ed. E Shafir, pp. 440–64. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press

Behav. Insights Team. 2012. Applying behavioural insights to reduce fraud, error and debt.
Work. Pap., UK Cabinet Off., London

Bell C. 2013. Inside the coalition’s controversial ‘Nudge Unit.’ The Telegraph, Feb. 11

Benartzi S, Thaler RH. 2001. Naive diversification strategies in defined contribution savings
plans. Am. Econ. Rev. 91:79–98

Benhassine N, Devoto F, Duflo E, Dupas P, Pouliquen V. 2013. Turning a shove into a nudge? A
‘labeled cash transfer’ for education. NBER Work. Pap. 19227

Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2008. The importance of default options for
retirement savings outcomes: evidence from the United States. In Lessons from Pension Reform
in the Americas, ed. SJ Kay, T Sinha, pp. 59–87. New York: Oxford Univ. Press

Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Weller B. 2010. Public policy and saving for
retirement: the “autosave” features of the Pension Protection Act of 2006. In Better Living
Through Economics: How Economic Research Improves Our Lives, ed. J Siegfried, pp. 274–90.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press

Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2013a. Active choice and health care costs:
evidence from home delivery for prescription drugs. Work. Pap., Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA




                                               44
Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2013b. Simplification and saving. J. Econ. Behav.
Organ. 95:130–45

Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Milkman KL. 2013c. The effect of providing peer
information on retirement savings decisions. Work. Pap., Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA

Bettinger EP, Long BT, Oreopoulos P, Sanbonmatsu L. 2012. The role of application assistance
and information in college decisions: results from the H&R Block FAFSA experiment. Q. J.
Econ. 127:1–38

Bhargava S, Manoli D. 2011. Why are benefits left on the table? Assessing the role of
information, complexity, and stigma on take-up with an IRS field experiment. Work. Pap., Univ.
Tex., Austin

Bloom H, Schwartz S, Lui-Gurr S, Lee S, Peng J, Bancroft W. 2001. Testing a financial
incentive to promote re-employment among displaced workers: the Canadian Earnings
Supplement Project (ESP). J. Policy Anal. Manag. 20(3):505–23

Briss PA, Rodewald LE, Hinman AR, Shefer AM, Strikas RA, et al. 2000. Reviews of evidence
regarding interventions to improve vaccination coverage in children, adolescents, and adults. Am.
J. Prev. Med. 18(Suppl.):97–140

Brune L, Gine X, Goldberg J, Yang D. 2011. Commitments to save: a field experiment in rural
Malawi. Work. Pap., World Bank, Washington, DC

Bryan CJ, Adams GS, Monin B. 2013. When cheating would make you a cheater: Implicating
self prevents unethical behavior. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 142:1001–5

Bryan G, Karlan D, Nelson S. 2010. Commitment devices. Annu. Rev. Econ. 2:671–98
Bryan CJ, Walton GM, Roger T, Dweck CS. 2011. Motivating voter turnout by invoking the
self. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108:12653–56

Campbell JY, Jackson HE, Madrian BC, Tufano P. 2011. Consumer financial protection. J.
Econ. Perspect. 25(1):91–114

Carroll G, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Metrick A. 2009. Optimal defaults and active
decisions: theory and evidence from 401(k) saving. Q. J. Econ. 124:1639–74

Chapman GB, Li M, Colby H, Yoon H. 2010. Opting in vs. opting out of influenza vaccination.
JAMA 304:43–44

Chetty R, Friedman JN, Leth-Petersen S, Nielsen T, Olsen T. 2014. Active vs. passive decisions
and crowd-out in retirement savings accounts: evidence from Denmark. Q. J. Econ. 129(3): In
press




                                               45
Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2010. Why does the law of one price fail? An experiment on
index mutual funds. Rev. Financ. Stud. 23:1405–32

Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Metrick A. 2004. For better or for worse: default effects and
401(k) savings behavior. In Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, ed. D Wise, pp. 81–121.
Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press

Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC, Metrick A. 2006. Saving for retirement on the path of least
resistance. In Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New Agenda, ed. EJ McCaffrey, J Slemrod,
pp. 304–51. New York: Russell Sage Found.

Congon WJ, Kling JR, Mullainathan S. 2011. Policy and Choice. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press

Costa DL, Kahn ME. 2013. Energy conservation “nudges” and environmentalist ideology:
evidence from a randomized residential electricity field experiment. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc.
11:680–702

Darby S. 2006. The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption: a review for DEFRA of the
literature on metering, billing, and direct displays. Work. Pap., Environ. Change Inst., Univ.
Oxford, UK

DellaVigna S. 2009. Psychology and economics: evidence from the field. J. Econ. Lit.
47(2):315–72

Duarte F, Hastings JS. 2012. Fettered consumers and sophisticated firms: evidence from
Mexico’s privatized social security market. NBER Work. Pap. 18582

Duckworth AL, Grant H, Loew B, Oettingen G, Gollwitzer PM. 2011. Self-regulation strategies
improve self-discipline in adolescents: benefits of mental contrasting and implementation
intensions. Educ. Psychol. 31:17–26

Duflo E, Hanna R, Ryan S. 2012. Incentives work: getting teachers to come to school. Am. Econ.
Rev. 102:1241–78

Duflo E, Kremer M, Robinson J. 2011. Nudging farmers to use fertilizer: theory and
experimental evidence from Kenya. Am. Econ. Rev. 101:2350–90

Dupas P, Robinson J. 2013. Why don’t the poor save more? Evidence from health savings
experiments. Am. Econ. Rev. 103:1138–71

Dynarski SM. 2000. Hope for whom? Financial aid for the middle class and its impact on college
attendance. Natl. Tax J. 53:629–61

Dynarski SM. 2003. Does aid matter? Measuring the effect of student aid on college attendance
and completion. Am. Econ. Rev. 93:278–88



                                              46
Dynarski SM, Scott-Clayton J. 2006. The cost and complexity in federal student aid: ;essons
from optimal tax theory and behavioral economics. Natl. Tax J. 59:319–56

Engström P, Nordblom K, Ohlsson H, Persson A. 2013. Tax compliance and loss aversion.
Work. Pap. 2011:17, Dep. Econ., Uppsala Univ.

Filiz-Ozbay E, Guryan J, Hyndman K, Kearney M, Ozbay E. 2013. Do lottery payments induce
savings behavior? Evidence from the lab. NBER Work. Pap. 19130

Fox CR, Ratner RK, Lieb DS. 2005. How subjective grouping of options influences choice and
allocation: diversification bias and the phenomenon of partition dependence. J. Exp. Psychol.
Gen. 134:538–51

Frey B, Oberholzer-Gee F. 1997. The cost of price incentives: an empirical analysis of
motivation crowding-out. Am. Econ. Rev. 87:746–55

Fryer R. 2011. Financial incentives and student achievement: evidence from randomized trials.
Q. J. Econ. 126:1755–98

Gabaix X, Laibson D. 2006. Shrouded attributes, consumer myopia, and information suppression
in competitive markets. Q. J. Econ. 121:505–40

Gerber AS, Green DW, Larimer CW. 2008. Social pressure and voter turnout: evidence from a
large-scale field experiment. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 102:33–48

Gerber AS, Rogers T. 2009. Descriptive social norms and motivation to vote: Everybody’s
voting and so should you. J. Polit. 71:178–91

Glewwe P, Ilias N, Kremer M. 2010. Teacher incentives. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 2(3):205–27

Gneezy U, Rustichini A. 2000a. A fine is a price. J. Legal Stud. 29:1–17

Gneezy U, Rustichini A. 2000b. Pay enough or don’t pay at all. Q. J. Econ. 115:791–810

Goette L, Stutzer A. 2008. Blood donations and incentives: evidence from a field experiment.
Work. Pap. 08-3, Fed. Reserve Bank Boston

Gollwitzer P. 1999. Implementation intentions: strong effects of simple plans. Am. Psychol.
54:493–503

Gollwitzer PM, Sheeran P. 2006. Implementation intentions and goal achievement: a meta-
analysis of effects and processes. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 38:69–119

Grant A, Gino F. 2010. A little thanks goes a long why: explaining why gratitude expressions
motivate prosocial behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98:946–55



                                               47
Gugerty MK. 2007. You can’t save alone: commitment in rotating savings and credit
associations in Kenya. Econ. Dev. Cult. Change 55:251–82

Hansen WL. 1983. Impact of student financial aid on access. Proc. Acad. Polit. Sci. 35(2):84–96

Hastings JS, Weinstein JM. 2008. Information, school choice, and academic achievements:
evidence from two experiments. Q. J. Econ. 123:1373–414

Ho D, Imai K. 2008. Estimating causal effects of ballot order from a randomized natural
experiment: the California alphabet lottery, 1978–2002. Public Opin. Q. 72(2):216–40

Johnson E, Goldstein D. 2003. Do defaults save lives? Science 302:1338–39

Johnson E, Shu S, Dellaert BGC, Fox C, Goldstein D, et al. 2012. Beyond nudges: tools of
choice architecture. Mark. Lett. 23:487–504

Joint Comm. Tax. 2013. Estimates of federal tex expenditures for fiscal years 2012–2017. Rep.,
Joint Comm. Tax, Washington, DC

Just DR, Mancino L, Wansink B. 2007. Could behavioral economics help improve diet quality
for nutrition assistance program participants? Econ. Res. Rep. 6391, US Dep. Agric.,
Washington, DC

Just DR, Price J. 2014. Using incentives to encourage healthy eating in children. J. Hum. Resour.
In press

Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979. Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47:263–92

Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1984. Choices, values, and frames. Am. Psychol. 39:341–50

Kamenica E. 2012. Behavioral economics and psychology of incentives. Annu. Rev. Econ.
4:427–52

Kane TJ. 1995. Rising public college tuition and college entry: How well do public subsidies
promote access to college? NBER Work. Pap. 5164

Karlan D, McConnell M, Mullainathan S, Zinman, J. 2013. Getting to top of mind: how
reminders increase saving. Work. Pap., Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH

Kast F, Meier S, Pomeranz D. 2012. Under-savers anonymous: evidence on self-help groups and
peer pressure as a savings commitment device. Work. Pap. 12-060, Harvard Bus. Sch., Boston,
MA




                                               48
Kearney MS, Tufano P, Guryan J, Hurst E. 2010. Making savers winners: an overview of prize-
linked savings products. NBER Work. Pap. 16433

Keller PA, Harlam B, Loewenstein G, Volpp KG. 2011. Enhanced active choice: a new method
to motivate behavior change. J. Consum. Psychol. 21:376–83

Kling JR, Mullainathan S, Shafir E, Vermeulen LC, Wrobel MV. 2012. Comparison friction:
experimental evidence from Medicare drug plans. Q. J. Econ. 127:199–235

Kooreman P. 2000. The labeling effect of a child benefit system. Am. Econ. Rev. 90:571–83
Lacetera N, Macis M, Slonim R. 2014. Rewarding volunteers: a field experiment? Manag. Sci. In
press

Laibson D. 1997. Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting. Q. J. Econ. 112:443–77
Larrick RP, Soll JB. 2008. The MPG illusion. Science 320:1593–94

Leventhal, H, Singer R, Jones A. 1965. Effect of fear and specificity of recommendation upon
attitudes and behavior. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 2(1): 20-29.

Levitt S, List JA, Neckermann SS, Sadoff S. 2012. The behavioralist goes to school: leveraging
behavioral economics to improve educational performance. NBER Work. Pap. 18165

Fryer R, Levitt S, List JA, Sadoff S. 2012. Enhancing the efficacy of teacher incentives through
loss aversion: a field experiment. NBER Work. Pap. 18237

Lusardi A, Keller PA, Keller A. 2009. New ways to make people save: a social marketing
approach. In Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial
Education and Saving Programs, ed. A Lusardi, pp. 209–36. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press

Madrian BC. 2013. Matching contributions and savings outcomes: a behavioral economics
perspective. In Matching Contributions for Pensions: A Review of International Experience, ed.
R Hinz, R Holzman, D Tuesta, N Takayama, pp. 289–310. Washington, DC: World Bank

Madrian BC, Shea DF. 2001. The power of suggestion: inertia in 401(k) participation and
savings behavior. Q. J. Econ. 116:1149–87

Milkman KL, Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2011. Using implementation
intentions prompts to enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
108:10415–20

Milkman KL, Beshears J, Choi JJ, Laibson D, Madrian BC. 2013. Planning prompts as a means
of increasing preventive screening rates. Prev. Med. 56:92–93

Nichol KL, Margolis KL, Wuorenma J, Von Sternberg I. 1994. The efficacy and cost
effectiveness of vaccination against influence among elderly persons living in the community. N.
Engl. J. Med. 331:778–84



                                               49
Nichols AL, Zeckhauser RJ. 1982. Targeting transfers through restrictions on recipients. Am.
Econ. Rev. 72:372–77

Nickerson DW, Rogers T. 2010. Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions, voter
turnout, and organic plan making. Psychol. Sci. 21:194–99

O’Donoghue T, Rabin M. 1999. Doing it now or later. Am. Econ. Rev. 89:103–24
Payne JW, Bettman JR. 1999. Measuring constructed preferences: towards a building code. J.
Risk Uncertain. 19:243–70

Pew Charit. Trusts. 2013. How borrowers choose and repay payday loans. Rep., Pew Charit.
Trusts, Washington, DC

President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform. 2005. Simple, Fair and Pro-Growth:
Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System. http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-
policy/Documents/Simple-Fair-and-Pro-Growth-Proposals-to-Fix-Americas-Tax-System-11-
2005.pdf

Rogers T, Frey E. 2014. Changing behavior beyond the here and now. In Blackwell Handbook of
Judgment and Decision Making, ed. K Gideon, G Wu. New York: Wiley. In press

Rogers T, Milkman KL, John LK, Norton MI. 2013. Making the best-laid plans better: how plan
making increases follow-through. Work. Pap., Harvard Univ., Cambridge, MA

Rutter DR, Steadman L, Quine L. 2006. An implementation intentions intervention to increase
uptake of mammography. Ann. Behav. Med. 32:127–34

Saez E. 2009. Details matter: the impact of presentation and information on the take-up of
financial incentives for retirement saving. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 1(1):204–28

Seftor NS, Turner S. 2002. Back to school: federal student aid policy and adult college
enrollment. J. Hum. Resour. 37:336–52

Sheeran P, Orbell S. 2000. Using implementation intentions to increase attendance for cervical
cancer screening. Health Psychol. 19:283–89

Shu LL, Mazar N, Gino F, Ariely D, Bazerman MH. 2012. Signing at the beginning makes ethics
salient and decreases dishonest self-reports in comparison to signing at the end. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 109:15197–200

Soman D, Cheema A. 2011. Earmarking and partitioning: increasing saving by low income
households. J. Mark. Res. 48(Suppl. 1):S14–22

Spital A. 1995. Mandated choice: a plan to increase public commitment to organ donation.
JAMA 273:504–6



                                                50
Stango V, Zinman J. 2009. Exponential growth bias and household finance. J. Finance 64:2807–
49

Strotz RH. 1955. Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization. Rev. Econ. Stud.
23:1955–56

Subramanian CR. 2013. ‘Nudge’ back in fashion at White House. Time Swampland Blog, Aug.
9. http://swampland.time.com/2013/08/09/nudge-back-in-fashion-at-white-house/

Sunstein CR. 2013a. Simpler: The Future of Government. New York: Simon & Schuster

Sunstein C. 2013b. With clean-energy default rules, it’s easy being green. Bloomberg
Businessweek, Apr. 4. http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-04-04/with-clean-energy-
default-rules-its-easy-being-green

Szilagyi PG, Bordley C, Vann JC, Chelminski A, Kraus RM, et al. 2000. Effect of patient
reminder/recall interventions on immunization rates: a review. JAMA 284:1820–27

Thaler RH, Benartzi S. 2004. Save More Tomorrow: using behavioral economics to increase
employee saving. J. Polit. Econ. 112:S164–87

Thaler RH, Sunstein CR. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press

Toder E, Khitatrakun S. 2006. KiwiSaver evaluation literature review. Rep., Tax Policy Cent.,
Brookings Inst., Washington, DC.
http://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/informationreleases/kiwisaver/background/ks-eval-lit-
review-dec06.pdf

Toffler A. 1970. Future Shock. New York: Random House

Ubel P. 2013. Beyond comprehension: figuring out whether decision aids improve people’s
decisions. In The Behavioral Foundations of Public Policy, ed. E Shafir, pp. 351–60. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Univ. Press

UK Department for Work and Pensions. 2012. Reinvigorating workplace pensions. London: UK
Department for Work and Pensions

Vanguard Group. 2013. How America saves 2013: a report on Vanguard 2012 defined
contribution plan data. Vanguard, Valley Forge, PA

Volpp KG, John LK, Troxel AB, Norton L, Fassbender J, Loewenstein G. 2008a. Financial
incentive-based approaches for weight loss: a randomized trial. JAMA 300:2631–37




                                               51
Volpp KG, Loewenstein G, Troxel AB, Doshi J, Price M, et al. 2008b. A test of financial
incentives to improve warfarin adherence. BMC Health Serv. Res. 8:272

Wilde JA, McMillan JA, Serwint J, Butta J, O’Riordan MA, Steinhoff MC. 1999. Effectiveness
of influenza vaccine in health care professionals. JAMA 281:908–13

Wisdom J, Downs JS, Loesenstein G. 2010. Promoting healthy choices: information vs.
convenience. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 2:164–78




                                              52
