                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       A SURPLUS OF AMBITION:
CAN EUROPE RELY ON LARGE PRIMARY SURPLUSES TO SOLVE ITS DEBT PROBLEM?

                                         Barry Eichengreen
                                           Ugo Panizza

                                        Working Paper 20316
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20316


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Andrea Presbitero, Edward Robinson and Yi Ping Ng for comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Barry Eichengreen and Ugo Panizza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Surplus of Ambition: Can Europe Rely on Large Primary Surpluses to Solve its Debt Problem?
Barry Eichengreen and Ugo Panizza
NBER Working Paper No. 20316
July 2014
JEL No. E0,E6,F0,F34

                                              ABSTRACT

IMF forecasts and the EU’s Fiscal Compact foresee Europe’s heavily indebted countries running primary
budget surpluses of as much as 5 percent of GDP for as long as 10 years in order to maintain debt
sustainability and bring their debt/GDP ratios down to the Compact’s 60 percent target. We show that
primary surpluses this large and persistent are rare. In an extensive sample of high- and middle-income
countries there are just 3 (nonoverlapping) episodes where countries ran primary surpluses of at least
5 per cent of GDP for 10 years. Analyzing a less restrictive definition of persistent surplus episodes
(primary surpluses averaging at least 3 percent of GDP for 5 years), we find that surplus episodes are
more likely when growth is strong, when the current account of the balance of payments is in surplus
(savings rates are high), when the debt-to-GDP ratio is high (heightening the urgency of fiscal adjustment),
and when the governing party controls all houses of parliament or congress (its bargaining position
is strong). Left wing governments, strikingly, are more likely to run large, persistent primary surpluses.
In advanced countries, proportional representation electoral systems that give rise to encompassing
coalitions are associated with surplus episodes. The point estimates do not provide much encouragement
for the view that a country like Italy will be able to run a primary budget surplus as large and persistent
as officially projected.


Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu

Ugo Panizza
The Graduate Institute, Geneva
Department of International Economics
PO Box 36, 1211 Geneva 21
Switzerland
ugo.panizza@graduateinstitute.ch
1        Introduction


Europe’s problem economies have heavy debts and gloomy growth prospects. This fact
raises obvious concerns about the sustainability of public debts, concerns that have
manifested themselves periodically in increases in yields that investors demand to hold
governments’ debt securities. As we write, investors are relatively sanguine. The
question is whether they will remain so. It is whether and when worries about debt
sustainability will be back.
         The IMF, in its Fiscal Monitor (2013), sketches a scenario in which the
obligations of heavily indebted European sovereigns first stabilize and then fall to the
60 percent level targeted by the EU’s Fiscal Compact by 2030. It makes assumptions
regarding interest rates, growth rates and related variables and computes the cyclically
adjusted primary budget surplus (the surplus exclusive of interest payments) consistent
with this scenario. The heavier the debt, the higher the interest rate and the slower the
growth rate, the larger is the requisite surplus. The average primary surplus in the
decade 2020-2030 is calculated as 5.6 percent for Ireland, 6.6 percent for Italy, 5.9
percent for Portugal, 4.0 percent for Spain, and (wait for it…) 7.2 percent for Greece.1
         These are very large, if not wholly unprecedented, primary surpluses. There are
both political and economic reasons for questioning whether they are plausible. As any
resident of California can tell you, when tax revenues rise, legislators and their
constituents apply pressure to spend them.2 In 2014 Greece, when years of deficits and
fiscal austerity, enjoyed its first primary surpluses; the government came under pressure
to disburse a “social dividend” of €525 million to 500,000 low-income households
(Kathmerini, the Greek newspaper, called these transfers “primary surplus handouts.”)
Budgeting, as is well known, creates a common pool problem, and the larger the
surplus, the deeper and more tempting is the pool. Only countries with strong political



1
  The cyclical adjustment makes little difference to the calculations over a period as long as a decade, and
for simplicity we ignore it in what follows.
2
  The tax system in California is heavily geared toward capital gains income on investment, which is
highly cyclical due to the importance of, inter alia, high tech in the state economy.


                                                     2
and budgetary institutions may be able to mitigate this problem (de Haan, Jong-A-Pin
and Mierau 2013).
           Turning to the economics, a slowdown in global growth, a deterioration in the
terms of trade, and recession can all disrupt the efforts of even the most dedicated
governments seeking to run large primary surpluses for a decade. Recession depresses
tax revenues, and the spending cuts needed to maintain the surplus above the promised
threshold may depress activity and revenues still further. The government may prefer,
with good reason, to let its automatic fiscal stabilizers operate. Whatever the other
merits of that choice, it too will prevent the string of primary surpluses from being
maintained.
           These are high hurdles. Researchers at the Kiel Institute (2014) conclude that
“assessment of historical developments in numerous countries leads to the conclusion
that it is extremely difficult for a country to prevent its debt from increasing when the
necessary primary surplus ratio reaches a critical level of more than 5 percent.” Readers
need not subscribe to their 5 percent threshold to agree that there is an issue. And where
there is an issue, the issuer may need help from debt forgiveness, foreign aid, inflation,
or debt restructuring.3
           How seriously should one take such worries? We analyze a sample of 54
emerging and advanced economies over the period 1974-2013 as a step toward
answering this question. We first establish that primary surpluses as large as 5 percent
of GDP for as long as a decade are rare; there are just 3 such nonoverlapping episodes
in the sample. These cases are special; they are economically and politically
idiosyncratic in the sense that their incidence is not explicable by the usual economic
and political correlates. Close examination of the three cases suggests that their
experience does not scale.
           Analyzing a less restrictive definition of episodes – surpluses averaging at least
3 percent of GDP for 5 years – we find that surplus episodes are more likely when
growth is strong, when the current account of the balance of payments is in surplus
(savings rates are high), when the debt-to-GDP ratio is high (heightening the urgency of

3
    Reinhart and Rogoff (2013) reach a similarly gloomy conclusion.


                                                     3
fiscal adjustment), and when the governing party controls all houses of parliament or
congress (its bargaining position is strong). Strikingly, left wing governments are more
likely to run large, persistent primary surpluses. In advanced economies, proportional
representation electoral systems that are thought to give rise to encompassing coalitions
are associated with surplus episodes. The point estimates do not provide much support
for the view that Europe’s crisis countries, Italy for example, will be able to run primary
budget surpluses as large and persistent as officially projected.


2      The simple analytics of debt sustainability


Although there is no strong evidence that public debt has a causal effect on growth
(Panizza and Presbitero, 2013, 2014) or that there is a critical threshold where debt
becomes a problem (Pescatori, Sandri, and Simon, 2014), the level and composition of
debt can have important implications for economic stability and the wellbeing of current
and future generations.
       Public debt can finance high-return investment projects and expansionary fiscal
policies during recessions. Able public debt management also allows reducing tax
distortions over the business cycle. Thus problems, including problems of sustainability,
that prevent a government from resorting to debt in these times and circumstances will
result in suboptimal public policy. To be sure, public debt can also be used to finance
wasteful public spending and facilitate delay in necessary but politically costly
structural reforms. High levels of public debt may alter the structure of public
expenditure since, for any given interest rate and level of government spending, a higher
level of debt implies that a larger share of expenditure needs to be dedicated to paying
interest. This constraint could be useful if it creates incentives to reduce wasteful
spending. However, wasteful expenditure is often politically difficult to cut. Therefore,
debt service often crowds out productive public spending, such as investment in human
and physical capital (Bacchiocchi, Borghi and Missale 2011).
       High levels of public debt can increase financial fragility. They raise the risk of
a crisis, self-fulfilling or otherwise, limiting the government’s ability to implement


                                             4
countercyclical polices during recessions. Crises, by raising doubts about future
payments of interest and repayments of principal, create uncertainty which depresses
consumption and investment. Given how the government often has first call on
available resources, it is unusual for other borrowers (corporates etc.) to be regarded as
more creditworthy than the sovereign (once upon a time the rating agencies’ practice of
never assigning a higher credit rating to entities other than the government was known
as “the sovereign ceiling”). Thus, problems of debt sustainability for the sovereign can
also impair the creditworthiness and ability to borrow of those other entities.4
        Debt sustainability is customarily described in terms of an inter-temporal
constraint stating that net initial debt plus the present value of expected future
government expenditures to be equal to (or not greater than) the present value of
expected future government revenues. Alternatively, net initial debt must be smaller or
equal to the present value of expected future primary surpluses minus the expected
value of future interest payments.




                                              ∏       1


The intertemporal budget constraint is an accounting identity that, by definition, is
always satisfied (Mendoza 2003). A government could decide to satisfy its budget
constraint by defaulting or by inflating away its debt. In this sense, the standard
definition of debt sustainability stating that a “… borrower is expected to be able to
continue servicing its debt without an unrealistically large future correction to the
balance of income and expenditure” (IMF, 2002, p. 4) implicitly assumes that
adjustments through the primary balance are preferable to adjustments via default or
inflation.
        The above definition requires formulating expectations of the future path of
government revenues, expenditures, on the average interest rate paid on government

4
 In the context of developing-country debt, this is known as the debt overhang problem (Sachs 1989,
Krugman 1989). For a discussion of sovereign ceiling see Borensztein, Cowan, and Valenzuela (2013).


                                                  5
debt and on the economy's discount rate. Uncertainty about the future paths of these
variables can be enough to precipitate a crisis if investors, growing more uncertain,
demand higher interest rates in order to take up new debt issues, and those higher
interest rates strain the government’s debt servicing capacity. Such crises can be self-
fulfilling (Cole and Kehoe 2000). Indeed self-fulfilling crises may happen even if all
investors know that that a country is fundamentally solvent, but they do not know what
other investors think about what other investors think (i.e., in the absence of common
knowledge – see Morris and Shin 1998).
       Before the introduction of the euro, European governments that borrowed in
domestic currency were less likely to be subject to self-fulfilling crises because the
national central banks (which could print an unlimited amount of domestic currency)
acted as de facto lenders of last resort. But with the introduction of the euro, national
central banks could no longer act as lenders of last resort. Eurozone countries have thus
become similar to emerging market countries that do not borrow in their own currency
(Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza, 2005, De Grauwe, 2011, Dell'Erba, Hausmann
and Panizza, 2013, De Grauwe and Ji, 2013).
       In the absence of a lender of last resort, policymakers may adopt restrictive
policies with the hope of reassuring market participants and reducing the likelihood that
a sudden change in investor sentiment pushes the country towards the bad equilibrium.
However, restrictive policies that reduce growth in the short run and lead to political
turmoil and instability may backfire, amplifying investors' concerns. In its downgrades
of European sovereigns, Standard & Poor’s mentioned that restrictive policies may have
a negative effect on debt sustainability (Standard & Poor’s, 2012).
       All this is to say that fiscal policy is not made – or evaluated – in a vacuum.
Investors focus not just on the evolution of the country's debt-to-GDP ratio but also on
the presence or absence of a lender of last resort that can rule out a self-fulfilling crisis.
In the case of countries in the Eurozone, this second element boils down to the
willingness of the international community and the European Central Bank to support
the country if a run were to occur. While debt sustainability is a long-term concept, the
near term evolution of debt may become disproportionately important if it is believed


                                              6
that policymakers in Northern Europe are more likely to approve ECB-ESM support if
the fiscal numbers are good. Since good fiscal numbers increase the likelihood of
support were a crisis to happen, they reduce the likelihood that the crisis will happen
and that the ECB will be called on “to do whatever it takes.”
         Compare Italy and Japan. Italy has the fourth largest stock of public debt in the
world, the second highest debt-to-GDP ratio in the Group of Seven advanced
economies, and the highest debt service ratio in the G7 (Table 1).5 Japan, in contrast,
has the second largest stock of debt (after the United States) and the highest gross debt
ratio (although the difference in net debt ratios is lower). Yet Italy is required to pay
higher interest rates in order to borrow. One way of understanding this is that Italy is
more at risk of a run because the market in Italian debt can no longer be backstopped by
the Bank of Italy. An example of this kind of incipient run was in the autumn of 2011,
when the yield on Italian ten-year government bonds spiked to above 7 percent (with a
spread of more than 500 basis points over 10-year German Bunds). It took President
Draghi's announcement that the ECB was prepared to do "whatever it takes" to calm the
markets.
         The official sector, for its part, is relatively sanguine about the near term
evolution of Italian public debt. Current IMF projections forecast the debt-to-GDP ratio
as peaking at 135 percent of GDP in 2014 and then falling by 15 percentage points by
2019 (Figure 1). These forecasts assume that Italy will be able to reach a primary
surplus of 5 percent of GDP by 2017 and maintain it for a considerable period
thereafter. Under the EU’s newly agreed Fiscal Compact, Italy needs to reduce the gap
between its current debt-to-GDP ratio and the Maastricht Treaty’s 60 percent threshold
by one-twentieth per year. Under reasonable assumptions on interest rates and nominal
GDP growth, this objective will requires the country to maintain a primary surplus of
approximately 5 percent of GDP for at least ten years.6

5
  In 2012, Italy spent 5.4 percent of GDP to service its public debt, Japan spent less than one percent of
GDP. This is due to both low interest rates and to the fact that in Japan net debt is much lower than gross
debt, but this is not the case in Italy (Table 1). This note focuses on gross public debt. Panizza and
Presbitero (2013) discuss the pros and cons of using different definitions of debt.
6
  Panizza (2014) shows that this is the case for, inter alia, growth of 1 percent, inflation of 1.5 percent,
and an interest rate of 4.5 percent.


                                                     7
        These assumptions contrast with assessments as recently as four years ago, when
IMF staff deemed a large fiscal adjustment in Italy to be infeasible (Mody, 2014). They
discount the fact that there is only one previous 5-year period when Italy has been able
to achieve an average primary surplus close to 5 percent of GDP (4.8 percent of GDP
over between 1996 and 2000).7 Italy has relative large amount of debt to roll over in the
next few years (more than €550 billion, more than a quarter of the stock outstanding, in
2014-16). If investors doubt Italy's ability to roll over its debt, they may decide to test
the ECB's willingness to do whatever it takes.
        Italy is not unique. Several other countries will similarly require large and
persistent primary surpluses on conventional assumptions regarding growth, inflation
and interest rates. IMF (2013) lists 10 advanced economies that, in order to achieve its
debt targets, will have to maintain a cyclically adjusted primary surplus close or greater
than 3 percent of GDP over the entire decade 2020-30 (Table 2).8
        In this paper we study the realism of these expectations of large and persistent primary
surpluses.


3       Large and Persistent Primary Surplus Episodes


We study the frequency of large and persistent primary surplus episodes using an
unbalanced panel of 54 emerging and advanced economies over the 1974-2013 period.
Our sample includes 29 advanced economies and 27 middle income countries.9 Our

7
  During 1996-2006, nominal GDP growth was relatively high, Italian electors were enthusiastic about the
euro and willing to make sacrifices in order to be part of the common currency, and the government was
able to conduct off-balance-sheet operations that increased the primary surplus. Even with these favorable
conditions, the high primary surplus turned out to be short-lived. The average primary surplus went back
to 2.2 percent of GDP over 2000-2007. This is in line with a long long-term average (1990-2006) of 2.3
percent of GDP and with the 1990-99 average of 2.5 percent of GDP.
8
  The average primary surplus for the 26 advanced economies considered by the IMF is 3.6 percent of
GDP.
9
  Data on surpluses are from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook data base as supplemented by Mauro,
Romeu, Binder and Zaman (2013), OECD, and the World Development Indicators. Mauro et al. provide
data in some cases for general government budgets and in others for central government budgets. To
ensure compatibility with the WEO data base, we add only observations for general government budgets.
Table A1 in the Appendix lists the countries and periods included in our sample. For years prior to 1990
fiscal data for emerging market countries are often unavailable or of poor quality. To make the sample
more balanced, we report results that use data for 1974-2013 for advanced economies, data for 1990-2013


                                                    8
concern in this paper is primarily with the debt sustainability prospects of high income
countries, in Europe in particular; this guides the construction of the sample. However,
we also conduct some robustness tests using all economies for which data are available
with an income per capita of at least $2000.
        We define a primary surplus episode as large when the average value of the
primary surplus during the episode is, alternatively, greater than 3, 4, or 5 percent of
GDP. We define a primary surplus as persistent when the episode lasts at least 5, 8, or
10 years. We thus have a total of 9 definitions of large and persistent. Tables A2-A3 in
the Appendix list all country-year observations satisfying these nine definitions.
        In several cases a series of overlapping periods satisfies one or more of our
definitions. For instance, Belgium had an average primary surplus greater than 3 percent
of GDP for each five-year period from 1989-93 to 2004-08 and for each ten-year period
from 1987-96 to 2000-09. These overlapping episodes would be problematic for our
statistical analysis, however, so we build a dataset of nonoverlapping episodes by
selecting, among all possible candidates, the episode with the largest average primary
surplus in any given 5, 8, and 10 year window.10
        To study the economic and political conditions under which countries have large
and persistent primary surpluses, we need comparison groups.                      For the five-year
episodes, the comparison group consists of all possible                  nonoverlapping five-year
periods between 1974 and 2013 (1974-78; 1979-83; 1984-88; 1989-93-1994-98; 1999-
03; 2004-08-2009-13) which: (i) do not do not overlap with a window starting two year
before and ending two year after the episodes identified in Table 3 and (ii) do not


for emerging market economies and data for 1995-2013 for transition economies. We also drop
observations for an 8-year window around sovereign default episodes. See Table A8 for details on data
sources.
10
   In the example of Belgium described above, this procedure produces only one non-overlapping episode
(1998-2002). There are, however, cases in which long strings of primary surpluses identify more than one
episode. For instance, Denmark had an average primary surplus greater than 3 percent of GDP for each
five-year period from 1996-2000 to 2005-09. This string of episodes yields 2-five year non-overlapping
periods with local maxima (1997-2001 and 2004-08). Therefore, we classify these two episodes as large
and persistent under the 3 percent five year category. An alternative way of identifying non-overlapping
periods would be to employ a Chow test for structural breaks and select the episode that maximizes the
test. This procedure is, however, problematic in our context because some countries have short primary
surplus series.


                                                   9
overlap with the episodes of Table A2. We follow the same procedure for our eight and
ten-year episodes samples.
       This procedure reveals that large and persistent primary surpluses are relatively
rare. Out of 235 nonoverlapping five-year periods in our dataset, there were 36 five-year
nonoverlapping episodes with an average primary surplus of at least 3 percent of GDP
(15 percent of the sample), 18 five-year episodes with an average primary surplus of at
least 4 percent of GDP (8 percent of the sample), and 12 five-year episodes with an
average primary surplus of at least 5 percent of GDP (5 percent of the sample). See
Table 3.
       Eight-year periods of large primary surpluses are even more exceptional. Out of
185 nonoverlapping episodes, we find 17 episodes with an average primary surplus of at
least 3 percent of GDP (9 percent of the sample), 12 episodes with an average primary
surplus of at least 4 percent of GDP (6 percent of the sample), and 4 episodes with an
average primary surplus of at least 5 percent of GDP (2 percent of the sample). See
Table 4.
       Finally, out of 113 nonoverlapping ten-year episodes, there are 12 episodes with
an average primary surplus of at least 3 percent of GDP (11 percent of the sample), 5
episodes with an average primary surplus of at least 4 percent of GDP (5 percent of the
sample), and 3 episodes with an average primary surplus of at least 5 percent of GDP
(2.5 percent of the sample). See Table 5.
       Thus, large primary surpluses for extended periods are possible, but they are the
exception.


4      The correlates of large and persistent primary surpluses


We now examine the correlation between primary surplus episodes and a set of
economic and political variable. Without an instrumental variable strategy we are
unable to make strong claims of causality. However, some correlations are clearly more
causal than other. For example, the debt-to-GDP ratio is a “state variable” – the stock of
debt is slowly moving and largely predetermined at a point in time, and any correlation


                                            10
with the primary surplus plausibly reflects causality running from the inherited debt to
the fiscal balance. Any endogeneity due to causality running from primary surpluses to
the debt stock will bias the coefficient estimates away from those we find. For other
variables, such as the current account balance, in contrast, simultaneity is likely to be a
serious issue, and due caution when interpreting the results is advised.


4.1     Univariate analysis


Table 6 reports the average values for economic variables for the control group and
surplus episodes, the difference between the two averages, and the two-sided p-value of
a mean comparison test (in bold when the difference between the two groups is
significant at the 10 percent confidence level).
        Large primary surpluses coincide with periods of above average economic
growth. This is what one would expect in the presence of countercyclical fiscal policy.
However, the difference in growth is not always statistically significant.11 It is
significant when we consider five-year episodes. But when we look at eight and ten-
year episodes, in particular, we find that while average growth is higher when the
primary surplus is above the 3, 4, and 5 percent threshold, the difference between our
high primary surplus episodes and the control group is often statistically insignificant.
        There is some indication that large, extended primary surpluses are more likely
in high income countries.12 It could be that the level of per capita GDP is standing in
for the strength of institutions and that countries with stronger institutions are better
able to run large, persistent surpluses. We consider this possibility below.
        World GDP growth is positively related to large, persistent primary surpluses.
For 6 of our 9 possible definitions of a large and persistent surplus, we find that World
GDP growth is significantly higher during episodes of high primary surpluses than in
control periods. We will see that this effect tends to disappear, however, when we
control for domestic GDP growth.
11
   Abbas et al. (2013) similarly find that successful debt reversals are more likely when global growth is
high. But they do not undertake the formal statistical tests we report here.
12
   Although, again, the difference is not always statistically significant.


                                                   11
         Primary surplus episodes are associated with current account surpluses (the
difference with the control group is always large and statistically significant). This is
what one would expect from basic national accounts as the current account is equal to
government savings plus private savings minus investment.13
         We expect a high debt-to-GDP ratio to be associated with an increase in the
need for fiscal adjustment and, therefore, the likelihood of a large, extended surplus.
Consistent with this presumption we find that debt-to-GDP ratios tend to be higher
during episodes of high and persistent primary surpluses. The difference with the
control group, however, is statistically significant only for one of our nine definitions of
what constitutes a large and persistent episode.14
         Primary surplus episodes seem to be associated with depreciated exchange rates
(consistent with the finding that primary surpluses are associated with current account
surpluses, and consistent with the idea that depreciation is useful for crowding in
exports in periods of fiscal consolidation).15 In contrast, there is no indication that large,
persistent primary surpluses are more or less likely in periods of high unemployment or
inflation.16 There is some indication that sustained primary surpluses are more likely in
countries with faster population growth. In contrast, there is no evident correlation
between financial development and primary surpluses.17
         We also examined whether the incidence of large and persistent primary
surpluses is associated with countries’ political characteristics (Table 7). In one instance
there is a statistically significant difference in the likelihood of a large primary surplus
episode between countries with presidential and parliamentary forms of government.

13
   Aficionados of the literature on global imbalances will recognize this as the twin-deficits hypothesis in
another guise. It is worth noting that among all our economic and political variable, the current account
balance is probably the most endogenous with respect to primary surplus episodes.
14
   Celasum, Debrun and Ostry (2006) look at a panel of annual data (as opposed to five year periods, as
year) and the level or change in the primary balance (as opposed to whether the primary balance exceeds
3 percent, as here) and find that a high debt-to-GDP ratio is positively associated with the primary
balance (as here).
15
   Again, the difference with the control group is statistically significant only in one case.
16
   We consider these two variables because a high unemployment rate may increase the political costs of
a fiscal adjustment and above average inflation may reduce the need to a running a primary surplus
because inflationary surprise may reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio.
17
   As expected, the government overall balance is higher during episodes of high and persistent primary
surplus.


                                                    12
Interestingly, primary surplus episodes are more likely with left-of-the-center
governments, contrary to the findings of the literature analyzing the political
determinants of short-term budget balances (Roubini and Sachs 1989a,b).18 Note,
however, that subsequent literature (e.g. Cusack 1999) suggests that such partisan
differences have attenuated over time and that they are contingent on current economic
conditions (including, plausibly, the debt situation considered here). In addition, it has
been suggested (by inter alia Persson and Svensson, 1989) that right-wing governments
with a preference for low public expenditure and therefore low taxes may prefer high
debts to commit their left-wing successors to those policies; right-wing governments,
behaving strategically, may therefore be less inclined to commit to sustained large
primary surpluses.
         In the simple univariate comparisons of Table 7, primary surplus episodes are
more likely if the governmental party controls all houses of congress or parliament, but
the difference is statistically significant for only one of our nine definitions of an
episode. We find no statistically significant effect of democracy and electoral rules
(first-past-the-post elections, proportional representation, and average district
magnitude), nor any effect linked to the vote share of government parties or government
fractionalization and polarization. Some of these variables show signs of importance in
multivariate comparisons, however, to which we now turn.




4.2      Multivariate analysis


We now analyze the relationship between large and persistent primary surpluses and the
economic and political variables discussed above using probit regressions, where the
dependent variable takes a value of one during surplus episodes and zero in control
periods. The probit model is non-linear and its coefficients should be interpreted as the
effect of an infinitesimal change in the explanatory variables on the likelihood of

18
  Although, again, the difference is statistically significant only in one of our nine definitions of a large
and persistent primary surplus episode.


                                                      13
observing the episode. We concentrate on 3 percent, 5-year episodes, but also consider
other thresholds and period lengths.


Economic Variables


Table 8, which focuses on economic variables, indicates that GDP growth, the debt-to-
GDP ratio, the current account balance, and GDP per capita are significantly correlated
with the likelihood of a sustained primary surplus (Table 8, column 1). The point
estimates suggest that a one percentage point increase in domestic growth is associated
with a 7.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a primary surplus. (This
compares with the unconditional likelihood of a primary surplus episode of the current
magnitude which, in our sample, is about 15 percent.). A ten percentage point increase
in the debt-to-GDP ratio is instead associated with a 1.4 percentage point increase in the
likelihood of a primary surplus episodes (in our sample, the standard deviation of the
debt-to-GDP ratio is 33). A one percentage point increase in the current account balance
is associated with a 1.5 percentage point increase in the likelihood of a primary surplus
episode.
        Again, one should be cautious in interpreting these patterns, since the probit
model is nonlinear and the preceding calculations are linear approximations which may
not hold for large variations in the explanatory variables. Still these findings are
suggestive for the challenges facing Eurozone countries like Italy. With unfavorable
demographics and low productivity growth, GDP growth rates much above the 1.3-1.5
percent rates seen before the crisis seem unlikely.19 The swing in the current account
balance from deficit before the crisis (-1.4 percent of GDP in 2006-07) to surplus now
(+1.1 percent in 2014-15) increases the likelihood of a surplus episode by about 3
percent, according to our estimates. That Italy is a high savings country works in its
favor, to put the point another way. Unfortunately from this point of view, Italy’s

19
  The IMF provides forecasts of global growth through 2019: at less than 4 percent per annum, this is a
full percentage point slower than in the heyday of 2004-07 and 2010 (reflecting an anticipated moderation
in growth in emerging market and developing countries and possible problems of secular stagnation in the
advanced economies).


                                                   14
current account surplus is forecast to narrow and disappear at the end of the present
decade. The main economic factor pointing to the likelihood of large, persistent primary
surpluses is the high debt ratio – that Italy will have to run them, ruling out other
approaches to the problem, in order for that debt to be sustainable.
       In columns 2-4 of Table 8 we drop two variables (the real exchange rate and the
debt-to-GDP ratio) that limit our sample in terms of observations; the results do not
change. The results are also similar if we limit our analysis to a sample of advanced
economies. In this case we obtain a larger effect of domestic growth and of the debt
ratio and find that the current account balance is no longer statistically significant
(Table 9).
       As we noted above, the correlation between primary surplus episodes and GDP
per capita is both robust and puzzling. It may be that GDP per capita is capturing the
effect of institutional quality and that strong institutions are necessary to support long
and persistent fiscal surpluses. Strong institutions may make for better tax compliance.
They may make it easier for governments and societies to make credible commitments
to maintaining a policy, such as the policy of retiring public debt, over extended
periods. Consistent with this presumption, if we augment our regressions with an index
of institutional quality (the ICRG indicator of quality of government, QOG, obtained as
the mean of the ICRG’s control of corruption, law and order, and bureaucratic quality
measures), GDP per capita is no longer statistically significant. In any case, opinions
will differ as to whether Europe’s crisis countries (our motivation), notwithstanding
their high per capita GDP, should be regarded as countries where the relevant
institutions are strong. Note, moreover, that the interpretation that stronger institutions
support persistent primary surpluses required to accomplish fiscal adjustments is not
fully satisfactory, insofar as countries with strong institutions should be less likely to
need a fiscal adjustment in the first place.
       It is possible, however, that the correlation between persistent surpluses and
income per capita (as a proxy for the strength of institutions) reflects the fact that when
a country with good institutions receives a positive wealth shock it saves the windfall
and runs a series of large surpluses (for example, Norway, Singapore and New Zealand


                                               15
are three of our episodes of large and persistent primary surpluses). In this case, the
adjustment is not associated with the need to restore debt sustainability; rather it reflects
optimal fiscal smoothing. We test this hypothesis by interacting the level of debt with
income per capita and check whether the link between GDP per capita and primary
surplus episodes is stronger in countries with low levels of debt.
       Figure 2 confirms that this is the case. The relationship between GDP per capita
and the probability of a fiscal adjustment is statistically significant only in periods when
public debt is less than 80 percent of GDP. At the same time, only countries with
income per capita above $7,500 react to high debt levels with a persistent primary
surplus.


Political and Institutional Variables


In Table 10 we examine more closely at political and institutional correlates of primary
surplus episodes. Column 1 shows that surplus episodes are less likely with right-wing
governments and more likely in proportional systems and when the government party
controls all houses of parliament or congress. In addition, we find a positive association
between the likelihood of a persistent fiscal surplus on the one hand and either
government fractionalization or polarization on the other (where polarization is defined
as the maximum difference between the chief executive’s party’s economic orientation
and the values of the three largest government parties and the largest opposition party).
These latter results are surprising, but we will see that they are not robust. In contrast,
the results are robust to dropping democracy and district magnitude, variables that limit
the sample size (column 2).
       If we limit the sample to advanced economies (column 3), the effect of
proportional voting is stronger than in the full sample. While Milesi-Ferretti, Perotti and
Rostagno (2002) find that primary spending tends to be higher in countries with
proportional systems, Atkinson, Rainwater and Smeeding (1995) have shown that
countries with proportional representation typically exhibit higher average tax rates.




                                             16
They show as well that proportional systems are associated with more even distributions
of post-tax incomes, making widespread sharing of the burden of debt reduction easier.
         Our results suggest that there are country-periods in which the latter effect
dominates the former. The knock on proportional systems is that they can give rise to
party proliferation and government fractionalization, which makes sustaining policy
more difficult. Given that our regressions control for government fractionalization, this
observation does not necessary contradict theories suggesting that proportional
representation is conducive to fractionalization, which gives rise to gridlock and wars of
attrition.20


Synthesis


We now consider economic and political variables together. In the full sample, the
likelihood of an extended primary surplus episode is positively associated with GDP
growth, the debt-to-GDP ratio, and the log of GDP per capita. The significant political
variables are the dummy indicating that the government controls all relevant houses of
congress or parliament and the economic orientation of the government. As before, we
find that primary surplus episodes are less likely with right wing governments (column
1 of Table 11).
         In the next four columns of Table 11 we drop the variables with missing
observations that limit sample size (proportional representation, economic orientation of
the government, and debt-to-GDP ratio). The results are robust to the expanded
samples, except that we do not always find a statistically significant effect of the
variable that indicates that the government controls all relevant houses.21



20
   However, the result is robust to dropping fractionalization from the model, indicating that our findings
are strongly consistent with the view that proportional systems encourage the construction of
encompassing coalitions that makes compromise possible.
21
   While most of the results of Table 12 are robust to controlling for the current account balance, the debt-
to-GDP ratio tends to lose statistical significance when we control for the current account balance. We
decided to drop the current account balance because, among all our controls, this is the variable with the
most serious endogeneity issue.


                                                     17
         In Table 12, we estimate the models of Table 11 restricting the sample to
advanced economies. The results are similar, except that we now find a statistically
significant and robust effect of proportional representation. The contrast with Table 11
suggests that any positive effect of proportional representation is limited mainly to the
advanced economies (we provide more details on this result below).
         We also check the robustness of our results by estimating the model of Table 11
for all the countries with income per capita greater than $2000 and for which we have
data (i.e., we go beyond our advanced and emerging economies sample – for a full list
of episodes see Tables A5-A7 in the Appendix). The results, in Table 13, show more
evidence of a positive correlation between primary surplus episodes and GDP growth,
the debt-to-GDP ratio, GDP per capita, and the economic orientation of the
government.22
         In the full sample, proportional representation is never statistically significant.
This result confirms what we found in Tables 11 and 12 (i.e., proportional
representation is robustly associated with primary surplus only in advanced economies)
and suggests that proportional representation works well in countries where institutions
are strong, but does not make a difference (or may even have negative effects) in
countries with poor institutions. We test this hypothesis by interacting proportional
representation with either income per capita or the quality of government index.
Consistent with the above, the effect of proportional representation is only positive and
statistically significant for countries with either high income per capita or high
institutional quality, and it is negative (and statistically significant in the case of quality
of government) in countries with low institutional quality or income per capita (Figure
3).
         We also ran regressions like those reported in Tables 8-13 using higher
thresholds for the primary surplus and length of the episode. Table 14 shows the results
for a model similar to that of column 1 of Table 11. When we look at 5 year episodes
with 4 percent thresholds (column 1 of Table 14), we find that only GDP growth, GDP

22
   Tables 11-13 did not control for world growth because this variable is never statistically significant
(including world growth in the regressions would not alter the results).


                                                     18
per capita and proportional representation remain significantly correlated with primary
surplus episodes. However, the proportional representation dummy is no longer
statistically significant when we consider 5 percent five-year episodes (column 2).
Looking at eight-year 3 and 4 percent episodes (columns 3 and 4), we obtain results
which are similar to those of five-year 4 and 5 percent episodes, but in this case we
again find a significant effect of the “all-houses” dummy, suggesting that governments
that have control of all relevant houses are more likely to be able to implement long-
lasting fiscal consolidation programs.
       No robust correlations are evident when we consider the drivers of eight-year
five percent episodes. This is not surprising as that there is only a small handful of such
episodes and we cannot even estimate our probit model. The only variables that are
correlated with ten-year 3 percent episodes are GDP growth, GDP per capita, and the
“all-housea” dummy (column 5). Similarly, none of our economic or political variables
is significantly correlated with ten-year 4 percent episodes (column 6). As in the case of
eight-year episodes, we cannot estimate the determinants of 10-year 5 percent episodes
because we only have three of such episodes.
       Episodes with an average surplus which is either larger than 3 percent and that
lasts more than 8 years appear to be special and idiosyncratic in the sense that none of
our economic and political variables helps to explain their incidence.


5      Exceptions


We have shown that large, persistent primary surpluses – especially surpluses as large
and persistent as those prescribed by the IMF’s debt sustainability analyses of Europe
and the EU’s Fiscal Compact, which in some cases show that achieving debt targets will
require surpluses of 5 percent of GDP or more for periods as long as ten years – are
rare. That it is difficult to identify correlates of these episodes suggests that they are
politically and economically idiosyncratic. In this section we therefore consider the
episodes in question in more detail.




                                            19
       The three ten-year episodes of 5+ percent primary surpluses in our sample are
Belgium starting in 1995, Norway starting in 1999, and Singapore starting in 1990. The
Belgian case was associated with the convergence criteria for qualifying for monetary
union. Those criteria included a debt-to-GDP ratio of no more than 60 percent of GDP
or rapidly converging to that level; Belgium in the mid-1990s had a debt ratio roughly
twice that high. Thus, large primary surpluses were needed to signal the country’s
European partners that it was committed to bringing its debt ratio down toward
Maastricht-compliant levels. It is revealing that primary budget surpluses of this
magnitude did not persist much after the country’s entry into the Eurozone in 1999.
       This explanation for Belgium’s large primary surpluses begs the question of
why other European countries in its position, Italy for example, which also entered the
1990s with debts significantly in excess of the Maastricht criterion, did not behave
similarly. IMF (2011) points to the role played by institutional reforms put in place by
Belgium in the 1980s in anticipation of the need to sustain large primary surpluses.
Belgium reformed its tax code in the mid-1980s (enlarging the tax base and lowering
top marginal income tax rates) and rationalized its system of fiscal federalism at the end
of the decade (constraining spending by regional governments). It empowered the
Federal Planning bureau to issue nonpartisan, independent forecasts of the budget in the
mid-1990s, and restructured the High Finance Council to give it a clear mandate to
monitor and coordinate fiscal policies between the federal and regional levels. It is hard
to identify similar institutional reforms in Italy. The timing of the Belgian exception
(including the fact that the large primary surpluses disappear after the turn of the
century while institutional reforms do not) points to the importance of exceptional
circumstances (like the Maastricht deadline) and strong institutions in combination as
the explanation for the exception.
       Norway’s primary surpluses are associated with the peak in North Sea oil
production and the operations of the country’s petroleum fund. Production in the
Norwegian sector of the North Sea nearly doubled in the 1980s and remained elevated
before declining after 1993. The Government Petroleum Fund (previously the
Petroleum Fund and now part of the Government Pension Fund) was created to husband


                                           20
these revenues from peak oil for future generations. Budget surpluses associated with
oil revenues were paid into the fund starting in the 1990s.
         As in Belgium, the practice was encouraged by the development of strong
budgeting institutions. Budget documents refer to the non-oil deficit, making
transparent the dependence of revenues on natural resources and encouraging a long-
term approach to budgeting. The government adopted a guideline for fiscal policy
stating that the structural non-oil deficit may not exceed 4 per cent of total financial
assets in the Government Pension Fund, reflecting the assumption that the long run
return on the assets of the pension fund is 4 per cent.23 As we write, Norway’s general
government primary balance is still in substantial surplus, but it is declining as a share
of GDP (along with oil revenues)
         Singapore has run budget surpluses as a way of building up a reserve to insure
against volatility. The economy is small and lacking in natural resources. Its status as an
entrepot center has come under challenge from Hong Kong and now Mainland China,
and the financial and pharmaceutical sectors to which it has turned are volatile. It is
exposed geopolitically, and its relations with its Malaysian neighbor have not always
been the best.24
         All this has caused the government to prioritize accumulating surpluses in its
sovereign wealth funds, the Government Investment Corporation, which invests
globally, and Temasek Holdings, whose holdings are mainly local and regional. In
addition, since 1992 a small portion of the surplus has also been invested in the Edusave
Endowment Fund and the Medical Endowment Fund, interest earnings from which were
used to finance the future growth of social expenditures.25
         The structure of governance in Singapore, with its strong executive, strong
bureaucracy, and strong fiscal rules, enables the government to commit to persistent


23
   See Jafarov and Leigh (2007).
24
   In the words of Shanmugaratnam (2008), "...A country's reserves are a key asset in a globalised and
uncertain world. But they are especially valuable for a country completely lacking in natural resources,
extremely open to the world, and very small in size in a region of large players. Our reserves are our only
resource besides our people, and a major strategic advantage for Singapore.”
25
   As Bercuson (1995) explains, allocations to the funds are not classified as current expenditures but as
allocations of the budget surplus.


                                                    21
surpluses (Blondal 2006). The government has consistently issued conservative growth
forecasts that understate revenues, while coming under relatively little pressure to
correct those forecasts and increase spending accordingly (Abeysinghe and
Jayawickrama 2008). Insofar as the institutions and circumstances of Singapore are
special, it is not clear to what extent its ability to run large, persistent surpluses carries
over to other countries.
       We also have two additional cases of countries that have run surpluses of at least
4 per cent of GDP for as long as ten years: Ireland starting in 1991 and New Zealand
starting in 1994. These cases are similarly worth considering for their exceptional
nature, although it is important to emphasize that surpluses of “merely” 4 per cent will
not be enough for the most heavily indebted Eurozone countries to work down their
debts to targeted levels.
       Ireland’s experience in the 1990s is widely pointed to by observers who insist
that Eurozone countries can escape their debt dilemma by running large, persistent
primary surpluses. Ireland’s move to large primary surpluses was taken in response to
an incipient debt crisis: after a period of deficits as high as 8 per cent of GDP, general
government debt as a share of GDP reached 110 per cent in 1987. A new government
then slashed public spending by 7 per cent of GDP, abolishing some long-standing
government agencies, and offered a one-time tax amnesty to delinquents. The result was
faster economic growth that then led to self-reinforcing favorable debt dynamics, as
revenue growth accelerated and the debt-to-GDP ratio declined even more rapidly with
the accelerating growth of its denominator. This is a classic case pointed to by those
who believe in the existence of expansionary fiscal consolidations (Giavazzi and
Pagano 1990).
       But it is important, equally, to emphasize that Ireland’s success in running large
primary surpluses was supported by special circumstances. The country was able to
devalue its currency – an option that is not available to individual Eurozone countries –
enabling it sustain growth in the face of large public-spending cuts by crowding in
exports. As a small economy, Ireland was in a favorable position to negotiate a national
pact (known as the Program for National Recovery) that created confidence that the


                                             22
burden of fiscal austerity would be widely and fairly shared, a perception that helped
those surpluses to be sustained. (Indeed, it is striking that every exception considered in
this section is a small open economy.) Global growth was strong in the decade of the
1990s (the role of this facilitating condition is emphasized by Hagemann 2013). Ireland,
like Belgium (see above), was under special pressure to reduce its debt-to-GDP ratio in
order to meet the Maastricht criteria and qualify for monetary union in 1999. Finally,
the country’s multinational-friendly tax regime encouraged foreign corporations to book
their profits in Ireland, which augmented revenues.
       Whether other Eurozone countries – and, indeed, Ireland itself – will be able to
pursue a similar strategy in the future is dubious. Thus, while Irish experience has some
general lessons for other countries, it also points to special circumstances that are likely
to prevent its experience from being generalized.
       The case of New Zealand has also been widely analyzed. New Zealand
experienced chronic instability in the first half of the 1980s; the budget deficit was 9 per
cent of GDP in 1984, while the debt ratio was high and rising. Somewhat in the manner
of Singapore, the country’s small size and highly open economy heightened the
perceived urgency of correcting the resulting problems. New Zealand therefore adopted
far-reaching and, in some sense, unprecedented institutional reforms. At the aggregate
level, the Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1994 limited the scope for off-budget spending
and creative accounting. It required the government to provide Parliament with a
statement of its long-term fiscal objectives, a forecast of budget outcomes, and a
statement of fiscal intentions explaining whether its budget forecasts were consistent
with its budget objectives. It required prompt release of aggregate financial statements
and regular auditing, using internationally accepted accounting practices.
       At the level of individual departments, the government set up a management
framework that imposed strong separation between the role of ministers (political
appointees who specified departmental objectives) and departmental CEOs (civil
servants with leeway to choose tactics appropriate for delivering outputs). This
separation was sustained by separating governmental departments into narrowly-
focused policy ministries and service-delivery agencies, and by adopting procedures


                                            23
that emphasized transparency, employing private-sector financial reporting and
accounting rules, and by imposing accountability on technocratic decision makers
(Mulgan 2004).
           As a result of these initiatives, New Zealand was able to cut public spending by
more than 7 per cent of GDP. Revenues were augmented by privatization receipts, as
political opposition to privatization of public services was successfully overcome. The
cost of delivering remaining public services was limited by comprehensive deregulation
that subjected public providers to private competition. The upshot was more than a
decade of 4+% primary surpluses, allowing the country to halve its debt ratio from 71
per cent of GDP in 1995 to 30 per cent in 2010.
           An extensive literature discusses whether New Zealand-style reforms can be
readily translated to other countries. Its conclusions are mixed.26 The consensus, insofar
as there is one, is that countries with exceptionally strong rule of law, low levels of
corruption and strong institutions and markets are in the best position to emulate its
example.
           The New Zealand case may be the most encouraging one we have for the
sustainability of Eurozone debts. It suggests that 4+% surpluses for a decade are not
inconceivable; they are most likely for relatively small, open economies with strong
institutional capacity and an appetite for radical reform. That said, it is worth observing
that it took full ten years from the implementation of the first reforms, in 1984, to the
emergence of 4+% budget surpluses in New Zealand a decade later.27


6          Conclusion


For the debts of Europe’s problem countries to be sustainable, absent restructuring,
foreign aid or an unanticipated burst of inflation, their governments will have to run
large primary budget surpluses, in many cases in excess of 5 percent of GDP, for
periods as long as 10 years. History suggests that such behavior, while not entirely

26
     See Schick (1998) for a skeptical view and Bale and Dale (1998) for a balanced assessment.
27
     On the chronology, see Rudd and Roper (1997).


                                                     24
unknown, is exceptional. Countries that have run such large surpluses for such extended
periods have faced exceptional circumstances. Even applying more moderate criteria
(primary budget surpluses of 3 percent for at least 5 years), such behavior is unusual.
Sustained surplus episodes are more likely when growth is strong, the current account
of the balance of payments is in surplus (savings rates are high), the debt-to-GDP ratio
is high (heightening the urgency of fiscal adjustment), and the governing party controls
all houses of parliament or congress (its bargaining position is strong). Historically, left
wing governments have been more likely to run large, persistent primary surpluses. In
advanced countries, proportional representation electoral systems that give rise to
encompassing coalitions are associated with surplus episodes.
       On balance, this analysis does not leave us optimistic that Europe’s crisis
countries will be able to run primary budget surpluses as large and persistent as
officially projected.




                                            25
References

Abbas, S. Ali, Bernardin Akitoby, Jochen Andritzky, Helge Berger, Takuji
Komatsuzaki and Justin Tyson (2014), “Reducing Public Debt when Growth is Slow, ”
Washington, D.C.: IMF

Abbeysinghe, Tilak and Ananda Jayawickrama (2008), “Singapore‘s Recurrent Budget
Surplus: The Role of Conservative Growth Forecasts,” Journal of Asian Economics 19,
pp. 117-124.

Atkinson, Anthony, L. Rainwater and T. Smeeding (1995), “Income Distribution in
European Countries,” Working Paper no. 9535, Department of Applied Economics,
University of Cambridge.

Bakem Nakcikm and Tony Dale (1998), “Public Sector Reform in New Zealand and its
Relevance to Developing Countries,” World Bank Research Observer 13, pp.103-121.

Bacchiocchi, Emanuele, Elisa Borghi, and Alessandro Missale (2011), “Public
Investment under Fiscal Constraints,” Fiscal Studies 32(1), pp. 11‐42.

Bercuson, Kenneth (1995), “Singapore: A Case Study in Rapid Development,”
Washington, D.C: IMF.

Blondal, Jon (2006), “Budgeting in Singapore,” OECD Journal on Budgeting 6, pp. 46-
85.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Kevin Cowan, and Patricio Valenzuela (2013), “Sovereign
Ceilings “Lite”? The Impact of Sovereign Ratings on Corporate Ratings,” Journal of
Banking and Finance 37(11), pp. 4014-4024.

Celasun, Oya, Xavier Debrun and Jonathan Ostry (2006), “Primary Surplus Behavior
and Risks to Fiscal Sustainability in Emerging Market Countries: A ‘Fan-Chart’
Approach,” IMF Working Paper WP/06/67.

Cole, Harold and Timothy Kehoe (2000), “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of
Economic Studies 67, pp. 91-116.

Cusack, Thomas (1999), “Partisan Politics and Fiscal Policy,” Comparative Political
Studies 32, pp. 464-496.

De Grauwe, Paul (2011), “The Governance of a Fragile Eurozone,” CEPS Working
Documents.




                                          26
De Grauwe, Paul and Yuemei Ji (2013), “Self‐Fulfilling Crises in the Eurozone: An
Empirical Test,” Journal of International Money and Finance 34, pp. 15–36.

De Haan, Jakob, Richard Jong-A-Pin, and Jochen Mierau (2013), “Do Budgetary
Institutions Mitigate the Common Pool Problem? New Evidence for the EU,” Public
Choice 156, pp. 423-441.

Dell’Erba, Salvatore, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza (2013), “Debt Levels, Debt
Composition, and Sovereign Spreads in Emerging and Advanced Economies,” Oxford
Review of Economic Policy 29(3), pp. 518‐547.

Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza (2005), “The Pain of Original
Sin,” in B. Eichengreen and R. Hausmann (eds.) Other People's Money, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (1990), “Can Severe Fiscal Contractions Be
Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1990, pp.75-122.

Hagemann, Robert (2013), “Fiscal Rules for Ireland,” unpublished manuscript.

International Monetary Fund (2002) “Assessing Sustainability,” Policy paper prepared
by the Policy Review and Development Department, May 28, 2002. Washington, D.C.:
IMF.

International Monetary Fund (2013), Fiscal Monitor, Washington, D.C: IMF (April).

Jafarov, Eibar and Daniel Leigh (2007), “Alternative Fiscal Rules for Norway,” IMF
Country Report no. 07/197, Washington, D.C.: IMF, pp.17-43.

Kiel Institute of World Economics (2014), “Kiel Institute Barometer of Public Debt,”
http://www.ifw-kiel.de/think-tank/policy-support/the-kiel-institute-barometer-of-public-
debt/the-kiel-institute-barometer-of-public-debt/?searchterm=primary%20surplus
(March).

Krugman, Paul (1989), “Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt Overhang,” NBER Working
Paper no. 2486.

Mauro, Paolo, Rafael Romeu, Ariel Binder and Asad Zaman (2013), “A Modern
History of Fiscal Prudence and Profligacy,” IMF Working Paper No. 13/5, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC




                                           27
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, Roberto Perotti, and Massimo Rostagno (2002), “Electoral
Systems and Public Spending,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(2), pp. 609-657.

Mendoza, Enrique (2003), “An Analytical Review of Public Debt Sustainability
Analysis and its Implication for Emerging Markets,” Unpublished, University of
Maryland.

Mody, Ashoka (2014) “The Italian Fault Line,” Brussels: Bruegel,
http://www.bruegel.org/nc/blog/detail/article/1345-the-italian-fault-line/

Morris, Steve and Hyun Shin (1998), “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling
Currency Attacks,” American Economic Review 88, pp. 587-597.

Mulgan, Richard (2004), “Public Sector Reform in New Zealand: Issues of Public
Accountability,” Asian Pacific School of Economics and Government Discussion Paper
no.04/03, Canberra: ANU.

Panizza, Ugo (2014) “Public Debt Risks in Italy: Myths, Facts, and Policies,”
Unpublished, Graduate Institute, Geneva

Panizza, Ugo and Andrea F. Presbitero (2013). “Public Debt and Economic Growth in
Advanced Economies: A Survey,” Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics 149(II),
pp. 175‐204.

Panizza, Ugo and Andrea F. Presbitero (2014). “Public Debt and Economic Growth: Is
There a Causal Effect?” Journal of Macroeconomics 41, pp. 21-41.

Persson, Torsten and Lars Svensson (1989), “Why a Stubborn Conservative Would Run
a Deficit: Policy with Time-Inconsistent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
104, pp. 325-345.

Pescatori, Andrea, Damiano Sandri and John Simon (2014), “Debt and Growth: Is
There a Magic Threshold?” IMF Working Paper WP/14/34.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2013), “Financial and Sovereign Debt Crises:
Some Lessons Learned and Those Forgotten,” IMF Working Paper no.WP/13/266.

Roubini, Nouriel and Jeffrey Sachs (1989), “Government Spending and Budget Deficits
in the Industrial Countries,” Economic Policy 8, pp.98-131.

Roubini, Nouriel and Jeffrey Sachs (1989), “Political and Economic Determinants of
Budget Deficits in the Industrial Democracies,” European Economic Review 33, pp.
9803-938.


                                            28
Rudd, Chris and Brian Roper (1997), The Political Economy of New Zealand, 2nd
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Sachs, Jeffrey (1989), “Conditionality, Debt Relief and the Developing Country Debt
Crisis,” in Jeffrey Sachs (ed.), Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance,
Volume 1: The International Financial System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
pp. 255-296.

Schick, Allen (1998), “Why Most Developing Countries Should Not Try New
Zealand’s Reforms,” World Bank Research Observer 13, pp.122-131.

Shanmugaratnam, Tharmin (2008), “Second Reading Speech for Constitution of
Republic of Singapore (Amendment) Bill 2008,”
http://app.mof.gov.sg/data/Second_Reading_Speech_Constitution_Bill.pdf

Standard & Poor’s (2012), “Standard & Poor’s Takes Various Rating Actions on 16
Eurozone Sovereign Governments,” Ratings Direct, on the global direct portal Standard
& Poor’s.




                                         29
Table 1: Public Debt in G7 Countries (2012)
                           Gross Public Debt                       Net Public Debt
                        Millions         % of GDP                    % of GDP
USA                       €12'934'000      102.4%                       80.1%
Japan                     €10'962'000      237.3%                      129.5%
Germany                    € 2'160'000      81.1%                       58.1%
Italy                      € 1'990'000     127.0%                      106.1%
France                     € 1'834'000      90.2%                       84.0%
UK                         € 1'712'000      88.6%                       81.4%
Canada                     € 1'248'000      88.2%                       36.7%
Source: WEO Database, April 2014




Table 2: Fiscal Adjustment Strategy to Achieve Debt Target by 2030
Country                                   Cyclically adjusted primary balance over 2020-30
Belgium                                                          3.8%
France                                                           2.9%
Greece                                                           7.2%
Ireland                                                          5.6%
Italy                                                            6.6%
Japan                                                            7.3%
Portugal                                                         5.9%
Spain                                                            4.0%
United Kingdom                                                   4.2%
United States                                                    4.1%
Average for advanced economies                                   3.6%
Average for G20 advanced economies                               3.8%
Average for Emerging Market Economies                            0.5%
Source: IMF (2013). Tables 13a and 13b.




                                          30
Table 3: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 5-year periods
         3% of GDP                                        4% of GDP                                     5% of GDP
BEL1998            5.97                      BEL1998                      5.97            BEL1998                      5.97
BRA2004            3.58                      CAN1997                      5.05            CAN1997                      5.05
CAN1997            5.05                      CHL2004                      5.33            CHL2004                       5.33
CHL1991            3.54                      DNK1985                      5.49            DNK1985                      5.49
CHL2004            5.33                      DNK2004                      4.76            IRL1996                      5.34
DNK1985            5.49                      FIN1998                      4.75            NOR1981                       5.39
DNK1997            3.50                      IRL1988                      4.78            NOR2004                      13.71
DNK2004            4.76                      IRL1996                      5.34            NZL1993                      5.69
FIN1976            3.39                      ITA1996                      4.81            PAN1994                       6.77
FIN1998            4.75                      NOR1981                      5.39            SGP1991                      12.26
GRC1996            3.91                      NOR2004                      13.71           SGP2004                      6.48
HKG2007            3.23                      NZL1993                      5.69            SWE1986                      5.43
IRL1988            4.78                      NZL2002                      4.17
IRL1996            5.34                      PAN1994                      6.77
ISL2003            3.71                      SGP1991                      12.26
ISR1986            3.14                      SGP2004                      6.48
ITA1996            4.81                      SWE1986                      5.43
KOR1988            3.16                      TUR2002                      4.48
KOR1999            3.77
LUX1997            3.39
MEX1991            3.78
NLD1996            3.48
NOR1981            5.39
NOR2004            13.71
NZL1993            5.69
NZL2002            4.17
PAN1994            6.77
PAN2005            3.35
PER2004            3.01
PHL2004            3.47
SGP1991            12.26
SGP2004            6.48
SWE1986            5.43
SWE1997            3.45
THA1991            3.65
TUR2002            4.48
Average            4.81                                                    6.15                                         6.91
N. Episodes         36                                                      18                                           12
The year refers to the beginning of the episode (for instance, in column 1, BEL1998 indicates an episode that starts in 1998 and ends
in 2002). The numbers report the average primary surplus over the period.




                                                                31
Table 4: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 8-year periods
         3% of GDP                                        4% of GDP                                     5% of GDP
BEL1997            5.51                      BEL1997                      5.51             BEL1997                      5.51
CAN1997            4.01                      CAN1997                      4.01             NOR2001                     11.57
CHL1991            3.02                      DNK1984                      4.24             SGP1990                     10.93
CHL2001            3.26                      DNK2000                      4.02             SGP2005                      5.84
DNK1984            4.24                      FIN2000                      4.12
DNK2000            4.02                      IRL1993                      4.72
FIN2000            4.12                      ITA1995                      4.04
GRC1994            3.27                      NOR2001                      11.57
IRL1993            4.72                      NZL1993                      4.46
ITA1995            4.04                      SGP1990                      10.93
KOR1995            3.38                      SGP2005                      5.84
NOR2001            11.57                     TUR1999                      4.11
NZL1993            4.46
SGP1990            10.93
SGP2005            5.84
SWE1984            3.82
TUR1999            4.11
Average            4.96                                                    5.63                                         8.46
N. Episodes         17                                                      12                                           4
The year refers to the beginning of the episode (for instance, in column 1, BEL1997 indicates an episode that starts in 1997 and ends
in 2003). The numbers report the average primary surplus over the period.


Table 5: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 10-year periods
         3% of GDP                                        4% of GDP                                     5% of GDP
BEL1995            5.19                      BEL1995                      5.19             BEL1995                      5.19
CAN1996            3.72                      IRL1991                      4.70             NOR1999                     11.07
DNK1984            3.44                      NOR1999                      11.07            SGP1990                      9.30
DNK1999            3.97                      NZL1994                      4.14
FIN1999            3.95                      SGP1990                      9.30
IRL1991            4.70
ITA1993            3.60
KOR1993            3.33
NOR1999            11.07
NZL1994            4.14
SGP1990            9.30
TUR1999            3.74
Average            5.01                                                    6.88                                         8.52
N. Episodes         12                                                       5                                           3
The year refers to the beginning of the episode (for instance, in column 1, BEL1995 indicates an episode that starts in 1995 and ends
in 2004). The numbers report the average primary surplus over the period.




                                                                32
Table 6: Economic variables during large and persistent primary surplus episodes
                   Five-year episodes            Eight-year Five-year episodes         Ten-year Five-year episodes
                       4% 5
           3%             4%          5%         3%             4%           5%        3%          4%         5%
                                                       GDP Growth (%)
Control    2.74           2.99      2.98         3.04          3.11         3.05      2.90        2.92         2.95
Episode    4.78           4.33      4.64         3.99          3.75         4.20      3.60        4.42         3.79
Diff.     -2.03          -1.34      -1.66       -0.95          -0.64        -1.15     -0.70       -1.51       -0.83
p-value    0.00          0.02       0.01        0.05            0.27        0.29      0.19         0.07        0.43
                                                     GDP per capita (USD)
Control   23'239        22'701     23'015      22'653         21'957       22'936     23'265     24'054       24'222
Episode   24'645        28'774     29'442      26'926         32'534       39'328     30'765     34'077       38'959
Diff.     -1'405        -6'073     -6'427      -4'273        -10'577      -16'392     -7'500     -10'023     -14'737
p-value    0.60          0.10       0.15         0.28           0.02        0.05       0.11        0.15        0.09
                                                    World GDP Growth (%)
Control    2.74           2.75      2.76         2.79          2.79         2.79      2.79        2.80         2.81
Episode    3.05           3.13      3.12         3.04          3.07         2.85      2.97        2.89         2.92
Diff.     -0.31          -0.39      -0.36       -0.26          -0.28        -0.06     -0.18       -0.09       -0.11
p-value    0.01          0.02       0.06        0.00           0.00          0.70      0.00        0.27        0.29
                                             Current account balance (% of GDP)
Control   -1.40          -1.19      -1.13       -1.44          -1.44        -1.30     -0.98       -0.80       -0.87
Episode    1.34           2.82      3.97        1.83           3.17         10.46     3.10        5.94       10.70
Diff.     -2.74          -4.01      -5.10       -3.27          -4.61       -11.75     -4.09       -6.74      -11.57
p-value    0.00           0.00       0.00        0.01          0.00         0.00      0.01        0.00         0.00
                                                      Debt over GDP (%)
Control   52.81          51.91      52.43       46.88          47.51        50.26      51.97      52.29       52.95
Episode   53.96          62.10      61.82       58.17          66.84        73.94      62.68      66.71       75.09
Diff.     -1.15         -10.20      -9.39      -11.29         -19.33       -23.68     -10.71     -14.42      -22.14
p-value    0.85          0.21        0.34       0.14            0.04         0.18      0.26       0.31         0.23
                                              RER (% deviation from average)
Control    1.39           1.60       1.60        1.32          1.29         1.31       1.50       1.56        1.58
Episode    1.56           1.84       1.82        2.00          1.71         1.24       2.03       1.90        1.25
Diff.     -0.18          -0.25      -0.22       -0.67          -0.42        0.07      -0.53       -0.33       0.33
p-value    0.66           0.84      0.88         0.09           0.59        0.96       0.63        0.83       0.86
                                                    Unemployment rate (%)
Control    7.18           7.01      7.13         6.78          6.75         7.01      6.76        6.80        6.86
Episode    6.51           7.19      5.98         6.95          7.15         4.50      7.00        6.47        4.64
Diff.      0.67          -0.18      1.14        -0.17          -0.40        2.51      -0.24       0.32        2.22
p-value    0.38           0.86      0.35         0.86          0.73         0.25      0.82        0.84        0.28
                                                          Inflation (%)
Control    5.66          5.57       5.59         5.82          5.86         5.56       5.53       5.35        5.30
Episode    5.29          4.35       4.14         5.29          4.82         3.07       4.47       2.92        3.09
Diff.      0.37          1.22       1.44         0.53          1.03         2.49       1.06       2.43        2.21
p-value    0.72          0.36       0.39         0.71          0.53         0.38       0.53       0.30        0.46
                                            Credit to the private sector (% of GDP)
Control   88.47         86.34       86.17       85.34          82.56        82.49     91.14       89.80       88.68
Episode   80.13         80.67       80.81       78.27          82.48        79.64     81.07       82.07       80.02
Diff.     8.35          5.67        5.36        7.07           0.09         2.84      10.07       7.73         8.65
p-value   0.37          0.65        0.73         0.58          1.00         0.92      0.50        0.73         0.76
                                                    Population growth (%)
Control    0.71           0.77      0.76         0.76          0.76         0.74      0.81        0.78         0.78
Episode    1.05           0.99      1.20         0.86          0.84         1.44      0.83        1.21         1.35
Diff.     -0.34          -0.21      -0.44       -0.10          -0.08        -0.70     -0.01       -0.43       -0.57
p-value    0.02           0.25      0.05         0.63           0.73        0.10      0.95        0.19         0.17
                                              Government balance (% of GDP)
Control   -3.58          -3.16      -3.09       -2.93          -2.86        -2.76     -2.97       -2.73       -2.68
Episode    1.95           3.31       5.01        1.32          1.67         8.35      1.46        4.67         7.35
Diff.     -5.53          -6.47      -8.10       -4.26          -4.53       -11.10     -4.43       -7.40      -10.02
p-value    0.00           0.00       0.00        0.00          0.00         0.00      0.00        0.00         0.00




                                                       33
Table 7: Political variables during large and persistent primary surplus episodes
            Five-year episodes              Eight-year Five-year episodes Ten-year Five-year episodes
          3%       4%        5%               3%         4%        5%       3%       4%        5%
                                      Electoral System (Parliamentary=1; Presidential=0)
Control    0.81      0.77          0.78          0.81           0.78           0.80         0.77          0.79    0.80
Episode    0.71      0.89          0.83          0.81           1.00           1.00         0.92          1.00    1.00
Diff.      0.10     -0.12         -0.05         -0.01          -0.22          -0.20        -0.14         -0.21   -0.20
p-value    0.19      0.22          0.65          0.95           0.07           0.39         0.25          0.24    0.38
                              Economic Ideology of the Government (Right=1; Left=3; Center=2)
Control    1.87      1.91          1.93          1.91           1.94           1.93         1.90          1.91    1.91
Episode    2.13      2.00          1.82          2.08           1.76           1.38         1.84          1.53    1.30
Diff.     -0.26     -0.09          0.11         -0.17           0.17           0.55         0.06          0.39    0.61
p-value    0.09      0.67          0.68          0.40           0.47           0.28         0.77          0.26    0.20
                                  Does party of executive control all relevant houses? (1=yes)
Control    0.22      0.22          0.22          0.20           0.23           0.23         0.21          0.22    0.22
Episode    0.27      0.36          0.38          0.38           0.35           0.33         0.33          0.26    0.33
Diff.     -0.05     -0.14         -0.17         -0.19          -0.13          -0.10        -0.12         -0.04   -0.11
p-value    0.53      0.15          0.16          0.07           0.30           0.66         0.30          0.84    0.62
                                              Plurality (1= first past the post rule)
Control    0.54      0.54          0.52          0.54           0.56           0.55         0.59          0.56    0.55
Episode    0.49      0.44          0.50          0.50           0.36           0.33         0.41          0.40    0.33
Diff.      0.05      0.09          0.02          0.04           0.20           0.21         0.18          0.16    0.22
p-value    0.56      0.44          0.87          0.77           0.20           0.47         0.23          0.48    0.45
                                              Proportional representation (1=yes)
Control    0.80      0.82          0.83          0.81           0.81           0.81         0.79          0.80    0.80
Episode    0.83      0.78          0.67          0.75           0.82           0.67         0.83          0.80    0.67
Diff.     -0.03      0.04          0.17          0.06           0.00           0.15        -0.05          0.00    0.13
p-value    0.71      0.64          0.14          0.55           0.97           0.53         0.72          0.98    0.57
                                              Average Distrct Magnitude, House
Control   38.94     35.42         33.98         43.37          39.14          35.39        34.81         31.49   30.34
Episode   12.14      8.73          7.99          8.17           8.99           8.34        8.96          10.87    8.49
Diff.     26.80     26.69         25.98         35.20          30.15          27.05        25.86         20.62   21.85
p-value   0.26       0.38          0.47          0.34           0.47           0.72         0.49          0.70    0.75
                                              Average Distrct Magnitude, Senate
Control   333.44   319.34        323.17        311.30         289.42         324.03      313.54         322.29   335.34
Episode   327.52   446.99        447.99        299.50         447.75          13.00       447.75        450.50   13.00
Diff.      5.91    -127.66       -124.82        11.80        -158.33         311.03      -134.21       -128.21   322.34
p-value    0.96      0.47          0.56          0.95           0.46           NA           0.54          0.68    NA
                                               Vote share of Government Parties
Control   42.60     42.57         42.89         44.08          43.90          44.11        43.05         43.26   43.52
Episode   44.34     45.91         45.28         45.48          46.95          52.58        46.42         49.46   51.42
Diff.     -1.74     -3.34         -2.39         -1.40          -3.05          -8.46        -3.38         -6.20   -7.91
p-value    0.59      0.44          0.64          0.73           0.50           0.31         0.47          0.37    0.36
                                                  Herfindahl Index Government
Control    0.71      0.70          0.69          0.70           0.71           0.71         0.71          0.71    0.71
Episode    0.69      0.75          0.75          0.69           0.66           0.57         0.66          0.63    0.57
Diff.      0.02     -0.05         -0.05          0.01           0.05           0.14         0.05          0.08    0.14
p-value    0.65      0.40          0.50          0.93           0.55           0.36         0.55          0.50    0.35
                                                  Government Fractionalization
Control    0.30      0.31          0.31          0.30           0.30           0.29         0.30          0.30    0.29
Episode    0.32      0.25          0.26          0.31           0.35           0.43         0.34          0.37    0.43
Diff.     -0.02      0.05          0.05         -0.01          -0.05          -0.14        -0.05         -0.08   -0.14
p-value    0.65      0.40          0.50          0.93           0.55           0.35         0.55          0.50    0.35
                    Polarization between the executive party and the four principal parties of the legislature
Control    1.02      1.02          1.05          1.04           1.03           1.05         0.98          1.01    1.04
Episode    1.07      1.16          1.05          1.17           1.26           1.33         1.27          1.42    1.33
Diff.     -0.05     -0.14          0.00         -0.13          -0.23          -0.29        -0.29         -0.41   -0.29
p-value    0.73      0.50          0.99          0.54           0.36           0.54         0.22          0.25    0.52
                                                        Democracy Index
Control    9.26      9.18          9.20          9.23           9.19           9.27         9.20          9.23    9.27
Episode    8.84      9.06          8.84          9.14           9.11           7.91         9.06          8.72    7.89
Diff.      0.42      0.12          0.36          0.10           0.08           1.37         0.14          0.51    1.38
p-value    0.17      0.77          0.44          0.82           0.87           0.13         0.77          0.48    0.12




                                                       34
Table 8: Primary surpluses and Economic Variables
(advanced economies and emerging markets)
                               (1)                    (2)                  (3)                   (4)
Pop growth                   0.0519                 0.0323              0.0712*                0.0468
                            (0.0450)               (0.0344)             (0.0416)              (0.0318)
GDP Growth                 0.0776***             0.0672***            0.0729***             0.0616***
                            (0.0196)               (0.0157)             (0.0188)              (0.0148)
Log(infl)                    0.0122                 0.0140              0.00434               0.00554
                            (0.0280)               (0.0237)             (0.0271)              (0.0224)
Debt-to-GDP                 0.00139*              0.00134*
                           (0.00071)             (0.000803)
Credit to priv. sect.      -0.000567             -0.000635            -0.000636             -0.000736
                          (0.000798)             (0.000675)           (0.000803)            (0.000674)
Current acc. bal.          0.0154**               0.0116**             0.0161**              0.0119**
                           (0.00689)              (0.00554)            (0.00690)             (0.00557)
Log(GDP PC)                0.114***              0.0888***             0.118***             0.0888***
                            (0.0367)               (0.0297)             (0.0374)              (0.0301)
Unemployment                0.00290               0.000731              0.00595               0.00340
                           (0.00696)              (0.00584)            (0.00709)             (0.00594)
World GDP growth              2.528                  1.444                3.735                 2.475
                             (4.349)                (3.591)              (4.243)               (3.503)
RER                         -0.00179                                   -0.00294
                            (0.0123)                                    (0.0120)
Observations                   189                    219                  189                   219
Sample                      AE&EM                 AE&EM                AE&EM                 AE&EM
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   35
Table 9: Primary surpluses and Economic Variables
(advanced economies)
                               (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)
Pop growth                   -0.109                -0.0826               -0.0884              -0.0717
                            (0.0491)               (0.0335)             (0.0534)              (0.0365)
GDP Growth                  0.124***             0.0876***             0.120***             0.0853***
                            (0.0254)               (0.0200)             (0.0259)              (0.0195)
Log(infl)                   -0.00817              0.000696               -0.0187              -0.0103
                            (0.0453)               (0.0301)             (0.0456)              (0.0311)
Debt-to-GDP                 0.00204*             0.00157**
                           (0.00116)             (0.000766)
Credit to priv. sect.      -0.000626             -0.000436            -0.000818             -0.000637
                          (0.000871)             (0.000608)           (0.000926)            (0.000657)
Current acc. bal.           0.00704                0.00450              0.00938               0.00597
                           (0.00651)              (0.00427)            (0.00697)             (0.00487)
Log(GDP PC)                0.238***               0.149***             0.243***               0.145**
                            (0.0807)               (0.0522)             (0.0855)              (0.0573)
Unemployment                -0.00150              -0.00275              0.00442               0.00134
                           (0.00719)              (0.00495)            (0.00755)             (0.00534)
World GDP growth              2.242                  0.912                3.840                 2.040
                             (4.518)                (3.152)              (4.611)               (3.270)
RER                         -0.00742                                   -0.00947
                            (0.0111)                                    (0.0112)
Observations                   132                    161                  132                   161
Sample                  Adv. Economies        Adv. Economies       Adv. Economies        Adv. Economies
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   36
Table 10: Primary Surpluses and Political Variables
(advanced economies and emerging markets)
                                (1)                    (2)                 (3)                   (4)
Pol. Syst.                   -0.0773                -0.0833             -0.0407               -0.0407
                             (0.0568)              (0.0606)             (0.0930)              (0.0997)
Ec. Orient                 0.0767***              0.0721**              0.0617*              0.0664**
                             (0.0297)              (0.0305)             (0.0337)              (0.0336)
Allhouse                      0.161*                 0.139*             0.226**               0.217**
                             (0.0832)              (0.0815)             (0.0939)              (0.0894)
Plurality                    0.00528               0.00925              -0.0564               -0.0638
                             (0.0575)              (0.0606)             (0.0681)              (0.0678)
Proportional                 0.109**                 0.0743            0.142***              0.144***
                             (0.0511)              (0.0618)             (0.0428)              (0.0427)
Numvote                    -0.000156               -0.00137            0.000215              -4.65e-05
                            (0.00157)             (0.00162)            (0.00220)             (0.00183)
Fract.                         0.189               0.299**               0.0807                 0.119
                              (0.116)               (0.127)              (0.155)               (0.149)
Polariz.                     0.0646*                 0.0231             0.0691*                0.0491
                             (0.0350)              (0.0375)             (0.0407)              (0.0411)
Democracy                    -0.0214                                   -0.00497
                             (0.0230)                                   (0.0292)
Log(ADM)                     -0.0186                                   -0.00266
                             (0.0157)                                   (0.0145)
Observations                    192                    204                 149                   160
Sample                      AE&EM                 AE&EM                 Adv. Ec.              Adv. Ec.
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   37
Table 11: Primary Surpluses, Economic and Political Variables
(advanced economies and emerging markets)
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)
GDP Growth                   0.0695***        0.0724***        0.0634***       0.0632***       0.0686***
                              (0.0137)         (0.0123)         (0.0128)        (0.0136)        (0.0119)
Debt-to-GDP                  0.00122**         0.00103*                        0.00138**
                             (0.000620)      (0.000530)                        (0.000655)
Log(GDP PC)                   0.0682**        0.0710***         0.0647**        0.0744**       0.0698***
                              (0.0280)         (0.0260)         (0.0286)        (0.0294)        (0.0267)
Proportional                   0.0693           0.0654           0.0762                          0.0633
                              (0.0427)         (0.0397)         (0.0464)                        (0.0406)
Ec. Orient                   0.0744***                         0.0694**         0.0674**
                              (0.0271)                          (0.0270)        (0.0283)
Allhouse                       0.113*           0.0926           0.129*          0.0590           0.100
                              (0.0665)         (0.0609)         (0.0696)        (0.0649)        (0.0630)
Fract.                          0.170           0.0700            0.181          0.200**         0.0691
                              (0.0959)         (0.0837)         (0.0998)        (0.0960)        (0.0866)
Observations                     203              229              203             206             229
Sample                        AE&EM            AE&EM            AE&EM           AE&EM           AE&EM
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 12: Primary Surpluses, Economic and Political Variables
(advanced economies)
                                        (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)
GDP Growth                          0.0540***          0.0701***           0.0507***         0.0672***
                                     (0.0159)           (0.0151)            (0.0153)          (0.0148)
Debt-to-GDP                         0.000830*          0.000973*
                                    (0.000502)         (0.000540)
Log(GDP PC)                          0.118**            0.150***            0.123**           0.155***
                                     (0.0501)           (0.0502)            (0.0504)          (0.0537)
Proportional                        0.0976***          0.0955***            0.113***          0.107***
                                     (0.0340)           (0.0334)            (0.0328)          (0.0339)
Ec. Orient                          0.0641***                              0.0646***
                                     (0.0213)                               (0.0222)
Allhouse                             0.133**              0.103             0.183***           0.150**
                                     (0.0623)           (0.0638)            (0.0603)          (0.0651)
Fract.                                 0.123             0.0431              0.159*            0.0638
                                     (0.0833)           (0.0900)            (0.0898)          (0.0948)
Observations                            160                172                 160               172
Sample                               Adv. Ec             Adv. ec             Adv. ec          Adv. Ec
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   38
Table 13: Primary Surpluses, Economic and Political Variables
(all countries with GDP per capita of at least USD2000 PPP)
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)
GDP Growth                   0.0510***        0.0513***        0.0533***       0.0380***       0.0437***
                              (0.0112)         (0.0112)         (0.0101)       (0.00986)       (0.00920)
Debt-to-GDP                  0.00144**        0.00145**         0.00117*
                             (0.000710)      (0.000710)       (0.000625)
Log(GDP PC)                    0.0342           0.0338          0.0449*          0.0294         0.0422*
                              (0.0276)         (0.0275)         (0.0247)        (0.0279)        (0.0245)
Proportional                   0.0297                            0.0649          0.0266          0.0461
                              (0.0573)                          (0.0513)        (0.0571)        (0.0494)
Ec. Orient                    0.0609**        0.0623**                          0.0539**
                              (0.0272)         (0.0273)                         (0.0260)
Allhouse                       0.0496           0.0405           0.0697          0.0580          0.0696
                              (0.0600)         (0.0586)         (0.0540)        (0.0602)        (0.0530)
Fract.                          0.116            0.129           0.0254           0.149          0.0572
                               (0.104)         (0.0996)         (0.0902)         (0.101)        (0.0880)
Observations                     232              232              268             250             232
Sample                     All countries All countries All countries All countries All countries
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for five year episodes with a primary surplus
of at least 3% of GDP. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 14: Primary Surpluses, Economic and Political Variables
(different thresholds and time lengths)
                        (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)
GDP Growth         0.0246***       0.0149**        0.0461**        0.0185*        0.0555**        0.0177
                    (0.00838)      (0.00587)       (0.0186)       (0.00970)       (0.0225)       (0.0164)
Debt-to-GDP         0.000649       0.000354        0.000865       0.000542        0.000758       0.000335
                   (0.000417)     (0.000240)      (0.000775)     (0.000373)      (0.000810)     (0.000268)
Log(GDP PC)         0.107***       0.0616**        0.164**         0.108**         0.153**        0.0510
                     (0.0386)       (0.0272)       (0.0702)        (0.0524)       (0.0722)       (0.0472)
Proportional        0.0531**         0.0126        0.129***         0.0298          0.0701
                     (0.0270)       (0.0242)       (0.0469)        (0.0263)       (0.0522)
Ec. Orient            0.0183        0.00155         0.0484        0.000867         0.0215        -0.00917
                     (0.0197)       (0.0132)       (0.0361)        (0.0167)       (0.0372)       (0.0110)
Allhouse              0.0432         0.0249        0.292***         0.107*         0.194*         0.0145
                     (0.0517)       (0.0306)       (0.0932)        (0.0592)       (0.0993)       (0.0392)
Fract.               0.00312         0.0267          0.159          0.123*          0.242         0.0535
                     (0.0716)       (0.0418)        (0.121)        (0.0653)        (0.220)       (0.0585)
Observations            171            178             91             100             79            69
Sample              AE&EM          AE&EM           AE&EM          AE&EM           AE&EM          AE&EM
Length                5 years        5 years        8 years         8 years       10 years       10 years
Threshold               4%             5%             3%              4%              3%            4%
Probit Regressions, the dependent variable takes value one for episodes of length X with a primary
surplus above the threshold. The table reports the marginal effects estimated at the mean of the dependent
variable. Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   39
Figure 1: Italian Gross Public Debt
 140.00%                                                        €2'250

 130.00%
                                                                €2'000
 120.00%

 110.00%                                                        €1'750
 100.00%
                                                                €1'500
 90.00%

 80.00%                                                         €1'250
 70.00%

 60.00%                                                         €1'000

 50.00%
                                                                €750
 40.00%

 30.00%                                                         €500

 20.00%
                                                                €250
 10.00%

  0.00%                                                         €‐




           2014*
           2015*
           2016*
           2017*
           2018*
           2019*
            1988
            1989
            1990
            1991
            1992
            1993
            1994
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2003
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
                                       Year

                            % of GDP                Billio ns


Source: WEO database (April 2014). *IMF forecasts




                                               40
Figure 2: Marginal effect of GDP per capita at different level of public debt and
marginal effect of debt at different levels of GDP per capita.
                   .2
   dEP/dln(GDP)
     0      .1     -.1




                                    20     30         40     50        60         70    80          90       100    110         120     130
                                                                                  DEBT2GDP
   -.0005 0 .0005 .001 .0015 .002
         dEP/d(Debt-to-GDP)




                                    7    7.2    7.4    7.6   7.8   8        8.2    8.4  8.6   8.8        9   9.2   9.4    9.6     9.8   10
                                                                                  lnGDP_PC




                                                                                       41
Figure 3: Marginal effect of proportional representation at different levels of GDP
per capita and quality of government
       .2  0
    dEP/dPR
   -.2 -.4




               7   7.2        7.4   7.6   7.8        8   8.2    8.4  8.6    8.8   9        9.2   9.4   9.6        9.8   10
                                                               lnGDP_PC
       .4
       .2
   dEP/dPR
   -.2   0
       -.4
       -.6




               0         .1         .2          .3       .4        .5       .6        .7         .8          .9         1
                                                               (mean) qog




                                                                  42
Table A1: Country-years included in the sample
Country       First obs.     Last Obs.    Country     First obs.     Last Obs.
ARG         1992           2013           ISR       1986           2013
AUS         1974           2013           ITA       1974           2013
AUT         1974           2013           JPN       1974           2013
BEL         1974           2013           KOR       1974           2013
BRA         1996           2013           LBN       2000           2012
CAN         1974           2013           LTU       2000           2013
CHE         1974           2013           LUX       1990           2013
CHL         1991           2013           LVA       1996           2013
CHN         1991           2011           MEX       1991           2011
COL         1991           2013           NLD       1974           2013
CRI         1991           2013           NOR       1974           2013
CYP         2000           2012           NZL       1974           2013
CZE         1996           2013           PAN       1991           2013
DEU         1974           2013           PER       1993           2013
DNK         1974           2013           PHL       1997           2013
ECU         1991           1994           POL       1996           2013
ESP         1974           2013           PRT       1974           2013
EST         1996           2013           RUS       2006           2013
FIN         1974           2013           SGP       1990           2013
FRA         1974           2013           SVK       1996           2013
GBR         1974           2013           SVN       1996           2013
GRC         1974           2013           SWE       1974           2013
HKG         2002           2013           THA       1991           2013
IDN         1991           2011           TUR       1991           2013
IND         1991           2013           URY       2010           2013
IRL         1974           2013           USA       1974           2013
ISL         1974           2013           ZAF       2006           2013




                                         43
Table A2: Overlapping primary surplus episodes, 5-year periods
                          3% of GDP                                              4% of GDP                           5% of GDP
BEL1989       3.06 HKG2006            3.20 NZL1993           5.69 BEL1994        4.52 SGP1990          11.90 BEL1996            5.44
BEL1990       3.18 HKG2007            3.23 NZL1994           5.41 BEL1995        4.97 SGP1991          12.26 BEL1997            5.93
BEL1991       3.11 IRL1987            4.05 NZL1995           4.48 BEL1996        5.44 SGP1992          12.03 BEL1998            5.97
BEL1992       3.28 IRL1988            4.78 NZL1996           3.51 BEL1997        5.93 SGP1993          11.30 BEL1999            5.73
BEL1993       3.86 IRL1989            4.75 NZL2000           3.44 BEL1998        5.97 SGP1994           8.51 BEL2000            5.42
BEL1994       4.52 IRL1990            4.53 NZL2001           3.86 BEL1999        5.73 SGP1995           6.69 CAN1997            5.05
BEL1995       4.97 IRL1991            4.07 NZL2002           4.17 BEL2000        5.42 SGP1996           6.03 CHL2004            5.33
BEL1996       5.44 IRL1992            3.92 NZL2003           4.14 BEL2001        4.47 SGP1997           5.03 DNK1984            5.22
BEL1997       5.93 IRL1993            4.13 NZL2004           3.55 BEL2002        4.01 SGP1999           4.73 DNK1985            5.49
BEL1998       5.97 IRL1994            4.44 PAN1991           4.97 CAN1996        4.82 SGP2000           4.73 DNK1986            5.25
BEL1999       5.73 IRL1995            4.58 PAN1992           5.45 CAN1997        5.05 SGP2001           4.44 FIN1974            5.23
BEL2000       5.42 IRL1996            5.34 PAN1993           5.70 CAN1998        4.57 SGP2002           4.99 FIN1975            6.08
BEL2001       4.47 IRL1997            4.99 PAN1994           6.77 CHL2003        4.60 SGP2003           6.44 FIN1976            5.19
BEL2002       4.01 IRL1998            4.13 PAN1995           3.85 CHL2004        5.33 SGP2004           6.48 IRL1996            5.34
BEL2003       3.67 IRL1999            3.36 PAN2005           3.35 DNK1984        5.22 SGP2005           5.17 NOR1981            5.39
BEL2004       3.20 ISL2003            3.71 PAN2006           3.21 DNK1985        5.49 SGP2006           5.03 NOR1982            5.20
BRA1999 3.28 ISR1986                  3.14 PER2004           3.01 DNK1986        5.25 SGP2007           5.46 NOR1996            6.31
BRA2000 3.40 ITA1993                  3.32 PHL2003           3.07 DNK2003        4.41 SGP2008           4.80 NOR1997            7.62
BRA2001 3.48 ITA1994                  3.87 PHL2004           3.47 DNK2004        4.76 SGP2009           4.90 NOR1998            7.77
BRA2002 3.44 ITA1995                  4.43 PHL2005           3.17 FIN1998        4.75 SWE1985           4.52 NOR1999            8.43
BRA2003 3.46 ITA1996                  4.81 SGP1990          11.90 FIN1999        4.59 SWE1986           5.43 NOR2000            9.37
BRA2004 3.58 ITA1997                  4.62 SGP1991          12.26 FIN2000        4.41 SWE1987           5.08 NOR2001            9.25
BRA2005 3.24 ITA1998                  3.87 SGP1992          12.03 IRL1987        4.05 TUR2002           4.48 NOR2002 10.19
CAN1995 3.71 ITA1999                  3.16 SGP1993          11.30 IRL1988        4.78 TUR2003           4.35 NOR2003 11.66
CAN1996 4.82 KOR1987                  3.09 SGP1994           8.51 IRL1989        4.75                            NOR2004 13.71
CAN1997 5.05 KOR1988                  3.16 SGP1995           6.69 IRL1990        4.53                            NZL1993        5.69
CAN1998 4.57 KOR1989                  3.14 SGP1996           6.03 IRL1991        4.07                            NZL1994        5.41
CAN1999 3.96 KOR1990                  3.10 SGP1997           5.03 IRL1993        4.13                            PAN1992        5.45
CAN2000 3.28 KOR1992                  3.02 SGP1998           3.94 IRL1994        4.44                            PAN1993        5.70
CHL1991       3.54 KOR1993            3.02 SGP1999           4.73 IRL1995        4.58                            PAN1994        6.77
CHL1992       3.34 KOR1996            3.14 SGP2000           4.73 IRL1996        5.34                            SGP1990       11.90
CHL1993       3.10 KOR1997            3.32 SGP2001           4.44 IRL1997        4.99                            SGP1991       12.26
CHL2003       4.60 KOR1998            3.64 SGP2002           4.99 IRL1998        4.13                            SGP1992       12.03
CHL2004       5.33 KOR1999            3.77 SGP2003           6.44 ITA1995        4.43                            SGP1993       11.30
CHL2005       3.97 KOR2000            3.53 SGP2004           6.48 ITA1996        4.81                            SGP1994        8.51
DNK1983 3.70 LUX1997                  3.39 SGP2005           5.17 ITA1997        4.62                            SGP1995        6.69
DNK1984 5.22 LUX1998                  3.07 SGP2006           5.03 NOR1974        4.17                            SGP1996        6.03
DNK1985 5.49 MEX1991                  3.78 SGP2007           5.46 NOR1976        4.21                            SGP1997        5.03
DNK1986 5.25 MEX1992                  3.26 SGP2008           4.80 NOR1977        4.31                            SGP2003        6.44
DNK1987 3.90 NLD1996                  3.48 SGP2009           4.90 NOR1978        4.36                            SGP2004        6.48
DNK1996 3.10 NLD1997                  3.41 SWE1984           3.58 NOR1979        4.75                            SGP2005        5.17
DNK1997 3.50 NOR1974                  4.17 SWE1985           4.52 NOR1980        4.85                            SGP2006        5.03
DNK1998 3.43 NOR1975                  4.00 SWE1986           5.43 NOR1981        5.39                            SGP2007        5.46
DNK1999 3.18 NOR1976                  4.21 SWE1987           5.08 NOR1982        5.20                            SWE1986        5.43
DNK2000 3.00 NOR1977                  4.31 SWE1997           3.45 NOR1983        4.88                            SWE1987        5.08
DNK2001 3.31 NOR1978                  4.36 SWE1998           3.29 NOR1996        6.31
DNK2002 3.82 NOR1979                  4.75 THA1991           3.65 NOR1997        7.62
DNK2003 4.41 NOR1980                  4.85 THA1992           3.24 NOR1998        7.77
DNK2004 4.76 NOR1981                  5.39 THA1993           3.02 NOR1999        8.43
DNK2005 3.62 NOR1982                  5.20 TUR1999           3.84 NOR2000        9.37
FIN1976       3.39 NOR1983            4.88 TUR2000           3.38 NOR2001        9.25
FIN1977       3.01 NOR1984            3.70 TUR2001           3.23 NOR2002 10.19
FIN1997       3.96 NOR1995            3.88 TUR2002           4.48 NOR2003 11.66
FIN1998       4.75 NOR1996            6.31 TUR2003           4.35 NOR2004 13.71
FIN1999       4.59 NOR1997            7.62 TUR2004           3.64 NZL1992        4.95
FIN2000       4.41 NOR1998            7.77                           NZL1993     5.69
FIN2001       3.34 NOR1999            8.43                           NZL1994     5.41
FIN2003       3.09 NOR2000            9.37                           NZL1995     4.48
FIN2004       3.30 NOR2001            9.25                           NZL2002     4.17
GRC1994 3.24 NOR2002 10.19                                           NZL2003     4.14
GRC1995 3.61 NOR2003 11.66                                           PAN1991     4.97
GRC1996 3.91 NOR2004 13.71                                           PAN1992     5.45
GRC1997 3.54 NZL1991                  3.85                           PAN1993     5.70
GRC1998 3.01 NZL1992                  4.95                           PAN1994     6.77
The year refers to the beginning of the episode (for instance, in column 1, ARG2002 indicates an episode that starts in 2002 and
ends in 2006). The numbers report the average primary surplus over the period.



                                                                44
Table A3: Overlapping primary surplus episodes, 8-year periods
                    3% of GDP                                   4% of GDP                5% of GDP
BEL1995   5.34   ITA1992    3.38   SGP1990   10.93    BEL1992    4.17 SGP2005   5.84   BEL1994    5.14
BEL1996   5.47   ITA1993    3.86   SGP1991    9.85    BEL1993    4.68 SGP2006   5.71   BEL1995    5.34
BEL1997   5.51   ITA1994    3.95   SGP1992    9.30    BEL1994    5.14 TUR1999   4.11   BEL1996    5.47
BEL1998   5.06   ITA1995    4.04   SGP1993    8.75    BEL1995    5.34 SGP2005   5.84   BEL1997    5.51
BEL1999   4.82   ITA1996    3.80   SGP1994    7.27    BEL1996    5.47 SGP2006   5.71   BEL1998    5.06
BEL2000   4.53   ITA1997    3.46   SGP1995    5.96    BEL1997    5.51 TUR1999   4.11   NOR1978    5.11
BEL2001   4.07   KOR1986    3.02   SGP1996    5.15    BEL1998    5.06                  NOR1979    5.13
BRA1999   3.39   KOR1987    3.10   SGP1997    4.74    BEL1999    4.82                  NOR1994    5.36
BRA2000   3.42   KOR1988    3.11   SGP1998    4.46    BEL2000    4.53                  NOR1995    6.45
BRA2001   3.47   KOR1989    3.02   SGP1999    5.07    BEL2001    4.07                  NOR1996    6.94
BRA2002   3.30   KOR1990    3.04   SGP2000    5.80    CAN1996    4.01                  NOR1997    7.48
BRA2003   3.19   KOR1993    3.11   SGP2001    5.43    CAN1997    4.01                  NOR1998    8.32
BRA2004   3.17   KOR1994    3.13   SGP2002    4.82    DNK1984    4.24                  NOR1999 10.07
CAN1994   3.32   KOR1995    3.38   SGP2003    5.14    DNK1985    4.07                  NOR2000 11.31
CAN1995   3.83   KOR1996    3.34   SGP2004    5.52    DNK2000    4.02                  NOR2001 11.57
CAN1996   4.01   KOR1997    3.11   SGP2005    5.84    FIN2000    4.12                  SGP1990   10.93
CAN1997   4.01   KOR1999    3.07   SGP2006    5.71    IRL1987    4.09                  SGP1991    9.85
CAN1998   3.73   NOR1974    4.49   SWE1983    3.37    IRL1988    4.37                  SGP1992    9.30
CAN1999   3.42   NOR1975    4.17   SWE1984    3.82    IRL1989    4.38                  SGP1993    8.75
CHL1991   3.02   NOR1976    4.29   TUR1999    4.11    IRL1990    4.40                  SGP1994    7.27
CHL2001   3.26   NOR1977    4.47   TUR2000    3.59    IRL1991    4.42                  SGP1995    5.96
DNK1983   3.71   NOR1978    5.11   TUR2001    3.13    IRL1992    4.42                  SGP1996    5.15
DNK1984   4.24   NOR1979    5.13   TUR2002    3.18    IRL1993    4.72                  SGP1999    5.07
DNK1985   4.07   NOR1980    4.72                      IRL1994    4.53                  SGP2000    5.80
DNK1986   3.53   NOR1981    3.97                      IRL1995    4.14                  SGP2001    5.43
DNK1997   3.09   NOR1982    3.24                      ITA1995    4.04                  SGP2003    5.14
DNK1998   3.52   NOR1993    3.46                      NOR1974    4.49                  SGP2004    5.52
DNK1999   3.88   NOR1994    5.36                      NOR1975    4.17                  SGP2005    5.84
DNK2000   4.02   NOR1995    6.45                      NOR1976    4.29                  SGP2006    5.71
DNK2001   3.87   NOR1996    6.94                      NOR1977    4.47
DNK2002   3.16   NOR1997    7.48                      NOR1978    5.11
FIN1976   4.36   NOR1998    8.32                      NOR1979    5.13
FIN1997   3.55   NOR1999 10.07                        NOR1980    4.72
FIN1998   3.85   NOR2000 11.31                        NOR1994    5.36
FIN1999   3.92   NOR2001 11.57                        NOR1995    6.45
FIN2000   4.12   NZL1988    3.39                      NOR1996    6.94
FIN2001   3.57   NZL1989    3.82                      NOR1997    7.48
GRC1994   3.27   NZL1990    4.03                      NOR1998    8.32
GRC1995   3.06   NZL1991    4.04                      NOR1999   10.07
IRL1986   3.39   NZL1992    4.20                      NOR2000   11.31
IRL1987   4.09   NZL1993    4.46                      NOR2001   11.57
IRL1988   4.37   NZL1994    4.24                      NZL1990    4.03
IRL1989   4.38   NZL1995    3.84                      NZL1991    4.04
IRL1990   4.40   NZL1996    3.42                      NZL1992    4.20
IRL1991   4.42   NZL1997    3.26                      NZL1993    4.46
IRL1992   4.42   NZL1998    3.31                      NZL1994    4.24
IRL1993   4.72   NZL1999    3.47                      PAN1993    4.11
IRL1994   4.53   NZL2000    3.64                      PAN1994    4.93
IRL1995   4.14   NZL2001    3.45                      SGP1990   10.93
IRL1996   3.99   PAN1991    3.96                      SGP1991    9.85
IRL1997   3.78   PAN1992    3.89                      SGP1992    9.30
IRL1998   3.43   PAN1993    4.11                      SGP1993    8.75
IRL1999   3.20   PAN1994    4.93                      SGP1994    7.27
BEL1995   5.34   ITA1992    3.38                      SGP1995    5.96
BEL1996   5.47   ITA1993    3.86                      SGP1996    5.15
BEL1997   5.51   ITA1994    3.95                      SGP1997    4.74
BEL1998   5.06   ITA1995    4.04                      SGP1998    4.46
BEL1999   4.82   ITA1996    3.80                      SGP1999    5.07
BEL2000   4.53   ITA1997    3.46                      SGP2000    5.80
BEL2001   4.07   KOR1986    3.02                      SGP2001    5.43
BRA1999   3.39   KOR1987    3.10                      SGP2002    4.82
BRA2000   3.42   KOR1988    3.11                      SGP2003    5.14
BRA2001   3.47   KOR1989    3.02                      SGP2004    5.52
BRA2002   3.30   KOR1990    3.04




                                                     45
Table A4: Overlapping primary surplus episodes, 10-year periods
                    3% of GDP                               4% of GDP               5% of GDP
BEL1987   3.04   ITA1993      3.60   TUR1999   3.74   BEL1990          4.07   BEL1994          5.12
BEL1988   3.39   ITA1994      3.51                    BEL1991          4.27   BEL1995          5.19
BEL1989   3.79   ITA1995      3.47                    BEL1992          4.60   NOR1994          5.55
BEL1990   4.07   ITA1996      3.16                    BEL1993          4.91   NOR1995          6.63
BEL1991   4.27   KOR1987      3.06                    BEL1994          5.12   NOR1996          7.78
BEL1992   4.60   KOR1988      3.09                    BEL1995          5.19   NOR1997          8.91
BEL1993   4.91   KOR1991      3.04                    BEL1996          4.96   NOR1998          9.71
BEL1994   5.12   KOR1992      3.17                    BEL1997          4.97   NOR1999         11.07
BEL1995   5.19   KOR1993      3.33                    BEL1998          4.82   SGP1990          9.30
BEL1996   4.96   KOR1994      3.22                    BEL1999          4.46   SGP1991          9.15
BEL1997   4.97   KOR1995      3.07                    IRL1988          4.45   SGP1992          8.53
BEL1998   4.82   NOR1974      4.46                    IRL1989          4.59   SGP1993          7.62
BEL1999   4.46   NOR1975      4.42                    IRL1990          4.55   SGP1994          6.62
BEL2000   3.66   NOR1976      4.80                    IRL1991          4.70   SGP1995          5.71
BRA1998   3.02   NOR1977      4.75                    IRL1992          4.45   SGP1996          5.24
BRA1999   3.43   NOR1978      4.62                    IRL1993          4.13   SGP1997          5.01
BRA2000   3.32   NOR1979      4.23                    NOR1974          4.46   SGP1998          5.19
BRA2001   3.22   NOR1980      3.60                    NOR1975          4.42   SGP1999          5.61
BRA2002   3.19   NOR1992      3.43                    NOR1976          4.80   SGP2002          5.23
BRA2003   3.08   NOR1993      4.61                    NOR1977          4.75   SGP2003          5.62
CAN1994   3.09   NOR1994      5.55                    NOR1978          4.62   SGP2004          5.69
CAN1995   3.49   NOR1995      6.63                    NOR1979          4.23
CAN1996   3.72   NOR1996      7.78                    NOR1993          4.61
CAN1997   3.71   NOR1997      8.91                    NOR1994          5.55
CAN1998   3.42   NOR1998      9.71                    NOR1995          6.63
DNK1983   3.18   NOR1999     11.07                    NOR1996          7.78
DNK1984   3.44   NZL1987      3.42                    NOR1997          8.91
DNK1985   3.24   NZL1988      3.75                    NOR1998          9.71
DNK1996   3.20   NZL1989      3.76                    NOR1999         11.07
DNK1997   3.66   NZL1990      3.67                    NZL1993          4.13
DNK1998   3.92   NZL1991      3.68                    NZL1994          4.14
DNK1999   3.97   NZL1992      3.87                    SGP1990          9.30
DNK2000   3.31   NZL1993      4.13                    SGP1991          9.15
FIN1997   3.47   NZL1994      4.14                    SGP1992          8.53
FIN1998   3.92   NZL1995      3.96                    SGP1993          7.62
FIN1999   3.95   NZL1996      3.69                    SGP1994          6.62
FIN2000   3.31   NZL1997      3.48                    SGP1995          5.71
IRL1985   3.03   NZL1998      3.36                    SGP1996          5.24
IRL1986   3.43   NZL1999      3.21                    SGP1997          5.01
IRL1987   3.99   PAN1991      3.62                    SGP1998          5.19
IRL1988   4.45   PAN1992      3.49                    SGP1999          5.61
IRL1989   4.59   PAN1993      3.39                    SGP2000          4.95
IRL1990   4.55   PAN1994      3.84                    SGP2001          4.74
IRL1991   4.70   SGP1990      9.30                    SGP2002          5.23
IRL1992   4.45   SGP1991      9.15                    SGP2003          5.62
IRL1993   4.13   SGP1992      8.53                    SGP2004          5.69
IRL1994   3.90   SGP1993      7.62
IRL1995   3.74   SGP1994      6.62
IRL1996   3.70   SGP1995      5.71
IRL1997   3.65   SGP1996      5.24
IRL1998   3.18   SGP1997      5.01
ITA1991   3.17   SGP1998      5.19
ITA1992   3.50   SGP1999      5.61
BEL1987   3.04   ITA1993      3.60
BEL1988   3.39   ITA1994      3.51
BEL1989   3.79   ITA1995      3.47
BEL1990   4.07   ITA1996      3.16
BEL1991   4.27   KOR1987      3.06
BEL1992   4.60   KOR1988      3.09
BEL1993   4.91   KOR1991      3.04
BEL1994   5.12   KOR1992      3.17
BEL1995   5.19   KOR1993      3.33
BEL1996   4.96   KOR1994      3.22
BEL1997   4.97   KOR1995      3.07




                                               46
Table A5: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 5-year periods, all countries
                   3%                                4%                     5%
BEL1998         5.97   NZL1993      4.29   BEL1998         5.97   BEL1998         5.97
BGR1998         3.61   NZL2002      4.17   BWA1990        14.62   BWA1990        14.62
BGR2004         3.51   OMN2004     11.28   CAN1997         5.05   CAN1997         5.05
BHR2004         3.14   PAN1990      4.74   CHL2004         5.33   CHL2004         5.33
BLZ2005         3.43   PAN2005      3.35   DMA2003         4.47   DNK1985         5.49
BRA2004         3.58   PER2004      3.01   DNK1985         5.49   DZA2004         9.44
BWA1990        14.62   QAT2004     12.07   DNK2004         4.76   IRL1996         5.34
CAN1997         5.05   SAU2004     21.52   DZA2004         9.44   JAM1993         6.83
CHL1990         3.67   SGP1991     12.26   ECU1990         4.52   JAM2003         9.11
CHL2004         5.33   SGP2004      6.48   FIN1974         4.69   KNA2009         5.69
DMA2003         4.47   SMR2004      5.70   FIN1998         4.75   KWT2004        18.87
DNK1985         5.49   SWE1986      5.43   IRL1988         4.78   LBY2004        26.35
DNK1997         3.50   SWE1997      3.45   IRL1996         5.34   NOR1981         5.39
DNK2004         4.76   MEX1990      3.62   ITA1996         4.81   NOR2004        13.71
DZA2004         9.44   MYS1993      4.63   JAM1993         6.83   OMN2004        11.28
ECU1990         4.52   NAM2005      4.00   JAM2003         9.11   QAT2004        12.07
FIN1974         4.69   NLD1996      3.48   KAZ2003         4.51   SAU2004        21.52
FIN1998         4.75   NOR1981      5.39   KNA2009         5.69   SGP1991        12.26
GRC1996         3.91   NOR2004     13.71   KWT2004        18.87   SGP2004         6.48
HKG2007         3.23   NZL1993      4.29   LBY2004        26.35   SMR2004         5.70
IRL1988         4.78   NZL2002      4.17   MYS1993         4.63   SWE1986         5.43
IRL1996         5.34   OMN2004     11.28   NOR1981         5.39   SYC1990        10.07
IRN2003         3.60   PAN1990      4.74   NOR2004        13.71   SYC2008         8.00
ISL2003         3.71   PAN2005      3.35   NZL1993         4.29   TTO2004         7.04
ITA1996         4.81   PER2004      3.01   NZL2002         4.17
JAM1993         6.83   QAT2004     12.07   OMN2004        11.28
JAM2003         9.11   SAU2004     21.52   PAN1990         4.74
KAZ2003         4.51   SGP1991     12.26   QAT2004        12.07
KNA2009         5.69   SGP2004      6.48   SAU2004        21.52
KOR2000         3.23   SMR2004      5.70   SGP1991        12.26
KWT2004        18.87   SWE1986      5.43   SGP2004         6.48
LBY2004        26.35   SWE1997      3.45   SMR2004         5.70
LUX1997         3.39   SYC1990     10.07   SWE1986         5.43
MEX1990         3.62   SYC2008      8.00   SYC1990        10.07
MYS1993         4.63   TTO2004      7.04   SYC2008         8.00
NAM2005         4.00   TUR2004      3.64   TTO2004         7.04
NLD1996         3.48   VEN1990      4.20   VEN1990         4.20
NOR1981         5.39   VEN1990      4.20
NOR2004        13.71




                                       47
Table A6: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 8-year periods, all countries
           3%                           4%                          5%
BEL1997                5.51   BEL1997              5.51   BEL1997             5.51
BGR1998                3.30   CAN1997              4.01   DZA2000             8.16
CAN1997                4.01   DNK1984              4.24   LBY2001            18.22
CHL1990                3.50   DNK2000              4.02   NOR2001            11.57
CHL2001                3.26   DZA2000              8.16   SGP1990            10.93
DMA2002                3.24   FIN2000              4.12   SGP2005             5.84
DNK1984                4.24   IRL1993              4.72
DNK2000                4.02   ITA1995              4.04
DZA2000                8.16   LBY2001             18.22
FIN1974                3.77   NOR2001             11.57
FIN2000                4.12   NZL1993              4.46
GRC1994                3.27   PAN1990              4.24
IRL1993                4.72   SGP1990             10.93
ITA1995                4.04   SGP2005              5.84
KAZ2005                3.56   TUR1999              4.11
KNA2006                3.84
KOR1995                3.06
LBY2001               18.22
NOR2001               11.57
NZL1993                4.46
PAN1990                4.24
SGP1990               10.93
SGP2005                5.84
SWE1984                3.82
TUR1999                4.11




Table A7: Nonoverlapping primary surplus episodes, 10-year periods, all
countries
           3%                           4%                          5%
BEL1995                5.19   BEL1995             5.19    BEL1995             5.19
BGR1998                3.45   DZA1999             7.52    DZA1999             7.52
CAN1996                3.72   IRL1991             4.70    NOR1999            11.07
DNK1984                3.44   NOR1999            11.07    SAU1999            13.43
DNK1999                3.97   NZL1994             4.14    SGP1990             9.30
DZA1999                7.52   SAU1999            13.43
FIN1999                3.95   SGP1990             9.30
IRL1991                4.70
ITA1993                3.60
KOR1993                3.33
NOR1999               11.07
NZL1994                4.14
PAN1990                3.56
SAU1999               13.43
SGP1990                9.30
TUR1999                3.74




                                        48
A8: Data Sources
The government balance (primary and total) data and macroeconomic controls are from
the WEO database (April 2014), OECD economic outlook, World Development
Indicator and old issues of the IMF Government Finance Statistics. We first use WEO
data, and when WEO data are missing, we complete the dataset with the historical
public finance dataset (Mauro et al., 2013), OECD, WDI, and GFS data (in that order).
For public debt, we use the same sources but also use the historical debt dataset of
Abbas et al. All political and institutional variables are from the World Bank's DPI
dataset, with the exception of the indexes of democracy and quality of government. The
index of quality of government is from ICRG and the index of democracy is the average
of the freedom house and polity indexes of democracy. Both variables were downloaded
from the Quality of Government Dataset at www.qog.pol.gu.se.




                                         49
