                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE TWIN DS: OPTIMAL DEFAULT AND DEVALUATION

                                        Seunghoon Na
                                   Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
                                         Martin Uribe
                                        Vivian Z. Yue

                                      Working Paper 20314
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20314


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2014, Revised June 2017




Previously circulated as "A Model of the Twin Ds: Optimal Default and Devaluation." Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe thank the National Science Foundation for research support. We thank for
comments Manuel Amador, Javier Bianchi, Robert Kollmann and seminar participants at Bonn,
Berkeley, Columbia, Georgetown, Harvard, Johns Hopkins, LSE, Mannheim, MIT, Notre Dame,
Penn, Penn State, Rutgers, Seoul National, UT Austin, the ECB, the Philadelphia Fed, the
Chicago Fed, the Board of Governors, the CIREQ-ENSAI workshop, the Cornell-PSU
conference, the 2015 World Congress of the Econometric Society, and the IFM October 2014
Program meeting of the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and should
not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors, any other person associated
with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Seunghoon Na, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Martin Uribe, and Vivian Z. Yue. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Twin Ds: Optimal Default and Devaluation
Seunghoon Na, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Martin Uribe, and Vivian Z. Yue
NBER Working Paper No. 20314
July 2014, Revised June 2017
JEL No. E52,F31,F34,F38,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

A salient characteristic of sovereign defaults is that they are typically accompanied by large
devaluations. This paper presents new evidence of this empirical regularity known as the Twin Ds
and proposes a model that rationalizes it as an optimal policy outcome. The model combines
limited enforcement of debt contracts and downward nominal wage rigidity. Under optimal
policy, default is shown to occur during con- tractions. The role of default is to free up resources
for domestic absorption, and the role of exchange-rate devaluation is to lower the real value of
wages, thereby reducing involuntary unemployment.


Seunghoon Na                                     Martin Uribe
IAB                                              Department of Economics
420 West 118th Street                            Columbia University
New York NY 10027                                International Affairs Building
sn2518@columbia.edu                              New York, NY 10027
                                                 and NBER
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé                          martin.uribe@columbia.edu
Department of Economics
Columbia University                              Vivian Z. Yue
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308                   Economics Department
New York, NY 10027                               Emory University
and NBER                                         602 Fishburne Drive
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu              Atlanta, GA 30322
                                                 and NBER
                                                 vivianyue1@gmail.com
1     Introduction
This paper introduces nominal rigidities into a sovereign default model to explain the empir-
ical regularity, first established in Reinhart (2002), that sovereign defaults are accompanied
by large devaluations of the nominal exchange rate. Specifically, using data for 58 countries
over the period 1970 to 1999, Reinhart (2002) estimates that the unconditional probability
of a large devaluation in any 24-month period is 17 percent. At the same time, she estimates
that conditional on the 24-month period containing a default event, the probability of a large
devaluation increases to 84 percent. Reinhart refers to the joint occurrence of default and
devaluation as the Twin Ds phenomenon.
   The present paper presents new evidence of the Twin Ds phenomenon by building an
expanded sample (1975-2013) that includes more countries and more recent default events.
In this data set the typical default episode is associated with an excess devaluation of the
domestic currency of 48 percent. A novel finding of our empirical analysis is that the large
devaluation that occurs at the time of default is typically not followed by an increase in
the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate. This characteristic suggests that the Twin
Ds phenomenon consists in the joint occurrence of default and a large level change in the
nominal exchange rate.
    Motivated by these facts, the paper develops a theoretical model with the property that
periods in which it is optimal to default are also periods in which it is optimal to bring
about a large change in a relative price. In the proposed model the key frictions are limited
commitment to repay external debts and downward nominal wage rigidity. In the model
default is predicted to occur after a string of increasingly negative output shocks. In the
run-up to default, domestic absorption experiences a severe contraction putting downward
pressure on the demand for labor. Absent any intervention by the central bank, downward
nominal wage rigidity would prevent real wages from adjusting downwardly and the labor
market would fail to clear resulting in involuntary unemployment. To avoid this scenario,
the optimal policy calls for a devaluation of the domestic currency, which reduces the real
value of wages. As a result, in the model, as in the data, default episodes are typically
accompanied by large devaluations.
   In a calibrated version of the model we find that the minimum devaluation necessary
to implement the optimal allocation at the time of default exceeds 35 percent. Thus, the
benevolent government’s desire to preserve employment during a severe external crisis gives
rise to devaluations similar in magnitude to those observed in the data during a typical Twin
Ds episode.
    Although, as emphasized above, in the data default events are typically accompanied


                                              1
by large devaluations, we find it of interest to consider the experiment of default when the
central bank is unwilling or unable to apply the optimal devaluation policy. In particular,
we consider a currency peg motivated by the experience of the periphery of Europe in the
aftermath of the great contraction of 2008. Under a currency peg, the government gives up
its ability to counteract the inefficiencies associated with downward nominal wage rigidity
during periods of depressed aggregate demand. As a consequence, under a currency peg,
the model predicts that default events are accompanied by involuntary unemployment. In
the calibrated version of the model, we find that around defaults unemployment rises by
about 20 percentage points. This result suggests that the proposed explanation of the Twin
Ds, namely, that large devaluations around default events are needed to realign key relative
prices, is economically important.
    The present analysis is related to various strands of the literatures on exchange-rate-
based stabilization and sovereign default. An important body of related work focuses on
the fiscal consequences of devaluations, emphasizing either flow or stock effects. Models of
balance-of-payment crises à la Krugman (1979) focus on increases in the rate of devaluation
as a way to generate seigniorage revenue flows when a government suffering from structural
fiscal deficits is forced to abandon an unsustainable currency peg. This explanation has been
used to understand the defaults of the early 1980s in Latin America, which were followed by
a decade of high inflation. Under this hypothesis, the nominal exchange rate continues to
grow at higher rates after the default. However, the pattern observed for a large number of
defaults in our data set (in fact the majority) is one in which high rates of devaluation stop
within a year after default.
   A literature that goes back to Calvo (1988) views devaluation as an implicit default on
(the stock of) domestic-currency denominated government debt. Recent developments along
these lines include Aguiar et al. (2013), Corsetti and Dedola (2014), Da Rocha (2013), Du
and Schreger (2015), and Sunder-Plassmann (2013). This channel is not open in the model
studied in the present paper because debt is assumed to be denominated in foreign currency.
This assumption is motivated by the empirical observation that most of the debt issued
by emerging economies is denominated in foreign currency (see, for example, Eichengreen,
Hausmann, and Panizza, 2005). However, we consider the present contribution complemen-
tary to this line of research as even in economies in which government debt is primarily
denominated in foreign currency, devaluations can have fiscal consequences by decreasing
the real value of other domestic-currency denominated government liabilities, such as the
monetary base or nominal pension liabilities.
   The real side of the model developed in this paper builds on recent contributions to the
theory of sovereign default in the tradition of Eaton and Gersovitz, especially, Aguiar and


                                                2
Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Kim and Zhang (2012), Hatchondo, Martinez, and Sapriza
(2010), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), and Mendoza and Yue (2012). This literature has
made significant progress in identifying features of the default model that help deliver realistic
predictions for the average and cyclical behavior of key variables of the model, such as the
level of external debt and the country interest rate premium. We contribute to this literature
by establishing that the social planner allocation in models of the Eaton-Gersovitz family
can be decentralized by means of a debt tax. And we extend this literature by merging
it with the literature on optimal exchange-rate policy in models without default risk (e.g.,
Galı́ and Monacelli, 2005; Kollmann, 2002; and Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe, 2016). Moussa
(2013) builds a framework similar to the present one to study the role of debt denomination.
Kriwoluzky, Müller, and Wolf (2014) study an environment in which default takes the form
of a re-denomination of debt from foreign to domestic currency. Finally, Yun (2014) presents
a model in which sovereign default causes the monetary authority to lose commitment to
stable exchange-rate policy.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents new evidence on
the Twin Ds phenomenon. Section 3 presents the model and derives the competitive equi-
librium. Section 4 derives the key decentralization results and characterizes analytically the
equilibrium under optimal default and devaluation policy. Section 5 analyzes quantitatively
the typical default episode under the optimal policy in the context of a calibrated version of
the model. Section 6 characterizes analytically and quantitatively the equilibrium dynamics
under a currency peg. Section 7 extends the model to allow for long-maturity debt and
incomplete exchange-rate pass-through. Section 8 concludes.


2     New Evidence on the Twin Ds Phenomenon
In this section, we confirm the findings of Reinhart (2002) on the Twin Ds phenomenon on
an expanded sample that includes the default-rich period 2000 to 2013. We also document
a novel characteristic of the Twin Ds phenomenon, namely, that the large depreciation
that occurs at the time of default is typically not followed by an elevation in the rate of
devaluation.
   The panel includes information on nominal exchange rates defined as the domestic cur-
rency price of one U.S. dollar and sovereign default dates. The data source for nominal
exchange rates is the World Bank’s World Development Indicator (WDI) database and the
source for default dates is Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017, Table 13.19). The panel includes
all countries that had at least one default event in the period 1975 to 2013 and for which
WDI has at least 30 consecutive years of data on the dollar exchange rate. These two criteria

                                                3
                   Figure 1: Excess Devaluation Around Default, 1975-2013
                              50
                                   Excess devaluations
                                   Default date
                              45


                              40


                              35


                              30
                    percent




                              25


                              20


                              15


                              10


                               5


                              0
                              −3       −2                −1           0             1   2   3
                                                              Years after default

Note. The solid line displays the median of the cumulative devaluation rate of the domestic currency
vis-á-vis the U.S. dollar between years -3 and t, for t = −3, . . . , 3, conditional on default in year
0 minus the unconditional median of the cumulative devaluation rate between years -3 and t.
Countries with less than 30 consecutive years of exchange rate data were excluded, resulting in
117 default episodes over the period 1975 and 2013 in 70 countries. Data Sources: Default dates,
Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017, Table 13.19). Exchange rates, World Development Indicators,
code: PA.NUS.FCRF.

result in a sample of 70 countries and 117 default episodes.
   Figure 1 displays the median excess depreciation of the nominal exchange rate around
defaults. It shows that typically in a window encompassing three years before and after a
default event, the exchange rate depreciates about 45 percent more than in the unconditional
median window of the same width. Thus the figure confirms the finding of Reinhart (2002)
that defaults are accompanied by large devaluations.
   A novel characteristic of the Twin Ds phenomenon uncovered by figure 1 is the deceler-
ation in the rate of devaluation that takes place shortly after default. Figure 2 highlights
this characteristic. It shows the behavior of the level of the nominal dollar exchange rate
in six recent well-known default episodes, namely, Argentina 2002, Ecuador 1999, Paraguay
2003, Russia 1999, Ukraine 1999, and Uruguay 2003. All six default events were followed by
no further devaluations. The path of the level of the nominal exchange rate around default
resembles a steep elevation followed by a plateau. The behavior of the nominal exchange
rate documented in figures 1 and 2 suggests a connection between the decision to default
and the decision to change the level of the nominal exchange rate. In the theoretical model


                                                                   4
                                                             Figure 2: Six Recent Defaults

                                                    Argentina                                                                    Uruguay


                                      3                                                                2.5
           Exchange Rate




                                                                                    Exchange Rate
                              2.5
                                                                                                               2

                                      2

                                                                                                       1.5
                              1.5


                                      1                                                                        1
                                          1998   2000     2002    2004   2006                                      2000   2002      2004        2006      2008
                                                         Year                                                                     Year


                                                        Ukraine                                                                  Russia

                                      5
                                                                                                               8
                                      4
                      Exchange Rate




                                                                                               Exchange Rate




                                                                                                               6
                                      3
                                                                                                               4
                                      2
                                                                                                               2
                                      1                                                                        1
                                          1996   1998     2000    2002   2004                                      1996   1998      2000        2002      2004
                                                         Year                                                                     Year


                                                    Paraguay                                                                     Ecuador
                                                                                                          10
                              2.2

                                      2                                                                        8
           Exchange Rate




                                                                                       Exchange Rate




                              1.8
                                                                                                               6
                              1.6
                                                                                                               4
                              1.4

                              1.2                                                                              2

                                      1                                                                        1
                                                                                                               0
                                          2000   2002     2004    2006   2008                                      1996    1998          2000      2002
                                                         Year                                                                     Year

                                                  Nominal Exchange Rate                                                               Default Date

Notes. Exchange rates are nominal dollar exchange rates defined as the domestic currency price
of one U.S. dollar, annual averages, first observation normalized to unity. Data sources. Default
dates, Table 13.19 of Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017); Nominal exchange rates, World Development
Indicators, code: PA.NUS.FCRF.



                                                                                5
laid out in the next section, this connection is created by combining lack of commitment to
repay sovereign debt with nominal frictions in the form of downward nominal wage rigidity.


3         The Model
The theoretical framework embeds imperfect enforcement of international debt contracts à
la Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) into the open economy model with downward nominal wage
rigidity of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016). We begin by describing the economic decision
problem of households, firms, and the government.


3.1         Households
The economy is populated by a large number of identical households with preferences de-
scribed by the utility function
                                                      ∞
                                                      X
                                                 E0         β tU(ct ),                                         (1)
                                                      t=0

where ct denotes consumption. The period utility function U is assumed to be strictly
increasing and strictly concave and the parameter β, denoting the subjective discount factor,
resides in the interval (0, 1). The symbol Et denotes the mathematical expectations operator
conditional upon information available in period t. The consumption good is a composite of
tradable consumption, cTt , and nontradable consumption, cN
                                                          t . The aggregation technology is
of the form
                                                 ct = A(cTt , cN
                                                               t ),                                            (2)

where A is an increasing, concave, and linearly homogeneous function.
        Households have access to a one-period, state noncontingent bond, which is assumed to
be denominated in tradables.1 We let dt+1 denote the level of debt assumed in period t and
due in period t + 1 and qtd its price. The sequential budget constraint of the household is
given by

                 PtT cTt + PtN cN     T       T T                  d    T d
                                t + Pt dt = Pt ỹt + Wt ht + (1 − τt )Pt qt dt+1 + Ft + Φt ,                   (3)

where PtT denotes the nominal price of tradable goods, PtN the nominal price of nontradable
goods, ỹtT the household’s endowment of traded goods, Wt the nominal wage rate, ht hours
worked, τtd a tax on debt, Ft a lump-sum transfer received from the government, and Φt
nominal profits from the ownership of firms. Households are assumed to be subject to a
    1
        In section 7.1, we show that the key results of the paper are robust to allowing for long-term debt.


                                                            6
debt limit that prevents them from engaging in Ponzi schemes. We introduce a tax on debt
as a way to decentralize the Eaton-Gersovitz model. Individual agents take the country
premium as exogenously given, whereas, as we will see shortly, the government internalizes
the effect of aggregate external debt on the country premium. Kim and Zhang (2012)
also consider the case of decentralized borrowing and centralized default. However, we
characterize the debt tax scheme that results in an equilibrium allocation identical to that of
a model with centralized borrowing and centralized default (the standard Eaton-Gersovitz
allocation). Specifically, both in the present setting and in Kim and Zhang’s borrowers do
not internalize the fact that the interest rate depends on debt. However, in the present
formulation households face debt taxes that make them internalize the effect of borrowing
on the country interest rate. By contrast, in the formulation of Kim and Zhang, debt taxes
are absent and hence the allocation under decentralized borrowing is different from the one
under centralized borrowing.
   The variable ỹtT is stochastic and is taken as given by the household. Households supply
inelastically h̄ hours to the labor market each period, but may not be able to sell all of them,
which gives rise to the constraint
                                              ht ≤ h̄.                                       (4)

Households take ht as exogenously given.
   Households choose contingent plans {ct , cTt , cN
                                                   t , dt+1 } to maximize (1) subject to (2)-(4)
and the no-Ponzi-game debt limit, taking as given PtT , PtN , Wt , ht , Φt , qtd , τtd , Ft , and
ỹtT . Letting pt ≡ PtN /PtT denote the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables,
the optimality conditions associated with this problem are (2)-(4), the no-Ponzi-game debt
limit, and
                                        A2(cTt , cN
                                                  t )
                                                      = pt ,                                 (5)
                                        A1(ct , cN
                                             T
                                                  t )

                                     λt = U 0 (ct )A1(cTt , cN
                                                             t ),

                                    (1 − τtd )qtdλt = βEt λt+1 ,

where λt /PtT denotes the Lagrange multiplier associated with (3).


3.2    Firms
Nontraded output, denoted ytN , is produced by perfectly competitive firms. Each firm oper-
ates a production technology of the form

                                           ytN = F (ht).                                     (6)


                                                  7
The function F is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly concave. Firms choose the
amount of labor input to maximize profits, given by

                                  Φt = PtN F (ht) − Wt ht .                             (7)

The optimality condition associated with this problem is PtN F 0(ht ) = Wt . Dividing both
sides by PtT yields
                                       pt F 0(ht ) = wt ,

where wt ≡ Wt /PtT denotes the real wage in terms of tradables.


3.3    Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity
We model downward nominal wage rigidity by imposing a lower bound on the growth rate
of nominal wages of the form
                                  Wt ≥ γWt−1 ,        γ > 0.                            (8)

The parameter γ governs the degree of downward nominal wage rigidity. The higher is γ,
the more downwardly rigid nominal wages will be.
   The presence of downwardly rigid nominal wages implies that the labor market will in
general not clear. Instead, involuntary unemployment, given by h̄ − ht , will be a regu-
lar feature of this economy. We assume that wages and employment satisfy the slackness
condition
                                (h̄ − ht ) (Wt − γWt−1 ) = 0.                           (9)

This condition states that periods of unemployment (ht < h̄) must be accompanied by
a binding wage constraint. It also states that when the wage constraint is not binding
(Wt > γWt−1 ), the economy must be in full employment (ht = h̄).
   The decision to model nominal rigidity as downward nominal wage rigidity is empirically
motivated. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) document that downward nominal wage rigidity
is pervasive in emerging-market economies. For example, during the 1998-2001 crisis in
Argentina, nominal hourly wages did not fall (actually they increased from 7.87 pesos in
1998 to 8.14 pesos in 2001) in spite of the fact that subemployment (the sum of involuntary
unemployment and involuntary part-time employment) increased by 10 percentage points
and that the nominal exchange rate was fixed at one dollar per peso. This evidence suggests
the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity. The period following the collapse of the
Argentine currency convertibility (i.e., post December 2001) features sizable increases in
nominal hourly wages. This suggests that nominal wages are upwardly flexible. This evidence


                                               8
favors a formulation in which wage rigidity is one-sided as opposed of two-sided. Consumer
prices in Argentina do not appear to be downwardly rigid to the same degree as nominal
wages. Over the period 1998 to 2001, nominal consumer prices fell by about 1 percent per
year. Taken together, this evidence suggests that in Argentina around the 2001 crisis, wages
were more downwardly rigid than were product prices.
   The empirical relevance of downward nominal wage rigidity extends to the periphery of
Europe around the Great Contraction of 2008. Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2016) show that
between 2008 and 2011 nominal hourly wages in 13 peripheral European countries failed
to decline (in fact they increased on average by 2 percent per year), despite the fact that
unemployment increased massively, that all 13 countries were either on the Euro or pegging
to the Euro, and that inflation in the eurozone was low. In the boom period that preceded
the crisis (2000 to 2007) nominal hourly wages increased by over 60 percent despite the facts
that productivity growth in the periphery of the eurozone was virtually nil and that euro
area wide inflation was low. Again, this evidence suggests a formulation in which nominal
wages are downwardly rigid but upwardly flexible.
   As a consequence of one-sided nominal wage rigidity, the present model implies that
the real exchange rate can be overvalued, in the sense of being higher than in the absence
of nominal rigidities. An implication of this characteristic of the model is that a nominal
devaluation will lead to a real depreciation insofar as the real exchange rate is overvalued
absent the nominal depreciation. For a model in which nominal rigidities in the nontraded
sector are two-sided and hence the nominal rigidity can cause both real exchange rate over-
and undervaluation see Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2007). These authors argue that
the real depreciations observed in the United Kingdom after the 1992 nominal devaluation
and in Korea after the 1997 nominal devaluation can be explained by upward rigidity in
nominal prices of nontraded goods.


3.4    The Government
At the beginning of each period, the country can be either in good or bad financial standing
in international financial markets. Let the variable It be an indicator function that takes
the value 1 if the country is in good financial standing and chooses to honor its debt and
0 otherwise. If the economy starts period t in good financial standing (It−1 = 1), the
government can choose to default on the country’s external debt obligations or to honor
them. If the government chooses to default, then the country enters immediately into bad
standing and It = 0. Default is defined as the full repudiation of external debt. While in
bad standing, the country is excluded from international credit markets, that is, it cannot


                                             9
borrow or lend from the rest of the world. Formally,

                                              (1 − It)dt+1 = 0.                                            (10)

       Following Arellano (2008), we assume that bad financial standing lasts for a random
number of periods. Specifically, if the country is in bad standing in period t, it will remain
in bad standing in period t + 1 with probability 1 − θ and will regain good standing with
probability θ. When the country regains access to financial markets, it starts with zero
external obligations.
   We assume that the government rebates the proceeds from the debt tax in a lump-
sum fashion to households. In periods in which the country is in bad standing (It = 0),
the government confiscates any payments of households to foreign lenders and returns the
proceeds to households in a lump-sum fashion. The resulting sequential budget constraint
of the government is
                                        ft = τtd qtddt+1 + (1 − It)dt ,                                    (11)

where ft ≡ Ft /PtT denotes lump-sum transfers expressed in terms of tradables.2


3.5       Foreign Lenders
Foreign lenders are assumed to be risk neutral. Let qt denote the price of debt charged
by foreign lenders to domestic borrowers during periods of good financial standing, and let
r∗ be a parameter denoting the foreign lenders’ opportunity cost of funds. Then, qt must
satisfy the condition that the expected return of lending to the domestic country equal the
opportunity cost of funds. Formally,

                                     Prob{It+1 = 1|It = 1}
                                                           = 1 + r∗ .                                      (12)
                                              qt

This expression can be equivalently written as
                                                          
                                                   Et It+1
                                           It qt −           = 0.
                                                   1 + r∗
   2
    It can be shown that the equilibrium dynamics are identical if one replaces the lump-sum transfer ft
with a proportional tax on any combination of the three sources of household income, wt ht , ỹtT , and Φt /PtT .




                                                       10
3.6    Competitive Equilibrium
In equilibrium, the market for nontraded goods must clear at all times. That is, the condition

                                                  cN    N
                                                   t = yt                                  (13)

must hold for all t.
  Each period the economy receives an exogenous and stochastic endowment equal to ytT per
household. This is the sole source of aggregate fluctuations in the present model. Movements
in ytT can be interpreted either as shocks to the physical availability of tradable goods or as
shocks to the country’s terms of trade.
   As in much of the literature on sovereign default, we assume that if the country is in bad
financial standing (It = 0), it suffers an output loss, which we denote by L(ytT ). The function
L(·) is assumed to be nonnegative and nondecreasing. Thus, the endowment received by the
household, ỹtT , is given by
                                        (
                                            ytT                 if It = 1
                               ỹtT =                                       .              (14)
                                            ytT   −   L(ytT )   otherwise

As explained in much of the related literature, the introduction of an output loss during
financial autarky improves the model’s predictions along two dimensions. First, it allows the
model to support more debt, as it raises the cost of default. Second, it discourages default
in periods of relatively high output.
    We assume that ln ytT obeys the law of motion

                                        ln ytT = ρ ln yt−1
                                                       T
                                                           + µt ,                          (15)

where µt is an i.i.d. innovation with mean 0 and variance σµ2 , and |ρ| ∈ [0, 1) is a parameter.
   In any period t in which the country is in good financial standing, the domestic price of
debt, qtd, must equal the price of debt offered by foreign lenders, qt , that is,

                                            It(qtd − qt ) = 0.                             (16)

   In periods in which the country is in bad standing dt+1 is nil. It follows that in these
periods the value of τtd is immaterial. Therefore, without loss of generality, we set τtd = 0
when It = 0, that is,
                                             (1 − It )τtd = 0.                             (17)

   Combining (3), (6), (7), (10), (11), (13), (14), and (16) yields the market-clearing condi-

                                                        11
tion for traded goods,

                               cTt = ytT − (1 − It)L(ytT ) + It[qtdt+1 − dt ].

      We assume that the law of one price holds for tradables.3 Specifically, letting PtT ∗ de-
note the foreign currency price of tradables and Et the nominal exchange rate defined as
the domestic-currency price of one unit of foreign currency (so that the domestic currency
depreciates when Et increases), the law of one price implies that

                                               PtT = PtT ∗Et .

We further assume that the foreign-currency price of tradables is constant and normalized
to unity, PtT ∗ = 1. Thus, we have that the nominal price of tradables equals the nominal
exchange rate,
                                                  PtT = Et .

      Finally, let
                                                         Et
                                                 t ≡
                                                        Et−1
denote the gross devaluation rate of the domestic currency. We are now ready to define a
competitive equilibrium.

Definition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium) A competitive equilibrium is a set of stochastic
processes {cTt , ht , wt, dt+1 , λt , qt, qtd } satisfying

                               cTt = ytT − (1 − It)L(ytT ) + It[qtdt+1 − dt ],            (18)

                                             (1 − It)dt+1 = 0,                            (19)

                                  λt = U 0 (A(cTt , F (ht)))A1(cTt , F (ht)),             (20)

                                         (1 − τtd )qtdλt = βEt λt+1 ,                     (21)

                                              It(qtd − qt ) = 0,                          (22)
                                         A2(cTt , F (ht))      wt
                                              T
                                                          = 0        ,                    (23)
                                         A1(ct , F (ht))     F (ht )
                                                        wt−1
                                                wt ≥ γ       ,                            (24)
                                                          t
                                                   ht ≤ h̄,                               (25)
  3
      Section 7.2 extends the model to allow for imperfect exchange-rate pass through.


                                                      12
                                                           
                                                      wt−1
                                    (ht − h̄) wt − γ          = 0,                               (26)
                                                        t
                                                       
                                                Et It+1
                                        It qt −            = 0,                                  (27)
                                                1 + r∗
given processes {ytT , t , τtd , It} and initial conditions w−1 and d0 .


4     Equilibrium Under Optimal Monetary Policy
This section characterizes the optimal default, devaluation, and debt tax policies. When the
government can choose freely the devaluation rate, t , and the debt tax, τtd , the competitive
equilibrium can be written in a more compact form, as stated in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (Competitive Equilibrium When t and τtd Are Unrestricted) When
the government can choose t and τtd freely, stochastic processes {cTt , ht , dt+1 , qt} can be sup-
ported as a competitive equilibrium if and only if they satisfy the subset of equilibrium con-
ditions (18), (19), (25), and (27), given processes {ytT , It} and the initial condition d0 .

Proof: The key step in establishing this proposition is to show that if processes {cTt , ht , dt+1 , qt}
satisfy conditions (18), (19), (25), and (27), then they also satisfy the remaining conditions
defining a competitive equilibrium, namely, conditions (20)-(24) and (26). To show this,
pick λt to satisfy (20). When It equals 1, set qtd to satisfy (22) and set τtd to satisfy (21).
When It equals 0, set τtd = 0 (recall convention (17)) and set qtd to satisfy (21). Set wt to
satisfy (23). Set t to satisfy (24) with equality. This implies that the slackness condition
(26) is also satisfied. This establishes proposition 1.

   It is noteworthy that the compact form of equilibrium conditions includes neither the
lower bound on wages nor the Euler equation of private households for choosing debt. This
means that policy can be set to undo the distortions arising from downward nominal wage
rigidity and the externality originating in the fact that private agents fail to internalize the
effect of their individual borrowing choices on interest rates. Taxes on debt play a similar
role in models in which a pecuniary externality arises because borrowers fail to internalize
that the value of their collateral depends on their own spending decisions (see Korinek, 2010;
Mendoza, 2010; Bianchi, 2011; and Bianchi, Boz, and Mendoza, 2012).
    The government is assumed to lack commitment and in the current model this lack of
commitment opens the door to time inconsistency. For example, in period t the government
would like to promise to repay next period to reduce the cost of borrowing, 1/qt . But in
period t + 1 this particular incentive for repayment is no longer there, as 1/qt was already


                                                  13
determined in the previous period, and hence the government may no longer find it optimal
to repay ex post. In what follows we will characterize optimal time consistent policies and,
following the practice in the Eaton-Gersovitz literature, will restrict attention to optimal
policies that are a time-invariant function of the minimum set of aggregate states of the
competitive equilibrium of the economy.
   The states appearing in the conditions of the competitive equilibrium listed in proposi-
tion 1 are the endowment, ytT , and the stock of net external debt, dt . Notice that the past
real wage, wt−1 , does not appear in the compact form of competitive equilibrium conditions.
The intuition for why this variable is irrelevant for determining the state of the economy is
that, with the policy instruments at its disposal, the government can completely circumvent
the distortion created by downward nominal wage rigidity.4
   Because of lack of commitment, the current government takes the behavior of future gov-
                                                                                     ˆ t+1
ernments, in particular, the policy function for the default decision, as given. Let I(y T
                                                                                           , dt+1 )
denote the default decision of the government in period t+1. The period-t government under-
stands that it can affect the default decision of the period-t + 1 by its choice of dt+1 . Taking
                                                                         T
into account that dt+1 is in the information set of period t and that yt+1  follows a first-order
                                    ˆ  T                            T
Markov process, we have that Et I(y , dt+1 ) is a function of y and dt+1 . Thus, should
                                                       t+1                          t
the period-t government choose to honor its debts in period t, we can express equilibrium
conditions (27) as
                                                       qt = q(ytT , dt+1 ).                        (28)

This equation says that the period-t government internalizes that its choice of dt+1 affects
the price of debt, that is, the government internalizes the dependence of the interest rate on
the amount of borrowing. With this notation in hand, we can now state the problem of the
benevolent government with lack of commitment as follows.
      If the country is in good financial standing in period t, It−1 = 1, the value of continuing
to service the external debt, denoted v c(ytT , dt ), i.e., the value of setting It = 1, is given by

                 v c (ytT , dt ) =                      U A cTt , F (ht) + βEtv g (yt+1
                                                                                    T
                                                                       
                                         max                                            , dt+1 )   (29)
                                     {cT
                                       t ,ht ,dt+1 }



subject to (25) and
                                          cTt + dt = ytT + q(ytT , dt+1 )dt+1 ,                    (30)

given dt , where v g (ytT , dt ) denotes the value of being in good financial standing. Clearly, the
optimal choice of ht is ht = h̄. The value of being in bad financial standing in period t,
  4
    We will show in section 6 that when the government is not free to choose the path of the devaluation
rate, the past real wage, wt−1, reappears as a relevant state variable.



                                                               14
denoted v b (ytT ), is given by

   v b (ytT ) = max U A ytT − L(ytT ), F (ht) + βEt θv g (yt+1
                                                           T
                                                               , 0) + (1 − θ)v b (yt+1
                                                                                   T
                                                                                    
                                                                                       ) ,                          (31)
                 {ht }


subject to (25). Again, it is optimal to set ht = h̄.
    In any period t in which the country is in good financial standing, it has the option to
either continue to service the debt obligations or to default. It follows that the value of being
in good standing in period t is given by

                                    v g (ytT , dt ) = max v c (ytT , dt ), v b(ytT ) .
                                                         
                                                                                                                    (32)

The government chooses to default whenever the value of continuing to participate in finan-
cial markets is smaller than the value of being in bad financial standing, v c(ytT , dt ) < v b(ytT ).
   Let D(dt ) be the default set defined as the set of tradable-output levels at which the
government defaults on a level of debt dt . Formally,5

                                     D(dt ) = ytT : v c(ytT , dt ) < v b(ytT ) .
                                             
                                                                                                                    (33)

We can then write the probability of default in period t + 1, given good financial standing
in period t, as
                                                         T
                            Prob{It+1 = 0|It = 1} = Prob yt+1 ∈ D(dt+1 ) .

Combining this expression, (12), and (28) yields
                                                          T
                                                   1-Prob yt+1 ∈ D(dt+1 )|ytT
                                q(ytT , dt+1 )   =                            .                                     (34)
                                                             1 + r∗

   With ht = h̄, equations (29)-(34) are those of the Eaton-Gersovitz model as presented in
Arellano (2008). We have therefore demonstrated that under optimal policy the equilibrium
allocation in the economy with downward nominal wage rigidity is identical to the equilibrium
allocation in the real economy of Arellano (2008). This establishes the following proposition:

Proposition 2 (Decentralization) Real models of sovereign default in the tradition of
Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) can be interpreted as the centralized version of the decentralized
   5
     A well-known property of the default set is that if d < d0 , then D(d) ⊆ D(d0 ). To see this, note that the
value of default, vb (ytT ), is independent of the level of debt, dt . At the same time, the continuation value,
vc (ytT , dt) is decreasing in dt . To see this, consider two values of dt , namely d and d0 > d. Suppose that d∗
and cT ∗ are the optimal choices of dt+1 and cTt when dt = d0 , given ytT . Notice that given d∗ , ytT , and dt = d,
constraint (54) is satisfied for a value of cTt strictly greater than cT ∗ , implying that vc (ytT , dt ) > vc (ytT , d0 )
for d < d0 . This means that, for a given value of ytT , if it is optimal to default when dt = d, then it must
also be optimal to default when dt = d0 > d.


                                                           15
economy with default risk and downward nominal wage rigidity described in definition 1 under
optimal devaluation policy and optimal taxation of debt.

    A corollary of this proposition applies to economies without nominal rigidities. Specifi-
cally, real models of sovereign default in the tradition of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) can be
interpreted as the centralized version of economies with decentralized markets for consump-
tion and borrowing and default risk under optimal taxation of debt. We present the proof
of this corollary in appendix A.1. In other words, real models in the Eaton-Gersovitz family
can be decentralized by means of a tax on foreign borrowing.
   The preceding analysis fully characterizes the real allocation under optimal policy, as we
have established that ht = h̄ at all times and that cTt and dt+1 are determined as in the
Eaton-Gersovitz model, whose solution has been characterized (using numerical methods) in
the existing related literature. It then remains to characterize the exchange-rate policy that
supports the optimal real allocation. This step will allow us to ascertain whether the model
can capture the empirical regularity that defaults are typically accompanied by nominal
devaluations, the Twin Ds phenomenon documented in figure 1. The family of optimal
devaluation policies is given by
                                                      wt−1
                                           t ≥ γ              ,                           (35)
                                                     wf (cTt )
where wf (cTt ) denotes the full-employment real wage, defined as

                                                 A2(cTt , F (h̄)) 0
                                   wf (cTt ) ≡                    F (h̄).                  (36)
                                                 A1(cTt , F (h̄))

Given the assumed properties of the aggregator function A(·, ·), the full-employment real
wage, wf (cTt ), is strictly increasing in the absorption of tradable goods. To see that the
family of devaluation policies given in equation (35) can support the optimal allocation,
notice that because in the optimal-policy equilibrium ht = h̄ for all t, competitive-equilibrium
condition (23) implies that wt = wf (cTt ), for all t ≥ 0. Combining this expression with (24)
yields (35). One can further establish that any devaluation-rate policy from the family (35)
uniquely implements the optimal-policy equilibrium. See appendix A.2 for a proof of this
claim.
   The optimal policy scheme features policy instrument specialization. Because the optimal
devaluation policy ensures that the equilibrium real wage equals the full-employment real
wage at all times, exchange-rate policy specializes in undoing the distortions created by
nominal rigidities. Recalling from the proof of proposition 1 that τtd is chosen to guarantee
satisfaction of the private agent’s Euler equation, it follows that tax policy specializes in
overcoming the borrowing externality.

                                                     16
5       The Twin Ds
The optimal devaluation policy, given in equation (35), stipulates that the government must
devalue in periods in which consumption of tradables experiences a sufficiently large con-
traction. At the same time we know from the decentralization result of Proposition 2 that
under optimal devaluation policy the default decision coincides with the default decision in
real models in the Eaton-Gersovitz tradition. In turn, in this family of models default oc-
curs when aggregate demand is depressed. Therefore, the present model has the potential to
predict the joint occurrence of default and devaluation, that is, the Twin Ds phenomenon.
The question remains whether for plausible calibrations of the model, the contraction in
aggregate demand at the time of default is associated with large enough declines in the full-
employment real wage to warrant a sizable devaluation. This section addresses this question
in the context of a quantitative version of the model.
   Conducting a quantitative analysis requires specifying an exchange-rate policy. From the
family of optimal devaluation policies given in (35), we select the one that stabilizes nominal
wages. Specifically, we assume a devaluation rule of the form

                                                     wt−1
                                             t =             .                                      (37)
                                                    wf (cTt )

For γ < 1, this policy rule clearly belongs to the family of optimal devaluation policies
given in (35). The motivation for studying this particular optimal devaluation policy is
twofold. First, it ensures no deflation in the long run. This property is appealing because
long-run deflation is not observed either in wages or product prices. Second, the selected
optimal devaluation policy delivers the smallest devaluation at any given time among all
optimal policies that are non deflationary in the long-run. This means that if the selected
devaluation policy delivers the Twin Ds phenomenon, then any other nondeflationary optimal
devaluation policy will also do so.6


5.1     Functional Forms, Calibration, And Computation
We calibrate the model to the Argentine economy. We choose this country for two reasons.
First, the Argentine default of 2002 conforms to the Twin Ds phenomenon. Second, the vast
majority of quantitative models of default are calibrated to this economy (e.g., Arellano,
2008; Aguiar and Gopinath, 2006; Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2012; Mendoza and Yue, 2012).
    6
     In the calibrated version of the model studied below, the assumed devaluation rule produces an uncon-
ditional standard deviation of the devaluation rate of 29 percent per year. The average standard deviation
of the devaluation rate across the 70 countries included in figure 1 is 35 percent.



                                                    17
                                   Table 1: Calibration
 Parameter       Value         Description
     γ             0.99        Degree of downward nominal wage rigidity
     σ              2          Inverse of intertemporal elasticity of consumption
    yT              1          Steady-state tradable output
     h̄             1          Labor endowment
     a             0.26        Share of tradables
     ξ             0.5         Elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables
     α             0.75        Labor share in nontraded sector
     β             0.85        Quarterly subjective discount factor
     r∗            0.01        World interest rate (quarterly)
     θ           0.0385        Probability of reentry
     δ1           -0.35        parameter of output loss function
     δ2          0.4403        parameter of output loss function
     ρ           0.9317        serial correlation of ln ytT
    σµ           0.037         std. dev. of innovation µt
                                 Discretization of State Space
     ny               200      Number of output grid points (equally spaced in logs)
     nd               200      Number of debt grid points (equally spaced)
     nw               125      Number of wage grid points (equally spaced in logs)
    T      T
  [y , y ]     [0.6523,1.5330] traded output range
        f loat
 [d, d]             [0,1.5]    debt range under optimal float
  [d, d]peg        [-1,1.25]   debt range under peg
          peg
 [w, w]           [1.25,4.25]  wage range under peg
Note. The time unit is one quarter.

The time unit is assumed to be one quarter. Table 1 summarizes the parameterization. We
adopt a period utility function of the CRRA type

                                               c1−σ − 1
                                     U(c) =             ,
                                                 1−σ

and set σ = 2 as in much of the related literature. We assume that the aggregator function
takes the CES form
                                 h                             i 1
                          T   N      T 1− 1ξ            N 1− 1ξ 1− ξ1
                      A(c , c ) = a(c )      + (1 − a)(c )            .

Following Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017), we set a = 0.26, and ξ = 0.5. We assume that
the production technology is of the form

                                           ytN = hαt ,



                                               18
and set α = 0.75 as in Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017). We normalize the time endowment
h̄ at unity. Based on the evidence on downward nominal wage rigidity reported in Schmitt-
Grohé and Uribe (2016), we set the parameter γ equal to 0.99, which implies that nominal
wages can fall up to 4 percent per year. We also follow these authors in measuring tradable
output as the sum of GDP in agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, and manufacturing in
Argentina over the period 1983:Q1 to 2001:Q4. We obtain the cyclical component of this
time series by removing a quadratic trend.7 The OLS estimate of the AR(1) process (15)
yields ρ = 0.9317 and σµ = 0.037. Following Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), we set
r∗ = 0.01 per quarter and θ = 0.0385. The latter value implies an average exclusion period
of about 6.5 years. Following these authors, we assume that the output loss function takes
the form
                                 L(ytT ) = max 0, δ1 ytT + δ2(ytT )2 .
                                              

We set δ1 = −0.35 and δ2 = 0.4403. We calibrate β, the subjective discount factor, at 0.85.
The latter three parameter values imply that under the optimal policy the average debt to
traded GDP ratio in periods of good financial standing is 60 percent per quarter, that the
frequency of default is 2.6 times per century, and that the average output loss is 7 percent per
year conditional on being in financial autarky. The predicted average frequency of default is
in line with the Argentine experience since the late 19th century (see Reinhart et al., 2003).
The implied average output loss concurs with the estimate reported by Zarazaga (2012)
for the Argentine default of 2001. The implied debt-to-traded-output ratio is in line with
existing default models in the Eaton-Gersovitz tradition, but below the debt levels observed
in Argentina since the 1970s.
   The assumed value of β is low compared to the values used in models without default,
but not uncommon in models à la Eaton-Gersovitz (see, for example, Mendoza and Yue,
2012). In section 7.3 we consider values of β of 0.95 and 0.98 and show that the prediction
of a Twin Ds phenomenon is robust to these changes. All other things equal, increasing β
lowers the predicted default frequency. One way to match the observed default frequency
without having to set β at a low value is to incorporate long-maturity debt. We pursue this
alternative in section 7.1. The predicted dynamics of the model around default episodes
(and in particular the model’s predictions regarding the Twin Ds phenomenon) are similar
in the model with one-period debt and a low β and in the model with long-maturity debt
and a high value of β.
       We approximate the equilibrium by value function iteration over a discretized state space.
   7
   The choice of a quadratic detrending method is motivated by the fact that the log of traded output in
Argentina appears to grow faster starting in the 1990s. However, the cyclical component of ytT is similar
under quadratic detrending, linear detrending, or HP(1600) filtering.


                                                   19
We assume 200 grid points for tradable output and 200 points for debt. The transition
probability matrix of tradable output is computed using the simulation approach proposed
by Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2009).


5.2     Equilibrium Dynamics Around A Typical Default Episode
We wish to numerically characterize the behavior of key macroeconomic indicators around a
typical default event. To this end, we simulate the model under optimal policy for 1.1 million
quarters and discard the first 0.1 million quarters. We then identify all default episodes. For
each default episode we consider a window that begins 12 quarters before the default date
and ends 12 quarters after the default date. For each macroeconomic indicator of interest,
we compute the median period-by-period across all windows. The date of the default is
normalized to 0.
   Figure 3 displays the dynamics around a typical default episode. The model predicts
that optimal defaults occur after a sudden contraction in tradable output. As shown in the
upper left panel, ytT is at its mean level of unity until three quarters prior to the default.
Then a string of three negative shocks drives ytT 12 percent (or 1.3 standard deviations)
below trend.8 At this point (period 0), the government finds it optimal to default, triggering
a loss of output L(ytT ), as shown by the difference between the solid and the broken lines
in the upper left panel. After the default, tradable output begins to recover. Thus, the
period of default coincides with the trough of the contraction in the tradable endowment,
ytT . The same is true for GDP measured in terms of tradables. Therefore, the model captures
the empirical regularity regarding the cyclical behavior of output around default episodes
identified by Levy-Yeyati and Panizza (2011), according to which default marks the end of
a contraction and the beginning of a recovery.
   As can be seen from the right panel of the top row of the figure, the model predicts that
the country does not smooth out the temporary decline in the tradable endowment. Instead,
the country sharply adjusts the consumption of tradables downward, by about 14 percent.
The contraction in traded consumption is actually larger than the contraction in traded
output so that the trade balance (not shown) improves. In fact, the trade balance surplus
is large enough to generate a slight decline in the level of external debt. These dynamics
seem at odds with the quintessential dictum of the intertemporal approach to the balance
of payments according to which countries should finance temporary declines in income by
   8
     One may wonder whether a fall in traded output of this magnitude squares with a default frequency of
only 2.6 per century. The reason why it does is that it is the sequence of output shocks that matters. The
probability of traded output falling from its mean value to 1.3 standard deviations below mean in only three
quarters is lower than the unconditional probability of traded output being 1.3 standard deviations below
mean.


                                                    20
             Figure 3: A Typical Default Episode Under Optimal Exchange-Rate Policy
           Tradable Endowment and Tradable Output                   Consumption of Tradables, cTt
                                                             1
       1
                                                        0.95
0.95

                                                            0.9
  0.9

0.85                ytT                                 0.85
                    ỹtT
  0.8                                                       0.8
   −12         −8          −4      0       4   8   12        −12   −8       −4      0       4       8   12

                                Debt, dt                                Nominal Exchange Rate, Et
0.58                                                        1.4

0.56                                                        1.3

0.54                                                        1.2

0.52                                                        1.1

  0.5                                                        1

0.48                                                        0.9
  −12          −8          −4      0       4   8   12        −12   −8       −4      0       4       8   12

                            Real Wage, wt                          Relative Price of Nontradables, pt
  2.2                                                       2.8

       2                                                    2.6

  1.8                                                       2.4

  1.6                                                       2.2

  1.4                                                        2
   −12         −8          −4      0       4   8   12        −12   −8       −4      0       4       8   12

                            Risk premium                                 Capital Control Tax, τtd
       6                                                    18

                                                            16
       5
                                                            14
%/yr




                                                        %




       4
                                                            12
       3
                                                            10

       2                                                     8
       −12     −8          −4      0       4   8   12        −12   −8       −4      0       4       8   12
Notes. Median of all 25-quarter windows around a default event in a simulation of 1 million quarters.
The default date is normalized to 0.           21
external borrowing. The country deviates from this prescription because foreign lenders raise
the interest rate premium prior to default. This increase in the cost of credit discourages
borrowing and induces agents to postpone consumption.
   Both the increase in the country premium and the contraction in tradable output in
the quarters prior to default cause a negative wealth effect that depresses the desired con-
sumption of nontradables. In turn the contraction in the demand for nontradables puts
downward pressure on the price of nontradables. However, firms in the nontraded sector are
reluctant to cut prices given the level of wages, for doing so would generate losses. Thus,
given the real wage, the decline in the demand for nontradables would translate into invol-
untary unemployment. In turn, unemployment would put downward pressure on nominal
wages. However, due to downward nominal wage rigidity, nominal wages cannot decline to a
point consistent with clearing of the labor market. To avoid unemployment, the government
finds it optimal to devalue the currency sharply by about 35 percent (see the right panel on
row 2 of figure 3). The devaluation lowers real wages (left panel of row 3 of the figure) which
fosters employment, thereby preventing that a crisis that originates in the external sector
spreads into the nontraded sector. The model therefore captures the Twin Ds phenomenon
as an equilibrium outcome.
   The large nominal exchange-rate depreciation that accompanies default is associated with
a sharp real depreciation of equal magnitude, as shown by the collapse in the relative price
of nontradables (see the right panel on the third row of figure 3). The fact that the nominal
and real exchange rates decline by the same magnitude may seem surprising in light of the
fact that nominal product prices are fully flexible. Indeed, the nominal price of nontradables
remains stable throughout the crisis, which may convey the impression that nominal prices
in the nontraded sector are rigid. The reason why firms find it optimal not to change nominal
prices is that the devaluation reduces the real labor cost inducing firms to cut real prices. In
turn, the decline in the real price of nontradables is brought about entirely by an increase
in the nominal price of tradables (i.e., by the nominal devaluation).
    The predicted stability of the nominal price of nontradables is in line with the empirical
findings of Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005), who report that the primary force
behind the observed large depreciation of the real exchange rate that occurred after the
large devaluations in Argentina (2002), Brazil (1999), Korea (1997), Mexico (1994), and
Thailand (1997) was the slow adjustment in the nominal prices of nontradable goods. A
natural question is whether the devaluations observed around default events do qualify as
large devaluations as defined by Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2005). This is indeed
the case. The median devaluation across the aforementioned five large devaluation episodes
is 63 percent (median of cumulative devaluations over 24 months, reported in table 1 of


                                              22
Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo). The median devaluation across the 117 default events
studied in this paper happens to be also 63 percent. This means that the devaluations
that typically accompany defaults are large devaluations as defined by Burstein, in sense of
Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo.9
   Finally, the bottom right panel of figure 3 shows that the government increases the tax
on debt prior to the default from 9 to 17 percent. It does so as a way to make private agents
internalize an increased sensitivity of the interest rate premium with respect to debt. The
debt elasticity of the country premium is larger during the crisis because foreign lenders
understand that the lower is output the higher the incentive to default, as the output loss,
that occurs upon default, L(ytT ), decreases in absolute and relative terms as ytT falls.
   The predicted increase in the debt tax around the typical default episode is implicitly
present in every default model à la Eaton-Gersovitz. However, because the literature has
limited attention to economies in which consumption, borrowing, and default decisions are
all centralized, such taxes never surface. By analyzing the decentralized version of the Eaton-
Gersovitz economy, the present analysis makes their existence explicit.
   It follows that the behavior of debt taxes around default provides a dimension, distinct
from the Twin Ds phenomenon, along which one can assess the plausibility of the predicted
default dynamics. The variable τtd , which in the model abstractly refers to a tax on debt, can
take many forms in practice. Here, we examine two prominent ones, namely, capital control
taxes and reserve requirements. The first measure is based on annual data on an index of
capital controls on inflows and outflows constructed by Fernández et al. (2016). The indices
cover the period 1995 to 2013 for 91 countries. We combine this data with the default dates
used in figure 1. The intersection of the data sets on capital controls and default dates yields
22 default episodes in 17 countries. The left panel of figure 4 displays the behavior of capital
controls on inflows and outflows starting three years prior to the default date. For each
default episode, the capital control index on outflows and inflows is normalized to unity in
year -3. The figure shows that on average countries tighten capital controls on both inflows
and outflows as they move closer to default. The second empirical measure of borrowing
restrictions we examine comes from a dataset on reserve requirements produced by Federico,
Végh, and Vuletin (2014). The dataset contains quarterly observations on various measures
of legal reserve requirements for 52 countries (15 industrialized and 37 emerging) covering the
period 1970 to 2011. Of the 52 countries in the dataset, Federico, Végh, and Vuletin classify
30 as active users of reserve requirements as a macro prudential policy instrument. We cross
   9
    Figure 1 of the present study displays an excess median devaluation around default events of 48 percent.
One may wonder why this figure is lower than the 63 percent reported above. The reason is that figure 1
plots the excess devaluation, which is defined as the deviation of the median devaluation around default
events from the unconditional median devaluation.


                                                    23
Figure 4: Capital Controls and Reserve Requirements Around Default: Empirical Evidence

               Capital Controls on Inflows and Outflows                      Reserve Requirements
        1.5                                                            3.5
                       outflow controls
        1.4            inflow controls                                  3

        1.3                                                            2.5

        1.2                                                             2
Index




                                                                   %
        1.1                                                            1.5

         1                                                              1

        0.9                                                            0.5

        0.8                                                             0
          −3          −2         −1            0          1             −3   −2         −1            0   1
                           Years after default                                    Years after default


Notes. Own calculations based on data on capital controls from Fernández et al. (2016), left panel,
and on data on reserve requirements from Federico, Végh, and Vuletin (2014), right panel.


the reserve requirement data for active users with the default dates used in figure 1. This
step delivers reserve requirement data for 14 default episodes in 8 different countries. The
right panel of figure 4 displays the median change in reserve requirements relative to year
-3. The figure shows that, on average, defaults are accompanied by a tightening of reserve
requirements. Taken together, the empirical evidence examined here provides support for the
predictions of the model above and beyond its ability to capture the Twin Ds phenomenon.


6         Default And Unemployment Under Fixed Exchange
          Rates
Although default episodes are typically accompanied by large devaluations, the analysis of
optimal default under fixed exchange rates is of interest because sovereign debt crises have
been observed in the context of currency pegs, fully dollarized economies (Ecuador, 2008),
and monetary unions (countries in the periphery of Europe, such as Greece and Cyprus, in
the aftermath of the global contraction of 2008). Here, we characterize the behavior of a
currency-peg economy under two polar assumptions about the country’s ability to commit to
repay its external obligations: lack of commitment and full commitment. The analysis of the
latter case is motivated by the fact that the debt crises observed in the periphery of Europe
were accompanied by bailouts. We begin with the imperfect commitment case, because it


                                                              24
introduces only one change to the economy studied thus far, namely, optimal exchange-rate
policy is replaced by a fixed exchange rate. Formally, we now assume that

                                              t = 1.                                          (38)

This policy specification is meant to capture a currency peg, a fully dollarized economy, or
membership in a monetary union.
   A competitive equilibrium in the peg economy are stochastic processes {cTt , ht , wt , dt+1 , qt}
satisfying (18), (19), (23), (25), (27),

                                           wt ≥ γwt−1 ,                                        (39)

and
                                   (ht − h̄) (wt − γwt−1 ) = 0,                                (40)

given processes {ytT , It} and initial conditions w−1 and d0 . Equilibrium condition (39) re-
places (24) and equilibrium condition (40) replaces (26). Notice that equilibrium conditions
(20), (21), and (22) are not included in the definition of equilibrium under a currency peg.
It is straightforward to show, following the same arguments as those presented in the proof
of Proposition 1, that one can find values for λt , τtd , and qtd that ensure satisfaction of these
three omitted equilibrium conditions given processes {cTt , ht , wt, dt+1 , qt} and a default policy
process It.
   The government is assumed to set policies in an optimal time-consistent fashion. At-
tention is restricted to equilibria in which decision rules are time-invariant functions of the
pay-off relevant state variables. In the competitive equilibrium of the fixed-exchange-rate
economy the pay-off relevant state variables are ytT , dt , and wt−1 . Note that now, contrary
to what was the case in the optimal exchange rate economy, wt−1 , the lagged value of the
real wage, is a state variable. This is so because when the nominal exchange rate is fixed,
downward nominal wage rigidity results in downward real wage rigidity.
   Consider first the value of continuing to service the debt for a government in good financial
standing at the beginning of period t, denoted v c(ytT , dt , wt−1 ). When a government chooses
                                                     ˆ T , dt+1 , wt) denote the default policy
to continue to service its debts it sets It = 1. Let I(y  t+1
function of the period-t + 1 government. The period-t government takes the default policy of
the future government as given. But it does internalize the fact that its own choices of dt+1
and wt influence the default decision of the period-t + 1 government and in this way affect
the interest rate at which it can borrow. To see this latter point, use the default policy of
the period-t + 1 government to eliminate It+1 from (27). In the case that It = 1, this yields:


                                                25
        ˆ T
     Et I(y   ,dt+1 ,wt )
qt =     t+1
          1+r ∗
                   . Using the facts that dt+1 and wt are in the information set of period t
and that ytT follows a first-order Markov process, we can rewrite this expression as

                                                    qt = q(ytT , dt+1 , wt ).                                (41)

The value of continuing to service the debt is then given by

           v c (ytT , dt , wt−1 ) =                          U A cTt , F (ht) + βEtv g (yt+1
                                                                                         T
                                                                            
                                            max                                              , dt+1 , wt )   (42)
                                      {cT
                                        t ,dt+1 ,ht ,wt }



subject to (23), (25), (39), and

                                        cTt + dt = ytT + q(ytT , dt+1 , wt )dt+1 ,                           (43)

given dt and wt−1 , where v g (ytT , dt , wt−1 ) denotes the value function associated with entering
period t in good financial standing, for an economy with tradable output ytT , external debt
dt , and past real wage wt−1 .
   Next consider the value of being in bad financial standing in the peg economy in period
t, denoted v b(ytT , wt−1 ). When the country is in bad financial standing, then It = 0. In
this case equilibrium condition (19) implies that dt+1 = 0 and equilibrium condition (18)
becomes cTt = ytT − L(ytT ). The value of being in bad financial standing in period t is then
given by

v b (ytT , wt−1) = max          U A ytT − L(ytT ), F (ht) + βEt θv g (yt+1
                                                                       T
                                                                           , 0, wt ) + (1 − θ)v b (yt+1
                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                          
                                                                                                        , wt ) ,
                   {ht ,wt }
                                                                                                             (44)
subject to (23), (25), and (39), given wt−1 .
   The value of being in good standing in period t is given by

                            v g (ytT , dt , wt−1 ) = max v c(ytT , dt , wt−1), v b (ytT , wt−1) .
                                                        
                                                                                                             (45)

The values of default, continuation, and good standing, v b (ytT , wt−1), v c(ytT , dt , wt−1), and
v g (ytT , dt , wt−1 ), respectively, depend on the past real wage, wt−1 . This is because under
downward nominal wage rigidity and a suboptimal exchange-rate policy, the past real wage,
by placing a lower bound on the current real wage, can prevent the labor market from clear-
ing, thereby causing involuntary unemployment and suboptimal consumption of nontradable
goods.




                                                                  26
   The default set is defined as

                        D(dt , wt−1) = ytT : v b (ytT , wt−1) > v c (ytT , dt , wt−1) .
                                      
                                                                                                             (46)

The price of debt must satisfy the condition that the expected return of lending to the
domestic country equals the opportunity cost of funds. Formally,
                                             T
                                      1-Prob yt+1 ∈ D(dt+1 , wt )
                                                                  = 1 + r∗ .                                 (47)
                                                  qt

   The slackness condition (40) is not included in the constraints of the value function
problems, (42), (44), and (45). The reason is that under optimal policy, the slackness
condition will always be satisfied. The proof is by contradiction. Suppose, contrary to what
we wish to show, that under the optimal policy ht < h̄ and wt > γwt−1 at some date t0 ≥ 0.
Consider now a perturbation to the allocation under the time-consistent optimal policy
consisting in a small increase in hours at time t0 from ht0 to h̃t0 , where ht0 < h̃t0 ≤ h̄. Clearly,
this perturbation does not violate the resource constraint—equation (43) when It = 1 and
cTt = ytT − L(ytT ) when It = 0— since hours do not enter it. From (23) we have that the real
                       A2 (cT  ,F (h̃t0 ))
wage falls to w̃t0 ≡        t0
                       A1 (cT  ,F (h̃t0 ))
                                             F 0(h̃t0 ) < wt0 . Because A1 , A2, and F 0 are continuous functions,
                            t0
the lower bound on the real wage, equation (39), is satisfied provided the increase in hours
is sufficiently small. In period t0 + 1, the wage constraint (39) is satisfied because w̃t0 < wt0 .
We have therefore established that the perturbed allocation satisfies the restrictions of the
optimal policy problems (42), (44), and (45). Finally, the perturbation is clearly welfare
increasing because it raises the consumption of nontradables in period t0 without affecting
the consumption of tradables in any period or the consumption of nontradables in any period
other than t0. It follows that an allocation that does not satisfy the slackness condition (40)
cannot be a solution to the optimal policy problems described by (42), (44), and (45).
   Next, we numerically characterize the equilibrium dynamics. The calibration of the model
is as shown in table 1. Relative to the case of optimal devaluations, the equilibrium under
a currency peg features an additional state variable, namely the past real wage, wt−1. We
discretize this state variable with a grid of 125 points, equally spaced in logs, taking values
between 1.25 and 4.25. This additional endogenous state variable introduces two compu-
tational difficulties. First, it significantly expands the number of points in the discretized
state space, from 40 thousand to 5 million. Second, it introduces a simultaneity problem
that can be a source of nonconvergence of the numerical algorithm. The reason is that the
price of debt, q(ytT , dt+1 , wt), depends on the current wage, wt . At the same time, the price
of debt determines consumption of tradables, which, in turn, affects employment and the


                                                             27
wage rate itself. To overcome this source of nonconvergence, we develop a procedure to find
the exact policy rule for the current wage given the pricing function q(·, ·, ·) for each possible
debt choice dt+1 . With this wage policy rule in hand, the debt policy rule is found by value
function iteration. This step delivers a new debt pricing function, which is then used in the
next iteration.


6.1     Typical Default Episodes With Fixed Exchange Rates
Figure 5 displays with solid lines the model dynamics around typical default episodes. The
typical default episode is constructed in the same way as in the case of optimal devaluations.
To facilitate comparison, figure 5 reproduces from figure 3 with broken lines the typical
default dynamics under the optimal devaluation policy.
   The top panels of the figure show that, as in the case of optimal exchange-rate policy,
default occurs after a string of negative output shocks and a significant contraction in trad-
able consumption. However, unlike the case of optimal devaluation policy, the contraction
in aggregate demand leads to massive involuntary unemployment, which reaches almost 20
percent in the period of default. Involuntary unemployment is caused by a failure of real
wages to decline in a context of highly depressed aggregate demand (see the left panel of
row 3 of figure 5). In turn, the downward rigidity of the real wage is due to the fact that
nominal wages are downwardly rigid and that the nominal exchange rate is fixed.
   The right panel on the third row of figure 5 displays the behavior of the relative price
of nontradables, pt . A fall in pt means that the real exchange rate depreciates as trad-
ables become more expensive relative to nontradables. Under the optimal policy, the real
exchange rate depreciates sharply around the default date, inducing agents to switch expen-
diture away from tradables and toward nontradables. This redirection of aggregate spending
stimulates the demand for labor (since the nontraded sector is labor intensive) and prevents
the emergence of involuntary unemployment. Under the currency peg, by contrast, the real
exchange rate depreciates insufficiently, inducing a much milder expenditure switch toward
nontradables, and thus failing to avoid unemployment. The reason why the relative price of
nontradables is reluctant to decline under the peg is that real wages, and hence the labor
cost faced by firms, stay too high due to the combination of downward nominal wage rigidity
and a currency peg.
   As in the case of optimal exchange-rate policy, the default takes place in the context of
an increase in the debt tax. This tightening in borrowing conditions aims to induce private
borrowers to internalize the heightened sensitivity of the country interest rate to the level of
debt.


                                               28
                     Figure 5: A Typical Default Episode Under A Currency Peg
                                         T                                                     T
                   Tradable Endowment, y                          Consumption of Tradables, c
                                         t                                                     t
  1.05                                                      1

        1
                                                      0.95
  0.95
                                                          0.9
       0.9
                                                      0.85
  0.85

       0.8                                                0.8
        −12   −8     −4      0       4       8   12        −12   −8     −4       0      4       8     12

                          Debt, d                                      Unemployment Rate
                                 t
       0.7                                                 20

       0.6
                                                           15
       0.5
                                                      %
                                                           10
       0.4
                                                            5
       0.3

       0.2                                                 0
        −12   −8     −4      0       4       8   12        −12   −8     −4       0      4       8     12

                       Real Wage, wt                             Relative Price of Nontradables, pt
       2.5                                                  3

                                                          2.8

                                                          2.6
        2
                                                          2.4

                                                          2.2

       1.5                                                 2
        −12   −8     −4      0       4       8   12        −12   −8     −4       0      4       8     12


                       Risk premium                                    Capital Control Tax
       10                                                  18

        8                                                  16

        6                                                  14
%/yr




                                                      %




        4                                                  12

        2                                                  10

        0                                                  8
        −12   −8     −4      0       4       8   12        −12   −8     −4       0      4       8     12
                           peg                                                optimal devaluation
Notes. Median of all 25-quarter windows around a default event in a simulation of 1 million quarters.
The default date is normalized to 0.

                                                      29
   One prediction of the model highlighted by the preceding analysis is that, all other
things equal, defaults are characterized by larger recessions when they take place under
fixed exchange rates than when they are accompanied by a devaluation. It is natural to ask
whether this prediction is borne out in the data. One difficulty in addressing this question
is that there are few cases in which default takes place in the context of a fixed exchange
rate. The typical default falls into the Twin Ds category. A second difficulty is that the
size of the contraction around default depends not only on the exchange-rate regime, but
also, among other factors, on the size of the shock that triggers the default. So, in principle,
a default event with devaluation could be associated with a larger recession than a default
event with fixed exchange rates if the shock that triggered the former is sufficiently larger
than the one that caused the latter. One way to at least partially control for this factor is to
study default events with and without devaluation that happened around the same time and
that were conceivably caused by a common set of external shocks. The Great Contraction of
2008 provides a suitable natural environment for this purpose. Following this global crisis,
there have been two defaults that were not followed by a devaluation, namely Greece in 2012
and Cyprus in 2013, and one that was followed by a devaluation, namely Iceland in 2009.
In addition, we include in the comparison the 2002 Argentine default because it is a recent
well-studied event and because our model was calibrated using some long-run regularities
of the Argentine economy. Figure 6 displays with a solid line the unemployment rate and
with a broken line the nominal exchange rate around the default date, which is indicated
with a vertical dotted line. In all four cases, default was associated with rising levels of
unemployment. But the unemployment dynamics post default were different across peggers
and nonpeggers. In Argentina and Iceland, the default cum devaluation was followed by an
improvement in unemployment. By contrast, Greece and Cyprus, both of which stayed in
the eurozone post default, experienced no decline in unemployment. We view this evidence
as consistent with the predictions of the model that devaluation around default reduces
unemployment. We note however, that even in the two default episodes that conform with
the Twin Ds phenomenon (Argentina and Iceland), we do observe a rise in unemployment
around the default event. In this regard, we do not wish to claim that the proposed model
can explain all sources of involuntary unemployment around default events. Rather, the
focus of the present investigation is to suggest that exchange-rate policy around default
episodes matters for unemployment outcomes, and that this connection provides a rationale
for the Twin Ds phenomenon.




                                              30
Figure 6: Default, Devaluation, and Unemployment: Argentina, Cyprus, Greece, and Iceland

                                                                             Argentina                                                                                                             Greece
                      Exchange Rate, Pesos per U.S. Dollar




                                                               4                                   20                                                                            2                                        30

                                                             3.5                                   18
                                                                                                                  Unemployment Rate, %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Unemployment Rate, %
                                                                                                                                                          Exchange Rate, Index
                                                               3                                   16

                                                             2.5                                   14                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                               2                                   12

                                                             1.5                                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                               1                                   8

                                                             0.5                               6                                                                                 0
                                                              1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                                                                                 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015


                                                                              Iceland                                                                                                              Cyprus
                                                             200                                   8                                                                             2                                        20
              Exchange Rate, Krona per Euro




                                                                                                       Unemployment Rate, %




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Unemployment Rate, %
                                                                                                                                         Exchange Rate, Index




                                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                                                             150                                   6                                                                                                                      15

                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                             100                                   4                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                      0.5


                                                              50                                   2                                                                             0                                        5
                                                                   2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                                                                                     2011   2012   2013     2014   2015

                                                              Unemployment Rate                                                                                                                           Nominal Exchange Rate

Note. Vertical line indicates the year of default. Own calculations based on data from INDEC
(Argentina), EuroStat, and the Central Bank of Iceland.




                                                                                                                              31
                                  Figure 7: Distribution of External Debt
                            2.5
                                                                             Currency Peg
                                                                             Optimal Devaluation Policy



                             2




                            1.5
                  density




                             1




                            0.5




                             0
                             −1       −0.5       0                     0.5          1                 1.5
                                                     external debt (d )
                                                                     t


          Note. Debt distributions are conditional on being in good financial standing.



6.2    Debt Sustainability Under A Currency Peg
Figure 7 displays with a solid line the distribution of external debt under a currency peg,
conditional on the country being in good financial standing. For comparison, the figure
also displays, with a broken line, the distribution of debt under the optimal devaluation
policy. Under a currency peg the economy can support less debt than under the optimal
devaluation policy. The median debt falls from 0.6 (60 percent of tradable output) under
the optimal devaluation policy to 0.2 (20 percent of tradable output) under a currency peg.
This reduced debt capacity is a consequence of the fact that, all other things equal, the
benefits from defaulting are larger under a currency peg than under optimal devaluation
policy. The reason is that under a currency peg, default has two benefits. One is to spur
the recovery in the consumption of tradables, since the repudiation of external debt frees up
resources otherwise devoted to servicing the external debt. The second, related to the first,
is to lessen the unemployment consequences of the external crisis. Recall that in equilibrium
cTt is a shifter of the demand for labor (see equation 23). The first benefit is also present
under optimal devaluation policy and is the one stressed in real models of default in the
Eaton-Gersovitz tradition. But the second is not, for the optimal devaluation policy, by
itself, can bring about the first-best employment outcome.
   The model predicts that under fixed-exchange rates, the country on average defaults twice
per century. This default frequency is slightly lower than that predicted under the optimal

                                                        32
 Figure 8: Net Foreign Assets to GDP Ratio and Interest Rates in Greece, 1980 to 2011

                          120                                                  30

                          100                                                  25




                                                            percent per year
                           80                                                  20
               % of GDP
                           60                                                  15

                           40                                                  10

                           20                                                   5

                           0                                                   0
                           1980   1990   2000   2010                           1980   1990   2000   2010



Note. Own calculations based on data from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007) for Net foreign assets
to GDP ratio, and from Bank of Greece and Eurostat for interest rates.


exchange rate policy, which was targeted in the calibration to be 2.6 times per century. This
result may be surprising in light of the fact that ex ante peggers have a stronger incentive
to default. The explanation is that the higher incentive to default under a peg implies a
steeper supply of funds. This, in turn, induces the country to borrow less in the stochastic
steady state. And with a lower external debt, the country has a reduced need to default.
In general, the model does not predict a sharp difference in the frequency of default across
peggers and optimal floaters.
   The prediction that in the long run peggers can sustain less debt than optimal floaters
may seem at odds with the increase in external net liabilities observed in the periphery of
Europe after the creation of the monetary union. However, the environment in which the
periphery of Europe operated after the creation of the eurozone is not fully comparable with
the peg-economy model due to the possibility of bailouts, which are ruled out in the model
studied thus far, but, as actual events during the great contraction confirmed, were most
likely present in peripheral Europe. The significant fall in the cost of borrowing together with
a sharp rise in external debt observed upon accession to the monetary union is consistent
with the hypothesis that accession came with the expectation of implicit debt guarantees.
Figure 8 displays the joint behavior of external debt and country interest rates for the case
of Greece.
   It is then natural to ask how the possibility of bailouts should be expected to alter the
debt distribution of peggers, and, in particular, if under a plausible calibration of the model
it could be possible that an economy with a currency peg and with access to bailouts could
sustain more debt than an economy with optimal exchange-rate policy but without access
to bailouts. To capture the economic environment in the periphery of Europe following the
creation of the eurozone (i.e., a peg with the possibility of bailouts), we now consider the


                                                       33
polar case of an economy with a currency peg and the ability to commit to repay its external
debt. To account for a residual repayment risk, we introduce an empirically realistic time
varying country interest rate. This is a stylized way to capture an environment with partial
and uncertain bailouts. A full treatment of bailouts is beyond the scope of the paper.
    We set the parameters γ, σ, a, ξ, α, and h̄ as in the calibration of the baseline model
(see table 1). The remaining parameters are set to capture salient aspects of the Greek
economy. In the economy with a currency peg and bailouts, we estimate the exogenous
driving process (ytT , rt) on quarterly Greek data from 1981:Q1 to 2011:Q3. We assume that
the vector (ln ytT , ln 1+r
                              
                        1+r
                            t
                               ) follows a bivariate AR(1) process. Appendix A.4 provides data
sources, describes the construction of both time series, and displays the estimated bivariate
driving process and its discretization. We set the steady-state value of the country interest
rate, r, equal to 0.011, which is the mean of the time series for the Greek interest rate, and
β equal to 0.985 to match a debt-to-output ratio of about 90 percent, the value observed in
2006, before the onset of the great contraction.
   In addition to the peg economy with implicit bailout guarantees, we consider two economies
without bailouts, one with a currency peg and the other with optimal exchange-rate policy.
These two cases are the same as those displayed in figure 7, but now calibrated to Greece.
The economies without bailouts contain three additional parameters, θ, δ1, and δ2. We set
θ to 0.01 to capture an average exclusion period of 25 years observed in Greece (Reinhart
and Trebesch, 2015). We pick δ1 and δ2 to match two moments in the floating exchange
rate economy. The first target is a debt-to-output ratio of 11.9 percent, which is consistent
with the value observed in Greece in 1995, prior to the eurozone project becoming a real
possibility. The second target is an output cost of default of 5 percent, which is consistent
with the panel estimates of Borensztein and Panizza (2009). In both of these economies, the
interest rate is endogenous, so the driving force is the univariate version of ytT implied by
the Greek bivariate process estimated above.
   Figure 9 displays the distributions of external debt under the three environments. The
figure illustrates the point that absent bailout guarantees, currency pegs can support less
external debt than optimal exchange-rate economies—this is the result stressed earlier in
this section—but at the same time a currency peg with bailouts can support more debt than
an optimal-exchange-rate economy without bailouts. In interpreting this prediction of the
model, recall that although the calibration targets the average debt levels of the floating
no-bailout and the currency-peg cum bailout economies, it does not target the average debt
level of the peg economy without bailouts. The insight that emerges from this analysis is
that the observed increase in external debt in the periphery of Europe upon accession to the
eurozone can be rationalized in the context of the present model of the Twin Ds phenomenon


                                             34
                  Figure 9: Bailouts and the Distribution of External Debt
                              1
                                                                              Currency Peg
                                                                              Optimal Devaluation Policy
                             0.9                                              Currency Peg with Bailouts


                             0.8


                             0.7


                             0.6
                   density




                             0.5


                             0.4


                             0.3


                             0.2


                             0.1


                              0
                                   −2   0   2   4      6         8       10     12       14        16
                                                    external debt (dt)




Note. The model is calibrated to Greece. Debt distributions are conditional on being in good finan-
cial standing. The distribution under the optimal float is truncated at 1 to preserve a comparable
scale across the three densities.

once the possibility of bailouts is taken into account.
   It is of interest to contrast the observed behavior of external debt in the periphery of
Europe following the creation of the common currency area in 2000 with that of Ecuador, an
economy that in the same year unilaterally adopted the U.S. dollar as legal tender. The case
of Ecuador is of particular interest because, contrary to the situation in Europe, dollarization
was not accompanied with the expectation of implicit bailout guarantees on the part of the
United States or other foreign institutions. Figure 10 displays the net external debt positions
as a fraction of GDP of Ecuador and the mean across the GIPS countries (Greece, Ireland,
Portugal, and Spain) from 1990 to 2011. From the introduction of the euro until the eve
of the Great Contraction (2000 to 2007), the GIPS countries display a fast accumulation of
external debt from 20 to 100 percent of GDP. By contrast, over the same period Ecuador’s
external debt fell from 80 percent to 20 percent of GDP. The dynamics of external debt in
Ecuador are consistent with the predictions of the theoretical model in the case in which the
adoption of a currency peg is not accompanied with implicit bailout guarantees.




                                                       35
    Figure 10: Net Foreign Assets to GDP Ratios: GIPS versus Ecuador, 1990 to 2011

                              120
                                        Ecuador
                                        GIPS


                              100




                               80
                   % of GDP




                               60




                               40




                               20




                               0
                               1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000     2002   2004   2006   2008   2010
                                                                    year



Source: Own calculations based on data from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007). GIPS is the mean of
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. The dotted vertical line indicates the year in which Ecuador
adopted the dollar and the GIPS adopted the Euro.


7     Sensitivity Analysis
This section extends the model to allow for long-maturity debt and imperfect pass-through.
It also analyzes the robustness of the central results of the paper to increasing the value of
the subjective discount factor, β.


7.1    Long-Maturity Debt
The baseline model assumes that debt carries a maturity of one period. In this section we
present a version of the model with long-maturity debt and show that our findings are robust
to this modification of the model.
   The specification of long-maturity debt follows Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012). Assume
that bonds have a random maturity. Specifically, with probability η ∈ [0, 1] bonds mature
next period and pay out one unit of the tradable consumption good. With probability 1 − η
bonds do not mature and pay a coupon equal to z > 0 units of tradables. The country
is assumed to hold a portfolio with a continuum of this type of bond. The realization of
maturity is independent across bonds. Hence, if the country has dt units of debt outstanding,
a share η will mature each period with certainty and the remaining share 1 − η will not.

                                                                  36
The nonmaturing bonds trade at the price qt per unit. Because a newly-issued bond is
indistinguishable from an existing bond that did not mature, the ex-coupon price of old
bonds and new bonds must be equal. If the debtor does not default, dt units of debt pay
[η + (1 − η)(z + qt)]dt units of tradable consumption. If the debtor defaults, the bond pays
zero. Absent default, the expected maturity of this type of bond is 1/η periods. Thus, the
random-maturity model allows for bonds of arbitrary maturity. Furthermore, it nests the
perpetuity model of debt (e.g., Hatchondo and Martı́nez, 2009) as a special case (for a proof
see Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé, 2017).
    The main difference between the models with long-maturity and short-maturity debt
is that long-maturity debt results in a state-contingent payoff, which may provide hedging
against income risk to the borrower. Specifically, the payoff on the long-maturity bond,
η + (1 − η)(z + qt) depends on qt , which is state contingent. In particular, in periods of
low endowment, qt is likely to be low, resulting in an ex-post low interest rate paid by
the borrower. Because periods of low income are associated with low consumption, the
long-maturity bond provides insurance against income risk. By contrast, the payoff on a
one-period bond is unity and hence nonstate contingent, providing no insurance against
income risk. Therefore, one should expect that all other things equal, the borrower will hold
more debt if debt is long term rather than short term.
  To embed this asset structure into the economy with downward nominal wage rigidity
presented in section 3 consider first the household’s problem. The household’s sequential
budget constraint is now given by

 PtT cTt +PtN cN    T
                       η + (1 − η)(z + qtd ) dt = PtT ỹtT +Wt ht +(1−τtd)PtT qtddt+1 +Ft +Φt , (48)
                                           
               t +Pt


where qtd now denotes the domestic price of long-maturity debt in period t. The optimality
condition for the choice of debt becomes

                        (1 − τtd )qtd λt = βEt λt+1 η + (1 − η)(z + qt+1
                                                                     d
                                                                         
                                                                         ) ,

where, as before, λt /PtT denotes the Lagrange multiplier associated with the household’s
sequential budget constraint, now equation (48). All other optimality conditions associated
with the household’s problem are unchanged.
   The firm’s problem and the conditions characterizing the labor market are unaffected by
the introduction of long-maturity debt. We continue to assume that in periods in which the
country is in bad standing (It = 0), the government confiscates any payments of households
to foreign lenders and returns the proceeds to households in a lump-sum fashion. The



                                                37
resulting sequential budget constraint of the government is

                          ft = τtd qtd dt+1 + (1 − It)[η + (1 − η)(z + qtd )]dt .                      (49)

    Consider now the participation constraint of foreign lenders. Let qt denote the price of
debt charged by foreign lenders. Then, qt must satisfy the condition that the expected return
of lending to the domestic country equal the opportunity cost of funds. Formally,
                                                                    
                                    Et It+1 [η + (1 − η)(z + qt+1 )]
                            It qt −                                    = 0.
                                                 1 + r∗

    The market-clearing condition for traded goods takes the form

                 cTt = ytT − (1 − It )L(ytT ) + It{qt dt+1 − [η + (1 − η)(z + qt )]dt}.

    A competitive equilibrium in the economy with long-term debt is a set of stochastic
processes {cTt , ht , wt, dt+1 , λt , qt , qtd} satisfying (19), (20), (22), (23), (24), (25), (26),

                 cTt = ytT − (1 − It )L(ytT ) + It{qt dt+1 − [η + (1 − η)(z + qt )]dt},                (50)

                          (1 − τtd)qtd λt = βEtλt+1 [η + (1 − η)(z + qt+1 d
                                                                            )],                        (51)
                                                                      
                                      Et It+1 [η + (1 − η)(z + qt+1 )]
                            It qt −                                      = 0,                          (52)
                                                   1 + r∗
given processes {ytT , t , τtd, It } and initial conditions w−1 and d0 .
    When the government can choose t and τtd freely, stochastic processes {cTt , ht , dt+1 , qt}
can be supported as a competitive equilibrium if and only if they satisfy the subset of
equilibrium conditions (19), (25), (50), and (52), given processes {ytT , It} and the initial
condition d0 . The proof mimics the one for Proposition 1, except that the proof that the
Euler equation (51) holds must be modified. The reason is that now future values of qtd
appear on the right-hand side of (51). We proceed as follows. In states in which the country
is in good standing, set qtd = qt. In states in which the country is in bad standing, set
qtd = q autarky , where q autarky is an arbitrary positive constant. Then, in any state, pick τtd
residually so as to satisfy the Euler equation (51). This is possible because at this point we
know the processes It , λt , qtd , and qt.
    An important implication of the fact that the analog to Proposition 1 continues to hold is
that wt−1 is not a pay-off relevant state variable. Thus, as in the model with short-maturity
debt, in the model with long-maturity debt the only pay-off relevant state variables are ytT
and dt . The time-consistent optimal policy problem can be cast as follows. If the country

                                                    38
is in good financial standing in period t, It−1 = 1, the value of continuing to service the
external debt, denoted v c (ytT , dt ), is

                  v c (ytT , dt ) =                      U A cTt , F (ht) + βEtv g (yt+1
                                                                                     T
                                                                        
                                          max                                            , dt+1 )   (53)
                                      {cT
                                        t ,ht ,dt+1 }



subject to (25) and

                       cTt + [η + (1 − η)(z + q(ytT , dt+1 )]dt = ytT + q(ytT , dt+1 )dt+1 ,        (54)

where v g (ytT , dt ) denotes the value of being in good financial standing. As in the model with
short-maturity debt, the optimal choice of ht is ht = h̄. The value of being in bad financial
standing in period t, denoted v b (ytT ), is given by

   v b (ytT ) = max U A ytT − L(ytT ), F (ht) + βEt θv g (yt+1
                                                           T
                                                               , 0) + (1 − θ)v b (yt+1
                                                                                   T
                                                                                    
                                                                                       ) ,          (55)
               {ht }


subject to (25). Again, it is optimal to set ht = h̄. The value of being in good standing in
period t is given by
                            v g (ytT , dt ) = max v c (ytT , dt ), v b(ytT ) .
                                                 
                                                                                        (56)

The government chooses to default whenever the value of continuing to participate in finan-
cial markets is smaller than the value of being in bad financial standing, v c(ytT , dt ) < v b(ytT ).
Letting D(dt ) denote the default set we have

                                       D(dt ) = ytT : v c(ytT , dt ) < v b(ytT ) .
                                               
                                                                                                    (57)

In equilibrium the pricing function of debt, qt = q(ytT , dt+1 ) and the policy function for debt,
dt+1 = d(ytT , dt ), must satisfy the participation constraint of foreign lenders:
                            (                                                                )
                                                    T        T                 T
                                                                           
                                 η + (1 − η)(z + q(yt+1 , d(yt+1 , dt+1 ))) I(yt+1 , dt+1 ) T
       q(ytT , dt+1 ) = E                                                                   yt ,    (58)
                                                       1 + r∗

where I(y T , d) equals unity if y T ∈ D(d) and equals zero otherwise.
   Because under optimal time-consistent policy ht = h̄ at all times, we obtain, by the
same arguments presented in the short-maturity debt model, that the family of devaluation
policies that support the optimal time-consistent allocation is given by equation (35). It
follows, in turn, that under the optimal exchange-rate policy the equilibrium is identical
to that of the real economy with long-maturity debt studied in Chatterjee and Eyigungor
(2012). This insight allows us to employ the following procedure to investigate whether the


                                                                39
Twin Ds phenomenon obtains in equilibrium in the economy with long-maturity debt: First,
compute the real allocation in the Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) economy. Associate
the resulting process for ct with cTt in the present model. Second, compute the process for
the full-employment wage as wtf = [α(1 − a)/a](cTt )1/ξ . Finally, use the optimal devaluation
policy (37) to obtain the process for the optimal devaluation rate.
   The long-maturity debt economy has two additional parameters that need to be cali-
brated: η, which governs the average maturity of debt, and z, which measures the coupon
rate. We follow Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) and set η = 0.05 and z = 0.03. The
assumed value for η implies that the average maturity of debt is 5 years. With the exception
of β, δ1, and δ2 , all structural parameters and the discretized driving process are the same
as in the short-maturity debt model (see table 1). Here we set β = 0.969, δ1 = −0.18319,
and δ2 = 0.24558 with the intent to match the same targets as in the short-maturity debt
economy, namely, an average debt-to-traded-GDP ratio in periods of good financial standing
of 60 percent per quarter, a default frequency is 2.6 times per century and an average output
loss while in bad financial standing of 7 percent. We are able to hit the first two targets
but fall slightly short of the third. The average output loss in equilibrium is 5 percent per
period.
   Figure 11 displays with a solid line the behavior of the long-maturity debt economy
around a typical default episode. For comparison it reproduces, with a broken line, the
typical default dynamics in the economy with short-maturity debt from figure 3. The figure
shows that the predicted dynamics in both economies are fairly similar. In particular, in the
economy with long-maturity debt the government finds it optimal to accompany the default
with a large devaluation of at least 45 percent. It follows that the model with long-maturity
debt continues to predict the Twin Ds phenomenon as an optimal outcome.
   The main role of the large devaluation at the time of default is to limit the decline in final
consumption by reducing the decline in nontraded consumption. Absent a devaluation, the
decline in traded absorption would spill over to the nontraded sector and hence to nontraded
consumption. Final consumption is predicted to decline on average 5.1 percent in a default
episode when debt has a long maturity and 4.2 percent when debt has a short maturity.
In the data, across 86 defaults over the period 1975 to 2013, the median decline in final
consumption is 5.1 percent over the three-year period leading up to and including a default
event.10 This suggests that the model explains well the observed decline in consumption
that occurs in a typical default episode.
  10
    The source for the consumption data is WDI. The cyclical component of consumption is the logarithmic
deviation from a quadratic trend. We exclude all countries with fewer than 30 years of consumption data.
The resulting panel contains 86 default events.



                                                  40
Figure 11: A Typical Default Episode Under Optimal Exchange-Rate Policy in the Economy
with Long-Maturity Debt
                     Tradable Output, ytT                          Consumption of Tradables, cTt
       1.05                                                 1

          1
                                                          0.95
       0.95
                                                           0.9
        0.9
                                                          0.85
       0.85

        0.8                                                0.8
         −12   −8     −4      0       4     8   12          −12   −8       −4         0         4   8   12

                           Debt, dt                                    Nominal Exchange Rate, Et
       0.65                                                1.6

        0.6                                                1.4

       0.55                                                1.2

        0.5                                                 1

       0.45                                                0.8
         −12   −8     −4      0       4     8   12          −12   −8       −4         0         4   8   12

                        Real Wage, wt                             Relative Price of Nontradables, pt
        2.2                                                2.8

                                                           2.6
          2
                                                           2.4
        1.8
                                                           2.2
        1.6
                                                            2

        1.4                                                1.8
         −12   −8     −4      0       4     8   12          −12   −8       −4         0         4   8   12

                Country Interest-Rate Premium                                   Debt Tax, τtd
         15                                                20

                                                           15
         10
                                                           10
          5
                                                            5

         0                                                  0
         −12   −8     −4      0       4     8   12          −12   −8       −4         0         4   8   12
                      long-maturity debt                                          short-maturity debt

Notes. The typical default dynamics are computed as medians of 25-quarter windows centered
on default events occurring in a simulated times series of 1 million quarters. The default date is
normalized to 0.


                                                     41
7.2    Incomplete Exchange-Rate Pass Through
Thus far, we have assumed that the law of one price holds for tradable goods, PtT = PtT ∗Et .
In this section, we will relax this assumption.
   Continue to assume that PtT ∗ is constant and normalized to unity. Let

                                                     PtT
                                             πtT ≡     T
                                                     Pt−1

denote the domestic gross rate of inflation of tradable goods. Then, under the assumption of
complete pass-through tradable inflation would equal the devaluation rate, that is, πtT = t.
We introduce incomplete pass-through by imposing the following law of motion for πtT ,
                                                            1−η
                                       πtT = (t)η πt−1
                                                    T
                                                                                              (59)

with η ∈ (0, 1]. According to this expression, tradable prices display short-run deviations
from the law of one price, in the sense that a one-percent devaluation in period t leads to
an increase in the domestic price of tradables of η percent in period t, which is less than one
percent. This friction could be a consequence of nominal product price rigidity in the traded
sector with pricing to market as in open-economy versions of the new-Keynesian models. A
full-blown formulation of such an environment would be of interest, but is beyond the scope
of this paper. In the long run there is perfect pass-through in the sense that a one-percent
devaluation in period t, all other things equal, leads asymptotically to a one-percent increase
in the domestic price of tradables. The smaller is η the more incomplete is pass-through.
The present formulation nests the case of perfect pass-through when η = 1.
   The remaining elements of the model are unchanged. Then, we have that under incom-
plete pass-through a competitive equilibrium is a set of stochastic processes {cTt , ht, wt, dt+1 ,
λt , qt , qtd , πtT } satisfying

                           cTt = ytT − (1 − It)L(ytT ) + It[qtdt+1 − dt ],                    (18)

                                         (1 − It)dt+1 = 0,                                    (19)

                              λt = U 0 (A(cTt , F (ht)))A1(cTt , F (ht)),                     (20)

                                     (1 − τtd )qtdλt = βEt λt+1 ,                             (21)

                                          It(qtd − qt ) = 0,                                  (22)
                                     A2(cTt , F (ht))    wt
                                         T
                                                      = 0      ,                              (23)
                                     A1(ct , F (ht))   F (ht )

                                                  42
                                                   ht ≤ h̄,                                             (25)
                                                         
                                                  Et It+1
                                         It qt −            = 0,                                        (27)
                                                  1 + r∗
                                                   η       1−η
                                         πtT = (t) πt−1T
                                                                ,                                       (59)
                                                      wt−1
                                              wt ≥ γ T ,                                                (60)
                                                       πt
and                                                          
                                                     wt−1
                                     (ht − h̄) wt − γ T           = 0,                                  (61)
                                                      πt
given processes {ytT , t, τtd , It} and initial conditions w−1 , d0 , and π−1
                                                                            T
                                                                               . One can readily
establish that proposition 1 continues to hold under the present formulation of incomplete
pass-through. This means that the optimal time-consistent policies of cTt , ht , dt+1 , qt , and It
are the same as in the model with perfect pass-through.
    The family of optimal devaluation policies now takes the form
                                                                 1
                                            wt−1   T
                                                     η−1           η
                                     t ≥ γ f T πt−1                        ,                           (62)
                                           w (ct )

                                                                                            A (cT ,F (h̄))
where the full-employment real wage, wf (cTt ), continues to be given by wf (cTt ) = A21 (ctT ,F (h̄)) F 0(h̄).
                                                                                            t
The above expression shows that all other things equal, the more incomplete is pass-through
(i.e., the smaller is η), the larger is the minimum devaluation required to maintain full
employment in response to a contraction in cTt .
  We continue to study the member of the family of optimal devaluation policies that fully
stabilizes the nominal wage (i.e., the rule that implies that Wt = Wt−1 for all t). This policy
rule now takes the form                                          1
                                            wt−1       T
                                                         η−1       η
                                      t =           π                  .                               (63)
                                           wf (cTt ) t−1
Because under full employment we have that PtN F 0(h̄) = Wt and because under the specific
optimal devaluation rule considered Wt is constant, it follows that PtN is also constant in
equilibrium. So it continues to be true that even though the nominal price of nontradables
is fully flexible, in equilibrium it behaves as if it was perfectly sticky.
   Figure 12 compares the behavior of the level of the nominal exchange rate during a typical
default episode in the economy with perfect pass-through (the solid line, reproduced from
figure 3) and in the economy with imperfect pass-through (the broken line). In this latter
case the parameter η takes the value 0.5. The figure shows that the nominal depreciation that
takes place at the time of default is about twice as large under imperfect pass through than


                                                     43
Figure 12: The Nominal Exchange Rate During A Typical Default Episode Under Optimal
Exchange-Rate Policy And Imperfect Pass-Through
                                          Nominal Exchange Rate, Et
                  1.6




                  1.5




                  1.4




                  1.3




                  1.2




                  1.1




                   1

                                                                      Perfect Pass Through (η=1)
                                                                      Imperfect Pass Through (η=0.5)
                  0.9
                   −12      −8       −4               0               4              8                 12




under perfect pass through. It follows that the Twin Ds phenomenon is more pronounced
the lower the degree of pass-through.


7.3    Patience and the Twin Ds
The calibration of the model features a value of β of 0.85. As mentioned earlier, this value
is commonplace in the quantitative default literature, but low relative to the values used
in closed-economy business cycle studies. Here, we explore the sensitivity of the emergence
of the Twin Ds as an optimal outcome to increasing the value of β. Figure 13 displays
the predicted nominal exchange rate under optimal exchange-rate policy around the typical
default episode for three values of β, 0.85, 0.95, and 0.98. In all cases, the model predicts
that defaults are accompanied by large devaluations. In this sense, the Twin Ds prediction
is robust to making households more patient. Indeed, the Twin Ds phenomenon is predicted
to be more pronounced as β increases. The reason is that as agents become more patient,
the costs of default (the output loss and financial autarky), which apply for a random period
of time, have a larger present discounted value. As a result, it takes a deeper contraction in
output for the country to choose to default. In turn, the larger the contraction, the larger
the devaluation necessary to ensure that the real wage falls to the level that clears the labor
market.



                                                    44
                         Figure 13: Predicted Twin Ds And Patience
                                          Nominal Exchange Rate, Et
                  1.6
                          β=0.85
                          β=0.95
                          β=0.98
                  1.5




                  1.4




                  1.3




                  1.2




                  1.1




                   1




                  0.9
                   −12        −8     −4               0               4   8   12




8     Conclusion
Sovereign defaults typically coincide with large devaluations of the domestic currency. In
addition, the dynamics of the nominal exchange rate around defaults resemble more a one-
time devaluation than a switch to a permanently higher rate of devaluation. For this reason,
the typical devaluation around default does not seem to be driven by the objective of gen-
erating a higher stream of seigniorage revenue. Furthermore, the fact that the majority of
the default episodes observed since the 1970s involved economies in which much of the debt
was either denominated in units of foreign currency or indexed discourages an explanation
in which the chief objective of a devaluation is to deflate the real value of interest-bearing
liabilities.
   This paper proposes an explanation of the joint occurrence of default and devaluation
in which the latter serves to correct a misalignment in relative prices. This explanation is
motivated by the fact that in fixed exchange rate economies, contractions are characterized
by a lack of downward adjustment in private nominal wages in spite of rising unemployment.
A prominent example is the debt crisis in the periphery of Europe following the Great
Contraction of 2008.
    We formalize this explanation by embedding downward nominal wage rigidity into the
Eaton-Gersovitz model of default. In this framework, default occurs in the context of highly
depressed aggregate demand. In turn, weak demand for final products lowers the demand
for labor, which puts downward pressure on real wages. In the absence of a devaluation,


                                                    45
the required fall in the real wage necessitates a decline in the nominal wage. But this
is ruled out by downward nominal wage rigidity. Thus, to avoid the emergence of large
involuntary unemployment, the government chooses to combine the default with devaluation.
For plausible calibrations of the model, the minimum devaluation rate consistent with full
employment is found to be over 40 percent.
  By contrast, under a fixed exchange rate the government is unable to reduce the real
value of wages by devaluing the domestic currency. Thus, default episodes are predicted to
be accompanied by involuntary unemployment. Under plausible calibrations of the model,
the unemployment rate increases by about 20 percentage points around the typical default.
   Finally, the combination of nominal rigidities and a fixed exchange rate introduces an
additional incentive to default into the Eaton-Gersovitz model. This incentive originates from
the fact that the resources set free by default boost domestic demand and thus reduce slack
in labor markets. Because of these elevated incentives to default, the model predicts that in
the long run fixed-exchange-rate economies can support less external debt than economies
with optimally floating rates.




                                             46
Appendix
A.1     Decentralization From Real To Real
In section 4 of the body of the paper, we demonstrated the decentralization of the Eaton-
Gersovitz model to a competitive economy with downward nominal wage rigidity. We estab-
lished that debt taxes and devaluation policy make the decentralization possible. Consider
now the question of decentralizing the standard Eaton-Gersovitz model to a real competi-
tive economy. To make the competitive economy real, suppose that nominal wages are fully
flexible (γ = 0). In this case, the devaluation rate, t , disappears from the set of competitive
equilibrium conditions. Specifically, t drops from conditions (24) and (26). The economy
thus becomes purely real, and exchange-rate policy becomes irrelevant. However, clearly
debt taxes are still necessary to establish the equivalence between the optimal-policy prob-
lem and the standard default model, as they guarantee the satisfaction of the private-sector
Euler equation (21). We therefore have the following result.

Proposition A.1 (Decentralization To A Real Economy) Real models of sovereign de-
fault in the tradition of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) can be decentralized to a real competitive
economy via debt taxes.

This result is of interest because it highlights the fact that debt taxes are present in all
default models à la Eaton and Gersovitz even though they do not explicitly appear in the
centralized analysis.


A.2     Implementability of the Optimal-Policy Equilibrium
This appendix shows that any member of the family of devaluation policies (35) uniquely
implements the optimal-policy equilibrium. We first prove that under any such exchange-rate
rule, the equilibrium involves full employment at all times. The proof is by contradiction.
Suppose that there is some period t such that ht < h̄ in equilibrium. Then, by the slackness
condition (26), we have that wt = γwt−1 /t . Combining this expression with (35), we get
that
                                         wt ≤ wf (cTt ).




                                               47
Now, using equations (23) and (36) we can write

                                       A2(cTt , F (ht)) 0
                                wt =                    F (ht )
                                       A1(cTt , F (ht))
                                       A2(cTt , F (h̄)) 0
                                     >                  F (h̄)
                                       A1(cTt , F (h̄))
                                     = wf (cTt ).

The inequality holds because of the assumed properties of the functions A(·, ·) and F (·) and
because ht < h̄. The above two expressions are clearly contradictory. We have therefore
established that under every exchange-rate rule belonging to (35), the equilibrium must
involve full employment. Because none of the remaining equilibrium conditions listed in
definition 1 depend on the devaluation rate, any possible nonuniqueness cannot be induced
by the monetary policy rule. In particular, if the real allocation in the Eaton-Gersovitz
model is unique, so it is when implemented with the devaluation rule (35).


A.3     Optimal Devaluation Policy Without Debt Taxes
In the model of section 3, continue to assume that borrowing is decentralized, but suppose
now that the government cannot set debt taxes optimally.
   Thus, the only policy instrument at the planner’s disposal is exchange-rate policy. In
general, the case without debt taxes is significantly more complex and potentially intractable.
The reason is that without a fiscal instrument used to induce private agents to internalize
the borrowing externality, the model may display multiple equilibria. The possibility of
nonuniqueness is identified in Kim and Zhang (2012) and formally established in Ayres et
al. (2015). (This multiplicity problem is not present in most of the existing default models
(e.g., Arellano, 2008; Aguiar and Gopinath, 2006; Chatterjee and Eyigungor, 2012; Mendoza
and Yue, 2012; etc.) because as demonstrated by proposition A.1 in appendix A.1, by
centralizing both the default and borrowing decisions, these models implicitly assume the
availability of optimal debt taxes.) We can show, however, that in the case in which the
intra- and intertemporal elasticities of substitution equal each other (ξ = 1/σ), the full-
employment devaluation policy is optimal even when the planner does not have access to
debt taxes.
   To see this, assume that debt taxes are not part of the set of policy instruments available
to the government. Suppose then that the process {τtd } is exogenous and arbitrary. In this
case, Proposition 1 does not hold anymore and one must expand the set of constraints of the
optimal-policy problem stated in equation (29) to include competitive-equilibrium conditions


                                              48
(20)-(22) as constraints. This is because τtd can no longer be set residually to ensure the
satisfaction of these constraints. But clearly, there are no longer guarantees that the solution
to the expanded optimal-policy problem will feature ht = h̄ for all t, because the right-hand
side of equation (20) in general depends on ht . Notice that even if the government cannot set
debt taxes optimally, it could still achieve full employment at all times by appropriate use of
the devaluation rate. But the resulting allocation would in general be suboptimal. However,
in the case in which the intra- and intertemporal elasticities of consumption substitution are
equal to each other (ξ = 1/σ), full employment reemerges as optimal. This is because in this
case competitive-equilibrium condition (20) is independent of ht .
   We have therefore established that full employment is optimal even if debt taxes are
not available to the planner. The case ξ = 1/σ is indeed quite relevant. As argued in the
calibration of the model presented in section 5.1, empirical estimates of the intratemporal
elasticity of substitution suggest that ξ is close to 0.5. At the same time, the typical value
of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution used in quantitative business-cycle analysis for
emerging countries is also 0.5, or σ = 2.
  It follows immediately that when ξ = 1/σ, the family of optimal devaluation policies
is given by expression (35). This means that large contractions in the domestic absorption
of tradable goods will be accompanied by devaluations under the optimal exchange rate
policy. Thus, if in any of the possibly many equilibria default takes place during aggregate
contractions (as is the case in the equilibrium selected by Kim and Zhang, 2012), the economy
without optimal debt taxation policy will continue to predict the Twin Ds phenomenon as
an optimal outcome.


A.4     Exogenous Driving Processes in the Calibration to the Greek
        Economy
To estimate the exogenous joint stochastic process for traded output and the country interest
rate, we use data over the period 1981:Q1 to 2011:Q3. We proxy traded output with an
index of industrial production instead of using sectoral GDP data, as we did in the case of
Argentina, because Greece did not produce such data between 1991 and 1999. Specifically,
we use the index of total manufacturing production (2005=100, seasonally adjusted) from the
OECD. We remove a quadratic time trend from the natural logarithm of the series to obtain
the cyclical component, ytT . The real interesth rate in iterms of tradables, rt , is obtained from
                                                  Et PtT ∗
the following relationship: 1+rt = (1+it )Et Et+1     PT∗
                                                           , where it denotes the nominal interest
                                                     t+1
rate in terms of national currency, Et denotes the nominal exchange rate defined as units
of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency, PtT ∗ denotes the foreign-currency price


                                                49
of tradables, and Et denotes the expectations operator conditional on information available
in period t. The source for Et is Eurostat (code ert_h_eur_q). We measure PtT ∗ by the
German consumer price index published by the OECD. We measure it as follows. For the
period 1981:Q1 to 1992:Q3 it is the overnight interest rate published by the Bank of Greece.
For the period 2001:Q1 to 2011:Q3 we proxy it by the interest rate on 10-year Greek treasury
bonds published by Eurostat (code irt_lt_mcby_q). For the period 1992:Q4    h   to 2000:Q4,
                                                                                    i
                                                                                                           Et PtT ∗
we measure it as the average of the above two interest rates. We proxy Et                                        T∗
                                                                                                          Et+1 Pt+1
                                                                                                                      by the
                                  Et PtT ∗
one-period ahead forecast of            T∗
                                 Et+1 Pt+1
                                               implied by an estimated AR(2) process for this variable.
We then estimate the following bivariate AR(1) process
                                 "                 #        "                 #
                                      ln ytT                          T
                                                                  ln yt−1
                                                       =A                         + t ,                               (A.1)
                                     ln 1+r
                                        1+r
                                            t
                                                                 ln 1+r
                                                                     1+r
                                                                        t−1




where t is an i.i.d. random vector with mean zero and variance covariance matrix Ω.
Estimation via OLS yields:
          "                  #                 "                                           #
              0.90 −0.20                           0.000551 −0.000003
     A=                          ,    Ω=                                                       , and r = 0.011.        (A.2)
              −0.06 0.62                           −0.000003 0.000059

    We discretize this driving process using 21 equally spaced points for log(ytT ) in the in-
terval [−0.2002, 0.2002] and 11 equally spaced points for log(1 + rt )/(1 + r) in the interval
[−0.0386, 0.0386]. As in the baseline case we use the method of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2009) to obtain the transition probability matrix. The resulting state space consists of 197
distinct pairs for (log(ytT ), log(1 + rt)/(1 + r)).
   In the economies with lack of commitment to repay and either optimal exchange rate
policy or a peg, the source of uncertainty is traded output, ytT . (The real interest rate, rt,
is endogenously determined.) We use the same grid for ln(ytT ) as in the case with bailouts
and take the transition probability matrix of ln(ytT ) to be the marginal transition probability
matrix of ln(ytT ) implied by the transition probability matrix for (ln ytT , ln(1 + rt )/(1 + r)).




                                                            50
References
Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath, “Crisis and commit-
   ment: inflation credibility and the vulnerability to sovereign debt crises,” unpublished
   manuscript, Harvard University, October 1, 2013.
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, “Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account,”
   Journal of International Economics 69, June 2006, 64-83.
Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 98, June 2008, 690-712.
Ayres, João, Gaston Navarro, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Sovereign Default:
   The Role of Expectations,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Working Paper 723,
   May 2015.
Bianchi, Javier, “Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 101, December 2011, 3400-3426.
Bianchi, Javier, Emine Boz, and Enrique Mendoza, “Macroprudential Policy in a Fisherian
   Model of Financial Innovation,” IMF Economic Review 60, June 2012, 223-269.
Borensztein, Eduardo, and Ugo Panizza, “The Costs of Sovereign Default,”         IMF Staff
   Papers, 56, 2009/ 683-741.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Large Devaluations and the Real
   Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy 113, August 2005, 742-784.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, “Modeling Exchange Rate Passthrough
   after Large Devaluations,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2007, 346-368.
Calvo, Guillermo A., “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role Of Expectations,” American
   Economic Review 78, September 1988, 647-661.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk,”
   American Economic Review 102, October 2012, 2674-2699.
Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola, “The Mystery of the Printing Press, Monetary Policy
   and Self-fulfilling Debt Crises,” unpublished manuscript, Cambridge University, August
   2014.
Da Rocha, José-Marı́a, Eduardo-Luis Giménez, and Francisco-Xavier Lores, “Self-fulfilling
   crises with default and devaluation,” Economic Theory 53, August 2013, 499-535.
Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger, “Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate Balance
   Sheets,” Harvard University, unpublished manuscript, May 22, 2015.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt With Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
   Empirical Analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies 48, April 1981, 289-309.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Hugo Panizza, “The Pain of Original Sin,”


                                            51
   in Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann, eds., Other People’s Money: Debt De-
   nomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies, The University of
   Chicago Press, 2005, 13-47.
Federico, Pablo, Carlos A. Végh, and Guillermo Vuletin, “Reserve Requirement Policy over
   the Business Cycle,” NBER Working Paper 20612, October 2014.
Fernández, Andrés, Michael Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Martı́n Uribe,
   “Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset,” IMF Economic Review 64, August 2016,
   548-574.
Galı́, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
   Small Open Economy,” The Review of Economic Studies 72, July 2005, 707-734.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, and Leonardo Martı́nez, “Long-duration bonds and sovereign de-
   faults,” Journal of International Economics 79, September 2009, 117-125.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos, Leonardo Martinez, and Horacio Sapriza, “Quantitative properties
   of sovereign default models: solution methods matter,” Review of Economic Dynamics
   13, October 2010, 919-933.
Kim, Yun Jung and Jing Zhang, “Decentralized Borrowing and Centralized Default,” Jour-
   nal of International Economics 88, September 2012, 121-133.
Kollmann, Robert, “Monetary Policy Rules In The Open Economy: Effects on Welfare And
   Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 2002, 989-1015.
Korinek, Anton, “Regulating Capital Flows to Emerging Markets: An Externality View,”
   unpublished manuscript, May 2010.
Kriwoluzky, Alexander, Gernot J. Müller, and Martin Wolf, “Exit expectations in currency
   unions,” University of Bonn, March 2014.
Krugman, Paul R., “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crisis,” Journal of Money, Credit
   and Banking 11, 1979, 311-325.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Ugo Panizza, “The Elusive Cost of Sovereign Default,” Journal
   of Development Economics 94, January 2011, 95-105.
Mendoza, Enrique, “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic
  Review 100, December 2010, 1941-1966.
Mendoza, Enrique G., and Vivian Z. Yue, “A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign De-
   fault and Business Cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, May 2012, 889-946.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The external wealth of nations mark II:
   Revised and extended estimates of foreign assets and liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of
   International Economics 73, November 2007, 223-250.
Moussa, Racha, “Debt Denomination, Exchange-Rate Regimes, And Sovereign Default,”
  manuscript, University of North Carolina, 2013.


                                            52
Reinhart, Carmen M., “Default, Currency Crises, and Sovereign Credit Ratings,” The World
   Bank Economic Review 16, 2002, 151-170.
Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth Rogoff, and Miguel Savastano, “Debt Intolerance,” Brook-
   ings Papers On Economic Activity 2003(1), 2003, 1-74.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Christoph Trebesch, “The Pitfalls of External Dependence:
   Greece, 1829-2015,” NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper 21664, October
   2015.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Finite-State Approximation Of VAR Pro-
   cesses: A Simulation Approach,” Columbia University, 2009.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
   Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy 124, October
   2016, 1466-1514.
Sunder-Plassmann, Laura, “Inflation, default, and the denomination of sovereign debt,”
   University of Minnesota, December 2013.
Uribe, Martı́n and Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, Open Economy Macroeconomics, Princeton
   University Press: Princeton, New Jersey, 2017.
Yun, Tack, “Inflation and Exchange Rate Crises: Endogenous Default of Monetary Policy,”
   Seoul National University, July 2014.
Zarazaga, Carlos, “Default and Lost Opportunities: A Message from Argentina for Euro-
   Zone Countries,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 7, May 2012.




                                          53
