                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COUNTRY RISKS AND INCENTIVES SCHEMES




                         Joshua Aizenman




                      Working Paper No. 2031




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 1986




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                NBER Working Paper #2031
                                                                September 1986




                               Country Risk and Incentives Schemes




                                               ABSTRACT



        The   purpose of this   paper is to address the role of endogenous default penalties
 that are     contingent   upon the intensity of default on the part of the borrowing nation,
 and    to evaluate the effects         of contingency plans    that make the interest rate
 dependent upon variables that are correlated with the default penalty. This is done by
 considering an economy where a default will trigger a variable cost whose magnitude
 is   determined by the
                    Intensity of default. We design alternative incentive schemes by
 varying the responsiveness of the penalty to the intensity of default, without
 changing the total cost applied in case of a complete default. At the limit             our
 incentive scheme converges to an exogenous default cost regime. We derive         the
 supply of credit for the case where there is uncertainty regarding the total default
cost,   and we evaluate the dependency of the supply curve on the incentive scheme. A
 rise in the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity is Shown to
 induce a higher default rate and             to raise the country risk as reflected in the
 interest rate associated with a   given borrowing, causing a leftward shift in the
supply of credit. Using the expected welfare of a representative consumer it is shown
that     the introduction of partial defaults due to a variable         penalty has adverse
effects. Thus, our study concludes that variable default schemes that tie the penalty
to the default rate are disadvantageous. We turn then to an assessment of the welfare
effect of plans that make the Interest rate contingent upon realization of shocks. In
general. such a contingency plan is advantageous. For example, a plan that will index
the interest rate such as to correlate it perfectly with the default penalty eliminates
the adverse effects of country risk on           expected income. For such an economy a
contingency plan that will index the effective interest rate to the realization of       the
terms of trade will be beneficial in reducing the effective
                                                                   magnitude of country risk
and the Incidence of default.




                                                               Joshua Aizenman
                                                               1101 East 58th Street
                                                               Graduate School of Business
                                                               University of Chicago
                                                               Chicago, IL 60637
                                                               (312)962—7260
         L INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

         The adverse supply shocks of the 1970's triggered substantial borrowings by
 L.D.C.'s and Latin American countries. The accumulated borrowings have changed the
 country risk characteristics of the borrowing nations, which have found         servicin9
 their   debt a challenging task. In the 1980's various countries have engaged in debt

 rescheduling ,     whereas others have found that new borrowings involve a significant

 risk premium'. Consequently, attention has been focussed on the design of credit

policies and the role of institutions in the presence of country risk. Recently we

have observed initial      attempts to design payment plans that will make the effective
 interest rate paid by the borrowing nation contingent upon its terms of trade2. These
circumstances have raised Important questions regarding the design of incentive

schemes for the borrowing nations. Such schemes should enhance the borrowing

nations' incentives to service their debt, thereby reducing the risk premium charged

for a 9iven credit volume and allowing smoother operation of the international

credit market, The purpose of this paper is to address two policy Issues related to

the design of incentives. We address first the role of endogenous default penalties

that are contingent upon the intensity of default undertaken by the borrower nation,

and   then we evaluate the effects of      contingency plans that make the interest rate

dependent upon variables that are correlated with the default penalty.

      In general, the supply of credit is determined by the nature of the expected

default penalty. A default may trigger two types of penalties. The first is

exogenously fixed, and Its magnitude Is independent of the intensity of default. The

second    is   variable, and Its magnitude is determined by the intensity of default. This

paper starts by addressing a positive issue--assessing the dependency of the supply

of credit on the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity. This

sets the stage for the normative discussion. The first policy Issue addressed Is the

welfare implications of contingent default penalties. We turn then to an assessment

of the welfare effect of contingent interest rates In the presence of country risk.
                                                      -2-
        SectIon 2 starts by formulating the benchmark case, where there Is only an

 exogenous default penalty. We consider a two—periods example. Borrowing takes place
 in period zero; debt repayment Is scheduled for period one. In case of default, a fixed
 default penalty is inflicted upon the borrower. There is uncertainty In                      period   zero
 regarding the magnitude of the effective default penalty, and debt Issuance occurs
before the resolution of uncertainty. We             consider risk—neutral lenders, who charge an

 Interest rate that results in an expected yield                      equal    to an exogenously       given

risk—free Interest rate. We review the derivation of the supply of credit, which may

 include a backward-bending portion. As was shown in Aizenman (1986), the presence

of   country risk introduces a         distortion, calling for an optimal           borrowing tax. Among
other    effects, the optimal tax eliminates the possibility of an equilibrium on the

backward-bending portion of the supply of credit, We assume that such a tax Is

applied, allowing us to focus our analysis on equilibria on the upward-sloping portion

of the supply of credit.

        In section 3 we modify the assumptions of section 2 by allowing for a default

penalty that is contingent upon the default intensity. To permit a comparison across

regimes we design alternative Incentive schemes by varying the responsiveness of

the penalty to the intensity of default, without changing the total.cost applied in

case of a complete default. At the limit our incentive                          scheme converges to an
exogenous default cost regime. The characteristics and the random nature of the full

default penalty (i.e. the penalty associated with complete default) are the same as in

section 2. These assumptions             allow us to derive the dependency              of the supply of

credit on the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity. In

general    we will observe incidences of partial default whose magnitude rises with the
level of borrowing relative to the cost of a complete default. A rise in the
elasticity    of the penalty with respect to the default intensity is shown to induce a

higher default rate and and to raise the country risk as reflected in the interest rate

associated with a given borrowing, causing a teitward shift                     in the supply of credit.
       Section 4     conducts a welfare comparison               between the regimes elaborated in
sections    2 and 3. Using the expected welfare of a representative consumer it is
                                            -3-
shown that the introduction of partial defaults due to a variable penalty has adverse
effects. Thus, our   studg   concludes that variable default schemes that tie the DenaltU
11fle default rate are disadvantageous. We turn then to an assessment of the welfare
effect of plans that make the interest rate contingent upon realization of shocks. In
general. such a contingency plan is    advantageous.   For example, It   is   shown   that   a plan
that   will index the Interest rate such as to correlate it perfectly with the           default

penalty   will eliminate the adverse effects of country risk on the expected Income.
Section 5 closes the discussion with Interpretative remarks that tie the discussion
in section 4 to recent attempts to make the effective interest rate paid by the
borrowing nation contingent upon Its terms of trade.
                                             -4-

         2. COUNTRY RISK WITH EXOGENOUS DEFAULT PENALTIES

         The purpose of this section is to characterize country risk for the case of a
fixed default penalty. This case will define the benchmark for              the subsequent
discussion.    We start by   modeling the supply of credit in the presence of country risk.
Next, we discuss the demand for credit and optimal policies for the borrowing nation.

The discussion in this section sketches the analysis In Aizenman (1986), whereas

sect Ion   3 extends the framework for the case of endogenous default penalties3.

       2.1 The Default   Decision

       Consider   a two—periods small economy. Borrowing B takes place in period zero
at an interest rate r*, Debt repayment (1+r*) Is scheduled for period one. In case of
default, a stochastic penalty N is inflicted upon the borrower, given by



       (I)           N:N0/P

The term 'P represents a stochastic disturbance, whose density function is 9. Debt
issuance occurs in period zero, before the resolution of uncertainty re9arding 'P. The
information regarding 'P is summarized by a distribution of 'P. which is known to
both the lenders and the borrowing nation. This information is applied to        determine

the   supply of credit. We consider the case where the default decision is arrived at by

a centralized decision maker, like the central bank. While consumers are assumed to

be price takers In the credit market, they are fully aware of the default rule guiding

the central bank. Equation (1) can reflect various economic environments. For

example. let the default penalty be the result of adverse commercial policies (like

banning trade in goods and services). In such a case the term 'P may reflect a

stochastic   term measuring the effectiveness of    the trade embargo.   Alternatively, the
default penalty can be the result of exclusion from future borrowing. Let N be the
future   cost of being excluded from the credit market (in terms of period two) due to a

default    in period one, and 'P be the effective discount factor that translates the
                                              -5-
 future penalty (N) into N/'P in terms of period one, Thus, P can be viewed as a
 myopia measure, where a higher 'P corresponds to a smaller weight attached to the
 future by the decision maker in period one. In such a case the uncertainty regarding 'P
 may reflect political uncertainty regarding the horizon of the future decision maker.
      Default   will take place   if the debt exceeds the penalty, or if


      (2)             (i+r*)             /p


Alternatively, the default rule     can be summarized by:




                default if        'P >   Z
      (3)
                no default if     'P < Z

where       Z N0/B(1+rw) denotes the marginal value of 'P associated with default.




     2.2 The SuDDIy of Credit

     We assume a credit market that is dominated by risk-neutral lenders, fully
informed regarding the nature of the decision rule guiding the borrower, as well as
regarding the borrowers indebtedness position4 (i). A risk-neutral lender will extend
credit B at a rate r such that the expected yield on the risky loan equals the
risk-free return:

     (4)         (i+r) p = 1+rf



where rf is the exogenously given risk-free interest rate, and P Is        the probability of

no default. From (4) we infer that
                                                      -6-

        (5)        P:fg(P)dP


where 9 is       the   density   function   corresponding    to 'P. defIned for    'P > c > 0.   Thus, P Is

a function      of (i+r)E P P((1+r'))             ,   with   P' <   0.   Equations (4) and (5) defIne the

credit supply curve, which is determined by the distribution g. we                        summarize the
reduced form of the supply of credit by:




        (4')     r
Notice that a rise in the interest r rate has two opposing effects on the expected
income yield. The direct effect is reflected in the rise of the yield for a given
probability of no default (P). But it also Implies a drop in P. This second effect
works to depress the expected yield, implying that under certain conditions (derived
in Aizenman (1986)) the supply is backward-bending5.
     2.3 The Demand for Credit

     The demand for credit is derived from the underlying consumer preferences. We
assume that consumers' utility is given by


     (o)          U u(X8) + pu(x1)


where          is the consumption in period I, and p stands for the subjective rate of time

preference. A representative consumer maximizes his expected utility subject to his
budget constraints. He Is facing an Interest rate r. that may differ from the external
interest rate r0 due to the presence of borrowing taxes. The social role of these
taxes will be examined in the sequel. The representative consumer's budget
constraints     are given by
                                                -7-
       (7)           X0:X0+B

       (8a)                    + R1 - 6(1 + r)

       (Bb)             =      -


 where        stands for the endowment In period I, R1 for lump-sum transfers in period

 one,Xjn is the consumption in case of no default, Xld is the consumption in states

 of default and B is the borrowing by the consumer. Equation (7) defines the budget
 constraint for period zero, whereas for period one we observe two possible budget
 constraints, corresponding to the possibility of no default (8a) and default (8b). To
 simplify exposition,       we abstract from production, assuming an endowment model
 (adding production and investment would not       change the main results). Applying the

budget   constraints to (6)    we can characterize the consumer problem as choosing B so

as   to maximize expected utility V


                                   Z                             00

      (9) V u(0 + B) +          pfu(1+ R1- B(1 + r))g('P) d'P + pfu(1 - N0/'P)g('P) d'P
                                                                 z


Optimizing
        (9)       yields the following first—order conditIon




      (10)                         =1   +   r
                 v(x0)/v(x1 )

where v(x1) stands for the expected marginal utility of consuming
                                                                             X1:


                                            z
      V'(x0) = u(x0)    ;
                             vO1) pfu1 + R1        -
                                                       BU + r))g(p)   d'P.




Opt imal borrowing B Is chosen by the consumer so as to support a consumption path
                                            -8-
that yields equality between the ratio of the corresponding expected marginal
utilities of consumption and the interest rate. The assumption that the consumer is a
price taker is reflected in the fact that each consumer treats aggregate borrowing B
(and the corresponding Z and r) as exogenously given.




       2.4 Ootimal Policy for a Borrowing Nation
       To gain insight into the potential role of optimal policies let us evaluate the

solution of the optimal consumption path by a centralized decision maker.        Potential
deviations     between the planners   and the consumers solutions will justify policies
needed to support optimalitg. These policies will be shown to be in the form of

optimal   borrowing taxes. We   assume that the transfer R1 is used to rebate consumers


such   that the net present value of the planners revenue is zero (when the relevant
interest rate from the planners perspective is the external interest rate, re). Subject
to   this requirement the budget constraints facing the planner can be shown to be




       (T)




       (6a)                 —
                                    + r')


       (8b')
                            -

with the help of these budget constraints the planners problem is reduced to a choice
of B that will maximize



                                z                            00

       (9) V = u(0     +    + pfu(1 - (' + r*))g(p) d + pfu(1       -
                                                                        N0/'P)g('P) d'P
                                E                            Z
                                                   -9-


 A key difference between the consumer's and the planner's problems is that the
 centralized planner is not a price taker In tne credit market, and he is aware mat the
 choice of borrowing B will impact on the interest rate via the supply of credit (q).
 Consequently. (9') implies that the condition for optimal borrowing is



                                                         d 109(1   + rw)
      (10')       V(x0)/v'(x1) (1     +    rw) (i +
                                                          dlog


                                                   z
where8        V'(x0)   u'(X0)   ; v'(x1)       =
                                                   pf u'(1 — (i + r$*))g(P) d'P.



Optimal borrowing B is chosen by the planner so as to support a consumption path
that yields      equality between the ratio of the corresponding expected marginal

utilities of consumption and the 'social' Interest rate (             defined by d log(1 + r*)/ d
log B).   A comparison between the planner's and the consumer's solutions reveals that

the two differ in      that the planner applies the 'social' Interest          rate, whereas the

consumer applies the 'private' one.       in   the absence of borrowing taxes the presence of

country   risk   Implies that there is a distortion, and that from the social point of

view the equilibrium is associated with excessive" borrowing because the private

falls short of the social interest rate. This situation provides the rationale for

government intervention. The distortion arises from the fact that                      individual

borrowers     treat the rate of Interest as given even though from         the perspective of the

country   as a whole the rate of interest rises with the volume of borrowing. An
optimal borrowing tax is needed to yield equality between the social and the private
interest rates7. As is shown in Aizenman (1986). the optimal borrowing tax has an
Important consequence —- ruling out inefficient equilibria on the backward—bending
portion of the supply of credit. Henceforth, we will assume that the optimal
                                            - 10-

 borrowing tax Is applied and therefore we will neglect the backward-bending portion
 of the supply of credit. This argument is summarized in Figure One. Curve DD is the
 demand for credit, KLMN plots the supply curve, and KIM' corresponds to the 'social
 supply' curve (the marginal to KIM). Optimality calls for a                  borrowing tax,
defined bg the vertical distance between r0 and F(Figure One)8.




        3. COUNTRY RISK WITH ENDOGENOUS DEFAULT PENALTIES

        The purpose of this section is to study the role of endogenous penalties, and to

assess their desirability. In section 2 we considered the case of a fixed default

penalty, independent of the magnitude of the default. In that case, the borrower faced

an all-or-nothing choice. In this section we allow for a penalty tied to the default

rate. Let us denote by 'r the default rate (         8L       LI). With a default t   only a
portion      1-r of (Ir) is paid in period one. We assume that a default r imposes

costs   of




      (ii)                           for     1 2 'r 2 0   ;    where h 2 1.




Notice that h   is the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity. It

measures the convexity of the penalty with respect to the default rate --        a higher h

implies higher responsiveness of the penalty to the default intensity. By definition,

the effective       penalty does      not    exceed N; and It approaches N as v -'         I
(complete default). The specification in (11) is flexible enough to allow assessment

of the positive and normative aspects introduced by the presence of an endogenous

penalty scheme. Varying h will allow us an assessment of the role of endogenous

penalties, where h .      I will bring convergence        to the benchmark case of fixed

penalties of sect Ion   2. With the exception of the specification of the variable cost in
               -ba-



1+r*
1+r


           N




                      M




K




                          B



       FIGURE ONE
                                              — 11—


(11),   we preserve all the other assumptions of section 2, including the distributional
assumptions regarding N (see (I)).
        The supply of credit in the presence of endogenous penalties is derived In
several stages. First, we derive the cost minimizing default rate                      from the
borrower's perspective for a given B(1+r).           Next,   armed with the solution for we
solve for the interest r0 charged by the lenders for credit volume B. we then study
the dependency of the supply of credit on the penalty scheme, as summarized by h.


        3.1 The Default Rate
        The borrowing nation chooses in period one the default rate 't so as to maximize
the gain in net income attributed to default. The 'default Income', denoted by n(t). is:



        (12)       yr(r):    v'(l÷r')-tN0/'P                 for                 Li



It is composed of the benefit of partial default              (I+r*)J minus the cost associated

with the default urhN0/I1J, Let us denote by             the default rate that maximizes the

default income. Direct optimization reveals that for h               1




                                                              1/(h - 1)
        (13)                Mm   {   1    I(i + r")/{hNH                 )




To gain further insight we plot In Figure Two the marginal cost and the marginal

benef   it   associated with default t.   Optimal   default is obtained at the intersection    of
the two curves. The Appendix shows that for an internal solution (             e<     < 1) a rise
in   h (the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity) will

increase the default rate. In terms of Fi9ure Two the rise In h is associated with a

rightward shift of the relevant portion of the MC curve. Similarly a drop in the

default penalty will shift the MC curve rightward, thus raising the default rate.

Alternatively, a rise in the gross Indebtedness (i +               r'O will   shift the MB curve
                  —1 la—




MB =(1.r')
MC




                           MC'
                  MC

                                     MB




                                 1




             FIGURE TWO
                                                     - 12-

upwards, being associated with a rise In the default rate.

        Let    us denote by Z the marginal value of 'P associated with a complete default
(r      1). From (13) we Infer that



        (14)            Z
                                hN0/(B(1
                                           +




 It is noteworthy that In the case             or   h     I the   default decision   degenerates to a
simple rule



                            0         if                'P < N0/IB(j+r')]
        (15)
                            I         If                'P > N0/(B(1+r*)J




Equation (15) corresponds to the           case      of a fixed default penalty.       ApplyIng (13)
allows us to conclude that as we approach the case of exogenous penalty (h -. 1) the
optimal default rate for an internal solution converges to zero, Thus, as h -, I we
approach the benchmark case of section              2, where      Is either zero or one. We turn now
to    the the derivation of the supply curve, which augments the information regarding

the default rate that has been derived in this section.




3.2   The SUDDIy of Credit with Endogenous Penalties
        Risk neutral lenders will require interest rate             r   such that:


        (16)        (1+r)( 1— E(fIl+r"         ;   )) = 1 rf

where E(I1+r" ;       ) stands     for the expected default intensity.         Debt issuance occurs

before the resolution of the uncertainty regarding 'P. Thus, the lenders will set the

interest rate according to (16). by            applying   the expected values of       obtained from
                                             - 13-

 (13),   yieldIng:




                            z               1/(h-1)
         (17)    E(i)       f ((i + r*)/{hNfl     g('P) d'P + f g('P) d'P
                            £                                        Z



and the implied supply of credit is given by




                        Z                    1/(n-1)
         (18) (i+rM)( f{i - [(i + r')/{hN)J             )g('P) d'P       J
                                                                             1+r1




The Appendix evaluates the dependency of the supply schedule on the elasticity of

the   penalty with respect to the default intensity (h). It Is shown that a rise In h
shifts the supply curve leftwards, implying that a given volume of credit will
require a higher interest rate. This result stems from the fact that for a given
Interest rate a higher convexity of the      penalty scneme (        d h > 8) implies a higher
default rate, reducing thereby the expected yield on a given volume of indebtedness,
and   thus necessitating a rise in the interest rate.
       To gain further insight, we now turn to a comparison between the welfare
obtained subject to endogenotis versus fixed penalties. This comparison will enable
us to conclude with normative statements regarding the desirability of each scheme.
                                                 -14-

        4.     THE WELFARE EFFECTS OF CONTINGENT PENALTIES AND INTEREST RATES

        Our discussion in section 3 implies that allowance for endogenous default
 penalties is associated with a rise in the country risk, as is reflected by the rise in
 the interest rate associated with a given Indebtedness. It is noteworthy that this
 observation alone does not suffice to determine the welfare effects of endogenous
 default penalties. That Is because the adverse effects of the induced rise in the
 interest      rate will be partly offset by the rise In the Incidence       of   partial defaults

that are associated with 'default income'.




      4.1 Endogenous        Default   Penalties and   Welfare

      we evaluate the welfare consequences of endogenous penalties by analyzing

their expected utility. Formally, the expected utility associated with a given level of

borrowing B Is given by




                                      z                                 00

     (19)       V U(e      + ) +p fu(1 - (i + r) + it)g('P) dl' + pju(X1 - N0/'P)g(P) dl'



where     It   and Z are obtained from (12)-(14). ApplyIng (19) we get that9




                 8v         z                  a(1+r)
     (20) — - Ju'(x1)( (1 - E)                             )g('P) dl'   <0
                 an                               an


Consequently, a greater responsiveness of the penalty scheme to the                 default rate

results    In a drop in expected welfare. This is because the added degree of freedom
introduced by         a variable default cost has the consequence of raising the        expected
                                                   - 15-

default         for a given credit volume, necessitating a higher interest rate. The rise in

the interest rate dominates any indirect gains associated with            the   greater flexibility

of the default structure.




        4.2   The Role of Contingencies

        The emerging conclusion is that welfare is reduced by making the default
penalty contingent upon the Intensity of default             This, however, does not Imply that
contingent prices are not beneficial. In fact, welfare can be enhanced If the interest
rate Is made contingent upon the default penalty ('P). For example, consider the case
of exogenous default penalties (h                  1). Suppose that the value of 'P is public
information in period one, and that we normalize N0 such that the expected value of

1/'V is one. Let us define a contingent interest rate r('P) by


       (21)       1+   r = (1   +




Recalling     that the default penalty is N0/P. it is evident that I +           r*   IS   defined to
be perfectly correlated with the default penalty. Applying the decision rule (3) it is

evident that for B <                +                                                            the
                           N0/(I         rf)   the contingent interest rate (21) eliminates


consequences of country risk.           To verify this point, note that for B <
                                                                                   N0/(1 + r) we
observe   that for all 'P. (1 + rw)ë< N0/'4'. With such a contingency pricing no default
will   occur.   The proposed scheme Is also feasible because the expected yield is equal

to the risk-free interest rate (E[(1+r)/'PJ = 1+rf ). The expected welfare in such a

system Is given by




       (22) V u(0 + ) + p Ju(1 -(i + r*))g(P) d'P
                                        - 16-


To gain further Insight into the welfare effect of this scheme consider the case

where consumers are risk neutral. I.e. where the periodic utility u(X) Is linear

(u(X)   x). For such an economy a welfare ranking is a comparison of expected Income.
A comparison of (22) and (9') reveals that the gain In expected Income associated
with the contingent    interest-rate scheme    Is equal to the       expected penalty
in the non—contingent, exogenous penalty                system              (given by

J(N0/"P)g('P)d ). The effect of making the interest rate perfectly correlated with the
z
penalty is to eliminate the adverse effects of country risk on the expected Income.
With risk-averse agents the optimal contingency pricing is more complicated, because
It involves also optimal reallocation of the Income risk among the various parties In
an attempt to reduce the volatility of income across states. But even in this case we
will observe welfare gains generated by contingent interest rates.
                                               - 17•-

         5. CQNCLUDING REMARKS

         Rather   than   repeating the summary from the introduction, we conclude with
 Interpretative remarks. Our discussion has focussed on the analysis of the potential

welfare     effects of contingency plans In        the presence of country    risk. The analysis
allows us to conclude that contingency plans that make the default costs dependent
upon the intensity of default undertaken by the borrower nation are not
cost-minimizing       schemes. At the same time, contingency plans that make the Interest

rate dependent upon observable variables that are correlated with the default
                                                                                          penalty

are cost-minimizing schemes. For example, a contingency plan that will make the

interest rate perfectly correlated with the default penalty will fully eliminate the

adverse     income effects of     country risk and will eliminate incidences      of   default for

creditvolumes below the ceiling. it will also have the beneficial by-product of
Increasing the credit ceiling. A necessary condition for the feasibility of such a
system is    that the realization of      the default penalty should be public information.
One can speculate        that an example of this   type of arrangement   is   the recent Mexican
rescheduling      plan, where   several aspects of debt servicing were made contingent upon
the   future price of oil. This arrangement can enhance welfare if the default cost is

low   in bad states of nature, when the price of exportables is low10. For such an
economy a contingency plan that will index the               effective Interest rate to the
realization of the price of exportables will be beneficial In         reducing the effective

magnitude   of country risk and the incidence of default.
                                              - 18-

                                             APPENDIX




       The purpose of this Appendix is to prove that for an internal solution for             a

rise in h (the elasticity of the penalty with respect to the default intensity) will

 increase the optimal default rate and will shift the supply of credit leftward.

       Direct derivation of (13) reveals that for 0 <         <I



       (A!)             -
                            (h log [(i +   r)/{hN)J   + h —   11
                ah                                                 (h-I)2


thus, the sign of (Al) is determined by sign{-(h    i(i + r")/(hN)J + h - 11). Note
                                                        log

that   because 0            < 1 equation (13) implies that log t(i + r*)/(hN)j < 0
Consequently,   for h       I sign{-(h log fi + r*)/{hN)J + Fi       -   ID is positive. We can
prove that (A!) is positive if we can demonstrate that the expression determining
the sign of (Al) rises with h (because h        1). This proof follows from the fact that



       (A2)   8 - [h log E(i + r)/(hN)J + h - lJ/8h = - log (i + rw)/(hN)J > •



       We turn now to the derivation of the effect on the supply curve of a rise in h.

We do so by evaluating the horizontal displacement of the supply schedule induced by

a rise in h. From (18) we get that for a given (I+rw)

                     8RI+r*)(1_ E(J1+rW ; ))                         z a ;:
       (A3) LB                                         ih (I+r*) f             g('P) d'P
                            88                                           8h
                                           - 19-


The term multipiging iB corresponds to the change in expected Uleld induced b a

rise In indebtedness. Direct Inspection of (18) reveals that this change Is negative,

due to the Induced     rise   In the expected default rate. The term multiplyln9 Eh is

positive,     because we showed that 8 r/8 h > 0. Combining that Information implies
that   holdrng (1 + rw) given


       (A4)        8B/3h <0.

Therefore, we conclude that a rise in h shifts the supplg schedule leftward.
                                                    - 20-


                                                 FOOTNOTES

        1. For a useful study on the debt problem see the World Bank Report (1986). For
 studies on country risk, see Harberger (1976, 1980); Eaton and Gersovitz (1981);
 Sachs (1984); Kletzer (1984); Edwards (1984. 1985); Dornbusch(1985);                Eaton   (1985);
 Krugman(1985); Aizenman (1986).
        2. A recent example is the July 22 .1986 agreement between Mexico and the
 IMF, where several aspects of debt servicing were made contingent upon the future
price   of oil.


        3. For related studies regarding the determination of the supply of credit with

exogenous      default penalties see Sachs (1984) and           Krugman(1985).

        4.   EquIlibrium    In a market with       partial   Information regarding the volume of

 indebtedness     is the   topic   of   Kletzer (1984).

        5.   It can be shown that d log B/d log (1+r*)               =   (I-1')/1l; where 11 is the
elasticity of P wIth respect to gross indebtedness Ei =—d log P/ d log ë'(l+r*)J.
Consequentity, the supply curve is backward bending if 'r > 1 (for more details see
Aizenman (1986)).

       8.    In deriving this result we use the fact         that V = 0.
       7. The percentage optimal borrowing tax can be shown to equal
(i +   r*)/(rø    d log   /u log (1r)).
       8.    It Is noteworthy       that as the borrowing nation approaches the inelastic

segment      of the supply of credit (where d B! d (1+r*) -' 0). optimality calls for the
imposition of a dual exchange rate system.                    This system is     equivalent to the
imposition of a quota on borrowing (equal to the borrowing ceiling) and a tax on
borrowing equal to the spread between the domestic interest rate and the supply price
of the credit ceiling. These are the optimal policies if the equilibrium occurs at the
credit ceiling level (for further details see Aizenman (1986)).

       9. In deriving (20) we are using the fact          that V = 0     and around the equilibrium

a,t/a(1+rN)=B and 87t/8-r:e.
                                          - 21-


     10. Several factors can account for low default costs in bad states of nature.

First, the cost of a trade embargo can be lower because of the drop      In   the value of

exports.   Second, bad states may be associated with higher myopia In   the policy maker.

whose survival may be    at risk.
                                         - 22-

                                       REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua,' Country Risk, Incomplete information Taxes on International

      Borrowing" (August, 1986); a previous draft appeared as "Country Risk,
      Asymmetric Information and Domestic Policies," NBER Working Paper Series No.
      1880   .1986.

Dornbusch,   Rudiger."PoI icy and Performance Links between LDC Debtors and

      industrial Nations," Brookings Papers       on    Economic    Activity, Volume
     2, 1985.
Eaton, Jonathan.Lending with Costly Enforcement of Repayment and
     Potential Fraud: NBER Working Paper Series No. 1697 .1985.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz. "Debt with Potential Repudiation:
     Theoretical and Empirical Analysis." Review of Economic Studies 48,1981.
Edwards, Sebastian.'LDC's Foreign Borrowing and Default Risk: An Empirical
     lnvestigation,"American Economic Review 74, 1984.
                "Country Risk. Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate
     In an Open Developing Economy." NBER Working Paper Series No.
     165 1, 1985.

Harberger, Arnold C.On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign

     Borrowing by Developing Countries," manuscrIpt, 1976.
              ."Vignettes on the World Capital Market," American Economic
     Review 70, 198$.
Kletzer, Kenneth M. "Asymmetries of Information and LDC borrowing with Sovereign
     Risk," Economic Journal 94, 1984.
Krugman, Paul. "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World," In Smith, W.G.
     and Cuddington, J. T., eds., "International Debt and the Developin9 Countries", A
     World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1985.
Jeffery D. Sachs."Theoretlcal Issues in International Borrowing." Princeton
     Studies in International Finance 54, 1984.
World Development Report 1986, published for the World Bank by Oxford

     University Press, 1986.
