                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

               PATENT TROLLS: EVIDENCE FROM TARGETED FIRMS
                                      Lauren Cohen
                                       Umit Gurun
                                   Scott Duke Kominers

                                    Working Paper 20322
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w20322

                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2014

We greatly appreciate the helpful comments of David Abrams, Ufuk Akcigit, David Autor, Pierre
Azoulay, James Bessen, Nick Bloom, Daniel Bradley, Eric Budish, Pierre-André Chiappori,
Colleen Chien, Wesley Cohen, Chris Cotropia, Sidney Dickstein, Maryann Feldman, Noah
Feldman, Robin Feldman, Ken Felter, Amy Finkelstein, Drew Fudenberg, Alberto Galasso,
Bernhard Ganglmair, Joshua Gans, Mariassunta Giannetti, Wally Gilbert, Daniel Gottlieb, John
Golden, Stuart Graham, Mark Greenstein, Oliver Hart, Cam Harvey, Paul Po-Hsuan Hsu, John
Eric Humphries, Bob Hunt, Sonia Jaffe, Louis Kaplow, Jay Kesan, Julian Kolev, Ellen Dickstein
Kominers, Paul Kominers, William Kominers, Mark Lemley, Josh Lerner, Stan Liebowitz, Chris
Malloy, Alan Marco, Michael Meurer, Shawn Miller, Adair Morse, Petra Moser, Kevin Murphy,
Marina Niessner, Jillian Popadak, Jim Poterba, Arti Rai, David Robinson, Assaf Romm, Fiona
Scott Morton, David Schwartz, Victoria Schwartz, Amit Seru, Andrei Shleifer, Ted Sichelman,
Kathy Spier, Scott Stern, Lars Stole, Balazs Szentes, Alex Teytelboym, Bob Topel, Catherine
Tucker, Saurabh Vishnubhakat, Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, Martin Watzinger, Heidi Williams,
and seminar participants at the 2015 American Finance Association Meeting, the 2014 Brandeis
Entrepreneurship Conference, the 2014 Berkeley CELS Conference, the 2015 Harvard/MIT/
INET/CIGI Workshop on Innovation, the 2015 Lund University Conference on Entrepreneurship
and Finance, the 2014 NBER Summer Institute Workshop on Innovation, the 2015 NBER Law
and Economics Meeting, the 2014 Red Rock Finance Conference, the 2015 Works in Progress
Intellectual Property Colloquium (WIPIP), Bentley, Brandeis, Chicago Booth, DePaul, Duke,
Harvard, HKU, HKUST, MIT, Nanyang Technological University, Ozyegin University, the
Society of Fellows, Texas Christian University, the University of Texas at Dallas, and the
USPTO. We are grateful to Daniel McCurdy, Christopher Reohr, and Shashank Tiwari of RPX
Corporation for graciously providing data used in this study. We also thank Mike Lloyd and
Doris Spielthenner of Ambercite for generously providing data. The authors gratefully
acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation (grants CCF-1216095,
SciSIP-1535813, and SES-f0847395; 1459912g). Kominers also gratefully acknowledges the
hospitality of Microsoft Research New England and the support of the Harvard Milton Fund and
the Wu Fund for Big Data Analysis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, and Scott Duke Kominers. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Patent Trolls: Evidence from Targeted Firms
Lauren Cohen, Umit Gurun, and Scott Duke Kominers
NBER Working Paper No. 20322
August 2014, Revised April 2016
JEL No. D2,K1,O31

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a theoretical model of, and provide the first large-sample evidence on, the behavior
and impact of non-practicing entities (NPEs) in the intellectual property space. Our model shows
that NPE litigation can reduce infringement and support small inventors. However, the model
also shows that as NPEs become effective at bringing frivolous lawsuits, the resulting defense
costs inefficiently crowd out some firms that, absent NPEs, would produce welfare-enhancing
innovations without engaging in infringement. Our empirical analysis shows that on average,
NPEs appear to behave as opportunistic patent trolls. NPEs sue cash-rich firms—a one standard
deviation increase in cash holdings roughly doubles a firm's chance of being targeted by NPE
litigation. We find moreover that NPEs target cash unrelated to the alleged infringement at
essentially the same frequency as they target cash related to the alleged infringement. By contrast,
cash is neither a key driver of intellectual property lawsuits by practicing entities (e.g., IBM and
Intel), nor of any other type of litigation against firms. We find further suggestive evidence of
NPE opportunism, such as forum shopping and targeting of firms that may have reduced ability
to defend themselves against litigation. We find that NPE litigation has a real negative impact on
innovation at targeted firms: firms substantially reduce their innovative activity after settling with
NPEs (or losing to them in court). Moreover, we neither find any markers of significant NPE
pass-through to end innovators, nor of a positive impact of NPEs on innovation in the industries
in which they are most prevalent.

Lauren Cohen                                      Scott Duke Kominers
Harvard Business School                           Society of Fellows
Baker Library 273                                 Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                    Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                  Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                          kominers@fas.harvard.edu
lcohen@hbs.edu

Umit Gurun
University of Texas at Dallas
School of Management
800 W Campbell Rd. SM41
75080 Richardson, TX
umit.gurun@utdallas.edu
       Clearly defined property rights are essential for well-functioning markets. In the case of
intellectual property (IP), however, property rights are complex to define, because unlike
ownership of physical assets, the space of ideas is difficult to delineate. The United States and
many other countries protect inventors’ IP through patents, property rights allowing ideas’
owners sole rights of commercialization—equivalently, the right to block commercialization of
arguably similar inventions—for a period of time. In the United States, the legal system is
the arbiter of patent infringement; hence, legal action (or the threat of legal action) is the
main lever by which patent holders challenge alleged intellectual property infringers.
       A new organizational form, the non-practicing entity (hereafter, NPE ), has recently
emerged as a major driver of patent litigation. NPEs amass patents not for the sake of
producing commercial products, but in order to claim license fees and/or litigate infringement
on their patent portfolios. The rise of NPEs has sparked a debate regarding NPEs’ value
and impact on innovation: Proponents of NPEs argue that NPEs serve a key financial
intermediary role, policing infringement by well-funded firms that could otherwise infringe
upon small inventors’ IP at will. Opponents cast NPEs as organizations that simply raise
the costs of innovation by exploiting the fact that an imperfect legal system will rule in their
favor sufficiently often—even if no infringement has actually occurred—that the credible
threat of the legal process can yield rents from producing, innovative firms.1 In part reflecting
the debate on NPEs, there have been (as of today) a dozen bills introduced in Congress
proposing to regulate the licensing and assertion of patents.2
       In this paper, we provide the first large-sample evidence on precisely which corporations
   1
     Bessen and Meurer (2014) estimate that from 2007 to 2010, litigation (and settlement) losses due to
NPEs averaged over $83 billion per year in 2010 dollars (just summing over the losses to publicly traded
firms). In magnitude, this corresponds to over 25% of annual United States industrial R&D investment.
   2
     In the last four years, Congress has considered the Innovation Act (H.R. 9 and H.R. 3309), the Targeting
Rogue and Opaque Letters (TROL) Act (H.R. 2045), the Patent Transparency and Improvements Act (S.
1720), the Patent Quality Improvement Act (S. 866), the Patent Abuse Reduction Act (S. 1013), the Patent
Litigation Integrity Act (S. 1612), the Innovation Protection Act (H.R. 3309), the Patent Litigation and
Innovation Act (H.R. 2639), the Saving High-tech Innovators from Egregious Legal Disputes (SHIELD) Act
(H.R. 845), the Stopping the Offensive Use of Patents (STOP) Act (H.R. 2766), and the End Anonymous
Patents Act (H.R. 2024). Meanwhile, the United States Patent and Trademark Office (2015) has undertaken
an initiative on “Enhancing Patent Quality.”



                                                     1
NPEs target in litigation, when NPE litigation occurs, and how NPE litigation impacts
targeted firms’ innovative activity.
   We begin with a parsimonious model of an innovative economy in which a large firm must
decide whether to innovate, and—conditional on innovating—must also decide whether to
reduce the costs of innovation by infringing upon a small inventor’s IP. NPEs help small
inventors litigate in response to infringement by the large firm, but can also sometimes win
lawsuits when no infringement has occurred.
   Our theoretical model supports both sides of the NPE debate: NPE litigation can both
reduce infringement and promote a transfer to inventors when infringement occurs, although
the value of NPEs to inventors—both in terms of license fees and receipts through litigation—
is only as large as the fraction of the damage award that NPEs pass through. As NPEs become
effective at bringing frivolous lawsuits, however, the resulting defense costs inefficiently crowd
out some firms that, absent NPEs, would prefer to engage in innovation without infringing.
Somewhat paradoxically, we also find that the possibility of frivolous lawsuits can lead some
innovating firms to infringe more because avoiding infringement may not deter suit.
   The theory illustrates that the key question for assessing NPEs’ welfare impact concerns
lawsuit targeting behavior: Do NPEs on average police against true infringement, or do they
primarily behave opportunistically, bringing lawsuits irrespective of whether infringement has
occurred? It is impossible for us to measure targeted firms’ infringement activity directly,
especially given that most NPE lawsuits are settled before even early stages of evidence
discovery occur. However, we can—and do—look for empirical evidence of opportunistic
behavior.
   We work with two independent sources of data on NPE litigation activity: proprietary
data from RPX Corporation and hand-coded, finely classified data assembled by Cotropia,
Kesan, and Schwartz (2014). Together, these data sources cover the complete universe of
NPE litigation from 2005 to 2015. We combine our data on NPEs with external data on
publicly traded firms.


                                                2
       Using our linked data, we show that NPEs appear to behave opportunistically: they target
firms that are flush with cash (controlling for all other characteristics) and firms that have
had recent, positive cash shocks. NPEs even target firms that earn their profits from business
segments having nothing to do with the allegedly infringing segments. Our findings suggest,
for example, that an NPE would likely sue a firm regarding alleged information technology
infringement even if the firm is earning all its revenue from a lumber division entirely unrelated
to the information technology division—and even if the information technology division is
unprofitable. Indeed, a one standard-deviation increase in cash level increases the probability
of being sued by an NPE by 7.40% (t = 4.25)—a twofold increase, and profitability in
unrelated business segments is almost as predictive of NPE litigation as is profitability in the
segment related to the alleged infringement.
       Meanwhile, we find some evidence that NPEs may not be policing infringement. The
cash-targeting we observe is mostly the behavior of large “patent aggregator” firms; small
inventors’ lawsuits show a different targeting pattern, in which defendants’ cash holdings are
not a significant factor. There is also evidence that NPEs bring lower-quality lawsuits, and
some evidence that NPEs are actively forum shopping.
       In theory, our finding that cash/profitability is a first-order determinant of NPE litigation
could simply be picking up a general characteristic of IP litigation, or of litigation more
generally. However, our results show otherwise: Practicing entities (PEs), such as IBM and
Intel, who also sue each other for patent infringement, do not behave in the same way as
NPEs. We hand-collected the universe of patent infringement cases brought by PEs against
PEs in our sample period, and find that, if anything, PEs are slightly less likely to sue firms
with high cash balances.3 Similarly, we found that cash is not a significant determinant of
other (non-IP) forms of litigation—tort, contract, securities, environmental, or labor. This
comparison suggests that our results on NPE litigation behavior do not just reflect general
   3
    All of the other key determinants of NPE targeting have (statistically and economically) no impact on
PE litigation behavior, with the exception of ongoing, non-IP-related cases, which has a positive impact on
targeting for NPEs, but a negative impact for PEs.



                                                    3
characteristics of litigation. Rather, our findings are consistent with agent-specific motivations
for NPEs in targeting firms flush with cash.
      Using several different empirical measures, we also find that NPEs target firms against
which they have a higher ex ante likelihood of winning. First, we show that NPEs are
significantly more likely to target firms that are busy dealing with other, non-IP-related
litigation. Being tied up with outside litigation increases the probability of being sued by
an NPE by roughly 19% (t = 2.38). Moreover, we show that, controlling for all other
characteristics, firms with smaller legal teams have a significantly higher probability of being
targeted by NPEs.
      Lastly, we examine the real impacts of NPE litigation on targeted firms’ innovative activity.
Using a differences-in-differences approach, we find that firms that lose to NPEs (either in
court or through settlement) reduce their research and development investment by roughly
20% going forward, relative to ex ante identical firms.4 Thus, our evidence suggests that NPE
litigation causes a real decrease in innovation at targeted firms. Of course, when NPEs win
lawsuits, some of the losses to the targeted PE—part of the settlement or damage award, but
not the legal costs—should eventually flow back to end inventors. The best available estimates
suggest, however, that only a small fraction of the damages won by NPEs are actually paid
back to innovators (Bessen, Ford, and Meurer (2011); Bessen and Meurer (2014)). As part of
our theoretical model illustrates, when only small transfers reach end inventors, NPEs’ value
in encouraging invention directly is significantly dampened.
      Taken as a whole, our evidence appears most consistent with the view that NPEs on
average behave as patent trolls. NPEs chase cash, and have a real negative impact on targeted
firms’ innovative activity. Alternative interpretations simply do not seem to explain the
entire body of evidence. For instance, our results on cash-targeting might be consistent
with the possibility that targeted firms are knowingly infringing and are stockpiling cash in
anticipation of litigation; however, this alternate explanation is at odds with our finding that
  4
    To control for selection of firms targeted by NPEs, we compare firms that are sued by NPEs and “win”
to those are sued by NPEs and “lose.”


                                                   4
NPEs are especially likely to target firms that have had cash shocks, and/or are embroiled in
non-IP-related lawsuits. Meanwhile, the idea that NPEs solely target firms that profitability
infringe on NPEs’ intellectual property is inconsistent with our finding that profitability in
related and unrelated operating segments are almost equally predictive of suit.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 provides background and a
literature review. Section 2 develops our model of the economics of innovation and intellectual
property litigation. Section 3 describes our data sources. Section 4 presents our empirical
results on NPE targeting. Section 5 shows evidence on the real impacts of NPE litigation
behavior on innovation. Section 6 provides a discussion, and Section 7 concludes.



1         Background

A United States inventor’s patenting process begins with an application to the United States
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), which assigns the application to a patent examiner.
The examiner’s job is to compare the filed patent’s claims to prior art, in order to determine
whether the claimed invention is novel and nonobvious.5 If the examiner decides to grant the
claims in an application, then the USPTO issues a patent to the applicant.6 The patentability
of a patent’s claims can be challenged in administrative proceedings before USPTO. Patent
validity can be challenged in one of the 94 federal district courts by presenting prior art that
may have been overlooked by USPTO examiners.
        Since a patent confers the right to exclude others from “practicing” an invention, patent
owners can sue anyone who uses, makes, sells, offers to sell, or imports their inventions
without legal permission. If a patent infringement lawsuit is not dismissed in its initial stages,
it proceeds to the discovery phase, in which both the accused infringer (defendant) and
the patent owner (plaintiff) supply documents intended to demonstrate how the allegedly
    5
     Prior art refers to other patents, publications, and publicly disclosed but unpatented inventions that
predate the patent application’s filing date.
   6
     In 2013, the average time between application and initial examiner report was 18.2 months and, on
average, it took 29.1 months for the USPTO to issue a patent. The USPTO granted 302,948 patents in 2013.
For other USPTO-related statistics, see http://www.uspto.gov/about/stats/.

                                                    5
infringing product is made. If a party does not make or sell products or provide services
based on the patented invention, then it is likely to have far fewer documents to disclose.
Consequently, as NPEs do not produce products, the discovery phase can be far less costly
for NPE plaintiffs than for defendants.
   If an infringement suit is not settled during the discovery phase, then a court interprets
the parties’ claims, making determinations both as to whether the patent is valid and whether
infringement occurred. A judge or jury who rules in favor of the patent owner can award
monetary damages and/or issue an injunction to prohibit further infringement.
   The amount of patent-related litigation has increased threefold since 2005 (see Figure 1).
According to a recent United States Government Accountability Office (2013) report, three
factors contributed to the rise in IP litigation: (1) the number of patents (especially software-
related patents) with unclear scope has increased; (2) courts have been granting large
monetary awards in infringement lawsuits, even for ideas that make only small contributions
to a product; and (3) markets place a larger valuation on patents than they did before.
   Large-scale NPE patent litigation is a recent development; consequently, the empirical
literature on NPEs is limited, but growing rapidly. Our paper contributes to this literature
by providing the first large-sample evidence about which public corporations NPEs choose
litigate, when NPEs target those companies, and how NPE litigation impacts innovative
activity at targeted firms.
   Many of the existing empirical studies on NPEs have found results consistent with those
we present: In a series of surveys, Chien (2013a) found evidence of cash-targeting by NPEs,
consistent with the empirical results we show in Section 4.1. Leychkis (2007) has found
evidence that NPEs frequently forum shop (see Section 4.6). Meanwhile, economists and legal
scholars have estimated both (1) high direct costs of NPE litigation, suggesting significant
harm to targeted firms (Chien (2014); Feldman (2014); Bessen and Meurer (2014)), and (2)
low rates of pass-through of NPE winnings to end inventors suggesting little direct value of
NPEs to small inventors (Bessen, Ford, and Meurer (2011)). Recent work sought to measure


                                               6
the indirect costs of NPE litigation, as well, finding that NPE litigation substantially reduces
innovation at targeted firms (Chien (2013a); Tucker (2014); Smeets (2015)) and makes it
harder for targets to acquire venture capital funding (Kiebzak, Rafert, and Tucker (2016)).
Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) developed a detailed, hand-coded dataset of 2010 and
2012 NPE litigation activities; we use this data to confirm our results out-of-sample (see
Section 4.9.1). Scott Morton and Shapiro (2014) provided both theoretical and empirical
evidence that—given the costs and deadweight losses of NPE litigation—the positive spillovers
from NPEs would have to be “very substantial” in order to justify NPE litigation from a
social welfare perspective.7,8
       While there is some evidence that patent aggregation and litigation may have been socially
valuable prior to 2000 (Galasso, Schankerman, and Serrano (2013); see also Galasso and
Schankerman (2010)), survey evidence suggests that in recent years, patent assertion activity
may have done little to promote innovation (Feldman and Lemley (2015)).9 A concurrent
literature in economics suggests that the impact of patent rights on innovation is highly
heterogeneous (Galasso, Schankerman, et al. (2015)); in particular, patents may discourage
valuable follow-on innovation (Williams (2013); see also Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001);
Lerner (2009); Williams (2015)).10 Consequently, the law and policy literatures have begun
to sort out potential deficiencies in the patent system more broadly (see, e.g., Lemley and
Melamed (2013); Budish, Roin, and Williams (2015); United States Patent and Trademark
   7
      Shrestha (2010) has argued that NPE litigation behavior is closely analogous to that of PEs, but his
empirics are hard to square with our data. The Shrestha (2010) study is based on a subsample of only
fifty-one NPEs, hand-selected on the basis that their names appear frequently in newspapers and other media.
Shrestha (2010) reports fewer than 100 NPE lawsuits per year between 2000 and 2008 and no rise in the total
number of IP lawsuits over the 2000-2008 period—inconsistent with both our findings and those of Cotropia,
Kesan, and Schwartz (2014).
    8
      In parallel, a growing theory literature has begun to illustrate how uncertainty regarding patent quality
and/or technology overlap may lead to patent trolling behavior (Lemley and Shapiro (2005); Bessen and
Meurer (2006); Choi and Gerlach (2014)).
    9
      Feldman and Lemley (2015) find that “very few patent licenses from assertion actually lead to new
innovation; most are simply about paying for the freedom to keep doing what the licensee was already doing,”
both in the case of NPE licensing/litigation and in the case of PE licensing/litigation.
   10
      Using data obtained from an NPE (but not studying NPEs, per se), Abrams, Akcigit, and Popadak
(2013) found an inverted-U relationship between patent citations and patent value (as measured in terms of
associated revenue).



                                                      7
Office (2015)), while proposing potential reforms (Lemley and Shapiro (2006); Schwartz and
Kesan (2014); see especially the work of Helmers, Love, and McDonagh (2013), which hints
at how policy lessons from the United Kingdom could be used to reduce patent trolling in
the United States).
       Our work is also related to the literature that examines the choice between settlement and
the pursuit of a court decision. Spier (2005) provides an excellent review of the economics of
litigation.11 While we focus solely on intellectual property, our paper is also related to the
well-developed literature on the effect of litigation risk on firm activities.12



2        Model

We now introduce a model of innovation and litigation: A firm decides whether to invest in
innovation, which has net benefit v > 0. If the firm does not innovate, then it produces a
“safe” product which returns 0. If the firm does innovate, then it must choose whether to
infringe on the intellectual property of a small inventor; infringement reduces the costs of
innovation by π > 0 (so that innovation with infringement yields net benefit v + π).
       If innovation occurs, then the inventor can bring a suit against the firm at cost ci ; in
that case, the firm pays court costs cf .13 The inventor can bring a suit (i) on his own or
(ii) indirectly through an NPE. For now, we assume that the is no possibility of licensing
the inventor’s intellectual property; we later add licensing to the model, and investigate the
impacts of NPEs on license rates.
  11
     Previous surveys include those of Cooter and Rubinfeld (1989), Hay and Spier (1998), and Daughety and
Reinganum (2000).
  12
     Prior research has investigated the impact of litigation risk on several characteristics, including cash
holdings (Arena and Julio (2011)), equity-based compensation (Jayaraman and Milbourn (2009)), IPO
underpricing (Lowry and Shu (2002); Hanley and Hoberg (2012)), institutional monitoring and board
discipline (Cheng, He Huang, Li, and Lobo (2010)), conservatism in debt contracting (Beatty, Weber, and Yu
(2008)), audit fees (Seetharaman, Gul, and Lynn (2002)), and auditors’ resignation decisions (Shu (2000)).
Papers have also investigated the relationship between managers’ financial reporting and disclosure decisions
and firms’ litigation risk (see, e.g., Skinner (1994, 1997); Francis, Philbrick, and Schipper (1994); Johnson,
Kasznik, and Nelson (2000); Rogers and Van Buskirk (2009)).
  13
     We assume throughout that the NPE passes the costs of litigation through to the inventor. This
assumption is not necessary for the qualitative results—it just serves to simplify the exposition.



                                                      8
                                                                                                  •

                                                                     innovate                              not innovate



                                                                                                                          #
                                                         •w                                                                   0
                                                                                                                              0

                                       infringe                      not infringe



                                   |                                                %
                               •                                                        •
                 litigate                not litigate                  litigate             not litigate
                  x                                                        |                 
     v+π−cf −p∗ δ                               v+π               v−cf −pn δ                      v
  max{pi δ−ci ,λpn δ−ci }                        0                 λpn δ−ci                       0



Figure 1: The innovation and litigation game: In stage 1, the firm decides whether to innovate.
If the firm chooses to innovate, then he must decide whether to infringe. Then, the inventor
litigates (either on his own or through the NPE) if doing so is profitable. For each end node,
the top term denotes the firm’s payoff, and the bottom term denotes the inventor’s payoff.


   Courts are assumed to be imperfect. The likelihood that a suit is successful depends
on whether infringement has actually occurred, and on whether an NPE is involved. The
probability that a suit succeeds is given by


                                                              if(infringement) if(no infringement)

                      the inventor sues on his own                     pi                             pi        .

           the inventor sues through an NPE                           pn                              pn


We normalize pi to 0, so that the inventor has no chance of succeeding in court unless
infringement has occurred. We also assume that


                                                  pn > pi and pn > pi = 0,


i.e., that the NPE is always more effective in bringing suit than the inventor is alone—
irrespective of whether infringement has occurred. It is also sensible to assume that pi > 0


                                                              9
and pn > pn , although these assumptions are not strictly necessary for our analysis.
   If the inventor sues on his own, he receives the full damage award δ from the firm. If
instead the inventor sues through an NPE, he receives fraction λ < 1 of the damages δ;
fraction (1 − λ) go to the NPE.
   If the firm infringes, then the inventor brings suit when

                                                                                               ci
                  max{pi δ − ci , λpn δ − ci } > 0              ⇐⇒          max{pi , λpn } >      .
                                                                                               δ

When pi ≥ λpn , the inventor sues on his own; when pi < λpn , the inventor sues through the
NPE.
                                 ci
   Thus, if max{pi , λpn } <     δ
                                      (bringing suit is never profitable for the inventor in case of
infringement), then the firm will always choose to innovate and infringe (and the inventor
will never sue), so that the firm receives total payoff v + π and the inventor receives 0.
                         ci
   If max{pi , λpn } >   δ
                              and the firm innovates and infringes, then the firm receives total
payoff
                                            v + π − cf − p∗ δ,                                        (1)

where here we take                               
                                                 
                                                 p
                                                 
                                                      i        pi ≥ λpn
                                          p∗ =
                                                 
                                                 p n
                                                              pi < λpn .

In that case, i receives (max{pi , λpn })δ − ci .
   If the firm does not infringe, then the inventor brings suit (through the NPE) when

                                                                                ci
                                 λpn δ − ci > 0           ⇐⇒          λpn >        .
                                                                                δ

In this case, if the firm innovates, then he receives total payoff


                                              v − cf − pn δ.                                          (2)


                                                          10
                                                           ci
   We henceforth assume that max{pi , λpn } >              δ
                                                              ,   so that bringing suit is profitable for the
                                                    ci
inventor only if the firm infringes. If λpn <       δ
                                                       ,   then no suit occurs unless the firm infringes,
so if the firm innovates, then he infringes exactly when the benefits of infringement outweigh
the costs, i.e., when


                          v + π − cf − p ∗ δ > 0      ⇐⇒            v + π > cf + p∗ δ.


              ci
   If λpn >   δ
                 ,   so that bringing suit is profitable for the inventor even if the firm does not
infringe, then, conditional on choosing to innovate, the firm’s decision as to whether to
infringe depends on the comparison of (1) and (2). If the firm innovates, then he infringes
exactly when
                                                                            π
                       v + π − cf − p ∗ δ > v − cf − p n δ          ⇐⇒        > p∗ − pn .                (3)
                                                                            δ


2.1    Impact of NPEs on Innovation and Infringement

Combining the preceding observations, we see that:

   • When the NPE is significantly more effective at bringing suit than the individual
      inventor is (i.e., when pn > pi /λ), and pn → 0, so that the NPE is ineffective at bringing
      nuisance suits (that is, suits when no infringement has occured), the NPE reduces total
      infringement: A suit occurs only after infringement, and the firm infringes if and only if


                                               v + π > cf + pn δ.                                        (4)


      Importantly, infringement is strictly lower than if the NPE were absent, as (4) is tighter
      than v + π > cf + pi δ, which is the condition that determines infringement absent the
      NPE.

   • However, as the NPE becomes better at bringing nuisance suits, that is, as pn → 1, we
      have (p∗ − pn ) → 0, so that (3) always holds. In that case, all innovating firms will

                                                    11
      infringe—even if the benefits of infringement are small. Consequently, if either the
      defense costs cf or the damages δ are sufficiently large, then we have


                                         v + π − cf − p∗ δ < 0,


      so that the firm will choose not to innovate.

   • If λδ > ci —bringing suit through the NPE is individually rational for the inventor if it
      is guaranteed to be successful—and either the defense costs cf or the damages δ are
      sufficiently large, then as pn → pn → 1, the firm always chooses not to innovate even if,
      absent the NPE, the firm would choose to innovate without infringing.

      Specifically, the firm chooses not to innovate when v+π−cf −p∗ δ < 0. If v+π−cf −pi δ <
      v, then the firm would innovate without infringing if there were no chance of nuisance suit.
      Thus, if pn is sufficiently high and the benefits of infringement are low (π < cf +pi δ), the
      presence of the NPE leads mid-range innovations (those having values v < cf + p∗ δ − π)
      to be crowded out of the market.


2.2    Impact of NPEs on IP Licensing

Now, we suppose that the inventor and firm can agree to license terms ex ante, in exchange
for committing not to litigate infringement. We assume that the firm has all the bargaining
power, so that it can force the inventor to take a license that just barely makes him indifferent
regarding litigation.
   If the firm innovates and infringes, then the inventor stands to earn


                                  max{pi δ − ci , λpn δ − ci } > 0




                                                12
if he brings a lawsuit. Thus, the firm can license the invention for


                                          max{pi δ − ci , λpn δ − ci }.                                         (5)


Examining (5), we see that as expected, the NPE only improves the terms of licensing for
the inventor when pi < λpn , that is, when the inventor would prefer to sue through the
NPE instead of litigating on his own. But then the value of the license to the inventor is
mediated by the rate at which the NPE passes value through to the inventor: No inventor
gains more through licensing than he would earn through bringing suit (although licensing is
more efficient because it saves court costs). In particular, if λ is small, then the inventor does
not gain much through licensing.14


2.3       Welfare Impact of NPEs

Our model illustrates that the welfare impact of NPEs is ambiguous.
       When NPEs are more effective at bringing suit than individual inventors are, the threat of
NPE litigation can reduce infringement and promote a transfer to inventors when infringement
occurs. However, the value of NPEs to inventors is mediated by the fraction λ of the damage
award that NPEs pass through: for the NPE to be a useful intermediary, it is necessary that
pn > pi /λ—either most of the proceeds of the suit must go to the inventor, or the NPE must
be much more effective at litigation than the inventor is. The possibility of NPE-backed
lawsuits may help inventors extract licensing fees from firms, but again this effect is mediated
by the pass-through rate λ; if λ is small, then the inventor cannot extract a high licensing fee.
       Meanwhile, if the NPEs become effective at bringing nuisance lawsuits, then in equilibrium
NPEs bring lawsuits even absent infringement. Somewhat paradoxically, this leads innovating
firms to infringe more, since they know that avoiding infringement will not deter suit.15
  14
      Even so, when λ is very small, it could still be the case that pi < λpn if, as is commonly believed, small
inventors are virtually powerless to bring suits against large firms.
   15
      This finding echoes the classical insight of Polinsky and Shavell (1989) that when court error is possible,
if plaintiffs’ costs are low (or if the gains from suit are sufficiently high), then potential defendants will choose


                                                        13
Additionally, the cost of nuisance lawsuits inefficiently crowds out welfare-increasing innovation
by some firms that, absent NPEs, would prefer to innovate without infringing.



3     Data

We obtain information on NPEs from RPX Corporation, a company that tabulates information
on NPE behavior, including data on patent litigation.16 RPX Corporation has collected data
going back to 1977, capturing from Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER)
every lawsuit filed by more than 4000 NPEs (approximately 850 parent companies, and 3300
affiliates); the data is thus systematic, and not based on self-reporting.17,18 We replicate all
of our analysis—and find nearly identical results in magnitude and significance—using the
hand-coded, publicly available NPE activity data collected by Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz
(2014) for the years 2010 and 2012 (see Section 4.9.1 and Appendix Table A4).
    Patent assertions by NPEs (e.g., “demand letters”), while not formal legal actions, do
occur. Patent assertions are unreported by nature, so there is unfortunately no comprehensive
dataset of these actions. However, it is widely believed that informal patent assertions have
been in decline recently, and are projected to decline further. The two biggest factors driving
this decline are the decreasing credibility of patent assertions (given the availability of the
formal legal channel),19 and the rise of legislation (both state and federal) to hold entities
liable for unsubstantiated demand letters.20 Furthermore, as many more NPEs are now suing
(see Table I, Panel B), non-legally binding letters simply alleging infringement (and asking
to disobey the law, as they will be sued irrespective of whether they obey the law.
  16
     RPX Corporation defines an NPE as “A firm that derives the majority of its revenue from licensing and
enforcement of patents.” Under this definition, traditional legal entities established to license and enforce
patents comprise the majority of NPEs. Additionally, individual inventors may be counted, while universities
will not be counted (unless they have patent enforcement subsidiaries).
  17
     Chien (2013b) compared a subsample of about 1000 of RPX’s codings to her own hand-codings, finding
no more than 7% disagreement.
  18
     RPX Corporation cleans its raw filing data (for instance, removing some “administrative duplicates”
representing the same case, but moved across districts).
  19
     One company executive relayed to us his reply to NPEs that send demand letters: “If you have a truly
viable case you will sue; otherwise don’t waste my time with this letter(!).”
  20
     See, e.g., the Executive Office of the President (2013) report on “Patent Assertion and U.S. Innovation.”


                                                     14
for money) are becoming less credible signals. The equilibrium result is that the economically
large alleged IP infringements appear to be addressed through lawsuits (all of which are in our
data), and this is becoming increasingly true over time. We thus feel that RPX Corporation’s
systematic and exhaustive collection of NPE lawsuit data likely captures the economically
important (and increasingly dominant) component of NPE behavior, even though it does not
fully capture patent assertions not backed by litigation (see also Feldman and Lemley (2015)
for supporting survey evidence). In Table I (Panel A), we present summary statistics on the
firms included in our analysis.21
       According to RPX Corporation, roughly 69% of NPEs’ patents were acquired externally
(purchased) by NPEs and their subsidiaries, whereas 19% were originally assigned to NPEs.22
Panel B of Table I shows the time-series of NPE litigation data through our sample period,
2005-2015. The data clearly indicates that there has been a sharp rise in NPE lawsuits over
the past decade.
       In total, the data provide detailed information on 21,300 litigation actions by NPEs (i.e.,
where an NPE is the plaintiff) and 19,621 litigation actions by PEs. RPX’s definition of
an NPE includes the following organizational forms: (1) patent asserters, entities that earn
revenue predominantly through asserting patents, (2) small inventors, (3) non-competing
entities (NCEs), operating companies asserting patents outside their areas of products or
services, and (4) universities (and research institutions). In our study, we exclude NCEs and
universities, which make up less than 3% of the sample. In the last column of Panel B of
Table I, we tabulate the number of observations in a different database, Lex Machina, that
also provides patent litigation records. A comparison of cases in the RPX and Lex Machina
datasets indicates that there is little difference between the two data sources.23
       We focus on the cases in which the defendant firm is publicly traded, as for these defendants
we can obtain rich, detailed characteristic data for which reporting is required by the Securities
  21
     Appendix Table A1 presents detailed descriptions of the specific data fields used in our study.
  22
     The remaining 12% are a blend of originally assigned and acquired patents.
  23
     In fact, the time series correlation between RPX and Lex Marchina—the final two columns of Table I,
Panel B—is 99.95%.


                                                  15
and Exchange Commission. In Figure 1, we graph the number of NPE and PE case dockets
in which the at least one of the defendants is a public firm. By 2015, 11.25% of all publicly
traded firms were sued by an NPE each year. This rise in IP litigation is also depicted in
Figure 1, which first shows the total rise in patent litigation over our sample period, and then
separates the rise into the cases brought by NPEs and IP cases brought by PEs. From Figure
1, it is apparent that the rise in overall IP litigation is entirely driven by NPE suits. PEs’
IP litigation has remained constant over the sample period. We revisit and examine more
systematically the difference in IP litigation behavior between NPEs and PEs in Section 4.2.
       We obtain firm-level patent information from the database used by Kogan, Papanikolaou,
Seru, and Stoffman (2012).24 This database contains utility patents issued by the USPTO
between January 1, 1926 and November 2, 2010, along with citation data on those patents.25
We obtain information on the in-house legal counsels and law firm associations of public firms
from ALM Legal Intelligence, which searches public records to find outside counsel used by
companies for corporate, contract, labor, tort, and IP litigation.
       To identify involvement in litigation events not related to IP, we use the Audit Analytics
Litigation database, which covers the period from 2005 to 2013 and reports information on
litigation for Russell 1000 firms from legal disclosures filed with the SEC. Audit Analytics
collects details related to specific litigation, including the original dates of filing and locations
of litigation; information on plaintiffs, defendants, and judges; and, if available, the original
claim amounts and the settlement amounts.
  24
     We thank Leonid Kogan, Amit Seru, Noah Stoffman, and Dimitris Papanikolaou for providing both
patent and citation data.
  25
     The USPTO defines utility patents as patents issued for the invention of new and useful processes,
machines, manufactures, or compositions of matter, or new and useful improvements thereof. A utility patent
generally permits its owner to exclude others from making, using, or selling the patented invention for a
period of up to twenty years from the date of patent application filing. Approximately 90% of the patent
documents issued by the USPTO in recent years have been utility patents.




                                                    16
4       Results

4.1       Cash-Targeting

We begin by examining the determinants of NPE litigation behavior. As a start, we parame-
terize a central concern of opponents to NPEs; namely, that NPEs bring nuisance suits (i.e.,
        ci
pn >    δλ
           ),   and that their prime driver is the ability of targeted firms to pay large damages
or settlement fees. We use both levels of cash balances on the balance sheet (CashLevel )
and changes in cash holdings (CashShock ) as proxies for the potential proceeds of a suit.
We include several firm- and time-level control variables, such as the firm’s market value,
book-to-market ratio,26 the prior year’s stock market performance, and the number of recent
patents issued to the firm, R&D, along with time and firm fixed effects. In Table II, we
report OLS regression results of the following specification:


SuedByNPE = f (CashLevel , TotalAssets, MVE , BM , R&D, PastReturn, PatentStock , CashShock ).


The outcome variable, SuedByNPE , is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was litigated by an NPE
in a particular year. CashLevel is the total amount of cash reported on the balance sheet as
of the beginning of the previous fiscal year. CashShock is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
change in cash in the past current fiscal year, compared to the previous fiscal year’s cash level,
is among the top 95% of cash changes in the firm’s industry cross-section. We include industry
or firm fixed effects to capture unobserved industry- or firm-level time-invariant factors that
are correlated with NPE targeting. Likewise, we include time fixed effects to control for
variation in litigation activity specific to a given year and for any time trends in litigation
propensity. We report various specifications to show the incremental value of each covariate
on overall model fit. Column 4 of Table II represents our preferred specification, which
includes firm-level characteristics (market value, book-to-market ratio, asset size, research
and development expense, prior stock performance of equity), time and firm fixed effects,
 26
      We use Tobin’s Q to proxy for investment opportunities.

                                                    17
and our cash variables. We use a log transformation of all variables to minimize the effect of
outliers.27 We cluster our standard errors at the firm level in order to broadly allow for any
time-series dependency in the probability of being sued over the course of the sample period.
       Table II uncovers a strong and consistent pattern: Firms with large cash balances and
firms with positive shocks to their cash holdings are more likely to be targeted by NPEs.
Controlling for other determinants and for firm and time fixed effects, the CashLevel coefficient
in Column 4, is 0.0565 (t = 4.25), is large and significant, as is the CashShock coefficient,
0.0167 (t = 2.06). To get an idea of the magnitudes, we use the coefficient estimates in the
full specification in Column 4. With the average firm-level cash holding of $579 million, the
0.0565 coefficient on CashLevel implies that a one standard-deviation increase in cash balance
increases the chances of being sued by 7.40%. Given that the unconditional probability of
being sued for patent infringement is approximately 8.60%, this is nearly a twofold higher
probability of being targeted (16.00% vs. 8.60%). This estimate shows the large economic
impact of cash on NPE targeting.
       In sum, Table II reveals the strong impact of cash on NPEs’ targeting decisions. In
particular, in Column 4, both of these effects are estimated including firm and time fixed
effects, along with fine controls for firm size, past returns, R&D spending, and patent stock.
Thus, the large coefficients can be interpreted as showing that a firm is likely to be targeted
by NPEs when it has an abnormally high cash level (or a shock to that cash level) relative to
all other firms’ cash levels (and shocks).
       We have run a number of robustness checks exploring the relationship between cash
and NPE litigation. First, in Panel B of Table VIII, we consider specifications identical to
those of Table II, but using logit and probit estimation as opposed to OLS. The coefficients
on cash remain large and significant, with the implied magnitudes even slightly larger in
point estimate. Furthermore, we replace the dummy dependent variable SuedByNPE with
its continuous counterpart TimesSued , measuring the number of times a given firm is sued
  27
    Neither the magnitudes nor the significance levels of our coefficients change appreciably when we do not
use log transformation.


                                                    18
by NPEs in any given year. We estimate the model in OLS (and Tobit) in the table,
and find that both CashLevel and CashShock are large and significant predictors of the
intensity with which firms are sued by NPEs. Next, in Appendix Table A3, we test for
any impact of multicollinearity on the estimates. From Appendix Table A3, we see that
multicollinearity is clearly not an issue. The coefficients on CashLevel and CashShock remain
large, significant, and—importantly—stable irrespective of the addition or deletion of any
given control variable.28 Lastly, we cluster standard errors by year (instead of by firm), and
estimate specifications with industry (as opposed to firm) fixed effects in Appendix Table A3.
Both of these adjustments have nearly no impact on the magnitude or significance on the
CashLevel and CashShock coefficients.


4.2        IP Litigation Behavior of Practicing Entities (PEs) & Litiga-

           tion Behavior against Firms more Generally

A reasonable response to the results in Table II is to expect that cash-targeting should be
the behavior of any profit-maximizing litigant. It makes little sense to sue a firm—incurring
potentially sizable legal costs, along with the opportunity costs of foregone suits—if the target
firm has no ex ante ability to pay. However, as it turns out, cash targeting is not generally a
first-order determinant of litigation outside NPE IP lawsuits. To see this, we compare the
determinants of NPE IP litigation to those of PE IP litigation, and to the determinants of
litigation activity more broadly.


4.2.1       IP Lawsuits Brought by PEs

NPEs do not have a monopoly on Intellectual Property litigation. PEs like Apple, General
Electric, and Intel also sue each other for patent infringement. If our results were simply
picking up general characteristics of IP litigation, then we might expect to see PEs behaving in
much the same way as NPEs. In order to compare PE and NPE behavior, we hand-collected
  28
       The coefficients are essentially unchanged in magnitude and significance across specifications.


                                                        19
the universe of patent infringement cases brought by PEs against other PEs in the same
period. As we already observed in Figure 1, the rise in IP litigation is driven by NPEs. While
NPEs have an exponential-type rise in IP litigation over the sample period, PEs’ IP litigation
has remained essentially constant. Thus, in an aggregate time-series sense, we see a difference
between the litigation behavior of the two groups.
       We run a more formal analysis of the determinants of PE lawsuits, using a set-up identical
to that used for NPEs in Section 4.1. We replicate the specifications used in Table II, but
this time we use SuedByPE as the dependent variable.29 The results of this analysis are
in Column 1 of Table III. We see that PEs behave very differently from NPEs. Nearly all
of the predictors of NPE litigation behavior have a small and insignificant impact on PE
litigation behavior. Moreover, the impact of cash goes mildly in the opposite direction (in
point estimate).
       Of course PEs likely have motivations for IP litigation beyond those of NPEs (e.g.,
competitive responses, defensive tactics, retaliative litigation). However, this comparison does
suggest that the results on NPE litigation behavior do not simply reflect general characteristics
of IP litigation over time or within the cross-section. Rather, they are consistent with agent-
specific motivations for NPEs in targeting firms flush with cash.


4.2.2      Other Litigation Behavior

We next move on to a more general setting, considering all lawsuits filed against publicly
traded firms. If the cash-targeting in NPE IP litigation is a general feature of litigation—as we
might think—then cash-targeting should show up in other litigation categories. From Audit
Analytics, we collected the entire slate of disclosed legal actions taken against publicly traded
firms. Audit Analytics covers the 2005–2013 period and reports information on litigation
against Russell 1000 firms, recording legal disclosures filed with the SEC.30
  29
    SuedByPE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm faces IP lawsuits from PEs in a given year.
  30
    Audit Analytics collects details related to specific litigation, including the original dates of filing and
locations of litigation; information on plaintiffs, defendants, and judges; and, if available, the original claim
and final settlement amounts.


                                                       20
   We run specifications identical to those of Table II, for all other litigation categories. The
results are shown in Table III. From Column 2 to 5 of Table III, we see that large amounts
of cash are not positively related to non-IP litigation actions (tort, contract, securities,
environment, and labor).
   So what drives non-IP litigation? The results suggest that the main determinant of non-IP
cases is the infraction itself (e.g., polluting a local waterway in the case of an environmental
suit). Importantly, these other cases often have more concrete and provable actions taken
by the defendant, as opposed to IP infringement, in which the property right is itself more
amorphously defined (and so infringement is more subjectively determined). This extra scope
given in IP cases makes IP a potentially good candidate for opportunistic, purely profit-driven
legal activity.
   The sum of the evidence in Tables II and III shows that NPE IP litigation is unique in its
cash-targeting nature, in comparison to other forms of litigation, and even within the fine
space of IP litigation. In the following sections we explore more closely the behavior of NPEs,
and examine whether NPE behavior appears to be—on average—opportunistic legal action.


4.3     Targeting Unrelated Profits

In this section we examine whether NPEs go after profits unrelated to alleged infringement.
Using finely reported business segment-level disclosures, we are able to extract and separate
profits in the business segments related to the alleged infringement from those profits in
unrelated segments.
   As of 1976, all firms are required by Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS)
14 (Financial reporting for segments of a business enterprise, 1976) and SFAS 131 (Reporting
desegregated information about a business enterprise, 1998) to report financial information
for any industry segment that accounts for more than 10% of total annual sales. Using these
segment-level filings, we extract information on industry classification, sales, and cost of
goods sold for each segment of each conglomerate between 2005 and 2015. We then use the


                                              21
concordance between international patent classification (IPC) codes and four-digit United
States Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) to identify the conglomerates’ segments
associated with the NPE-litigated patents.31
       After identifying segments related to allegedly infringed patents, we split each NPE-
targeted firm’s segments into related segments and unrelated segments. A firm’s related
segments are those segments that could potentially use the litigated patent in regular
operations; its unrelated segments are those that could not. We compute each segment
group’s gross profits by subtracting cost of goods sold from segment group sales.32
       We note that not all conglomerates report segment-level information in the same format.
For example, a conglomerate may report information on one segment only, or it may report
cost of goods sold for only one of the segments in which it operates. Therefore, our final
sample contains only conglomerates for which we have both cost and revenue data on at least
one related segment and one unrelated segment.
       We estimate a model to test whether the probability of being sued by an NPE is correlated
with profits obtained from unrelated segments, even after controlling for the profitability
of related segments. In this model, we include conglomerate fixed effects to control for
conglomerate-level unobserved litigation probability. We also control for industry-wide shocks
to profitability, by including a variable measuring the average profitability of the segment’s
industry.
       The results of our segment-level analysis are shown in Table IV. Column 1 of Table IV
shows the basic model, while Column 2 includes conglomerate fixed effects. Both columns tell
the same story. Consistent with the results in Table II, RelatedSegmentProfitability is a large
and significant predictor of NPE targeting. But so is UnrelatedSegmentProfitability. In other
words, NPEs seem not to care where their proceeds come from; an NPE’s probability of suing a
  31
     The concordance file we use was developed by Silverman (2003) and later improved by Kerr (2008). This
concordance has been used in several other studies, including those of McGahan and Silverman (2001) and
Mowery and Ziedonis (2001).
  32
     While we would ideally prefer to measure cash at the segment level in order to make our segment-level
analysis completely analogous to the tests in Tables II and III, segment-level cash variables are not reported.
Thus, we use profitability (revenues net of costs) at the segment level to proxy for profitability of suit.


                                                     22
firm increases with the firm’s profits even if those profits are derived from segments unrelated
to the patent under litigation. In Column 2 of Table IV, we see that the coefficient on
UnrelatedSegmentProfitability, 0.0265 (t = 1.99), implies that, controlling for the profitability
of a segment related to the patent allegedly being infringed, a one standard-deviation increase
in a completely unrelated segment’s profitability increases the chance of being sued by 0.58%
(relative to a mean of 3.18%). This compares to an increase in probability of 0.71% for the
same size increase in a related segment’s profitability (t = 2.18). In contrast, when we run
the analogue of Column 1 and 2 for PE firms, we see that UnrelatedSegmentProfitability is
not related to PE litigation activity.
    In sum, the results in Table IV provide additional, finely measured evidence that NPEs
behave opportunistically by targeting cash indiscriminately—NPEs target related cash and
unrelated cash at essentially the same rate.


4.4     Which NPEs are Driving Cash Targeting? Large Aggregators

        vs. Small Inventors

NPEs take many organizational forms. We next explore whether the cash-targeting behavior
seen in Tables II and IV varies by NPE type. As mentioned in Section 3, we exclude
universities and NCEs from the sample. This leaves essentially two main categories of patent
asserters in our data: patent assertion entities (PAEs) and small inventors. In our sample,
87.98% of the 21,300 cases have a patent assertion entity as a plaintiff, while small inventors
bring 9.63% of cases.33 Detailed information on plaintiff types, as well as comparison to other
samples, is provided in Appendix Table A4.
    In Table V, we decompose the results shown in Table II by NPE type. In Column 1 of
Table V, the regressand takes a value of 1 if the firm is sued by a patent assertion entity
(PAE). In Column 2, we reestimate the same specification with the regressand defined as 1
  33
     The remaining 2.38% of cases are not included in the analysis presented in this section, as those cases
could not be clearly assigned to either group.



                                                    23
when a firm is sued by a small inventor.
   From Table V, we see that the entire cash-targeting effect is driven by patent assertion
entities. Columns 1 of Table V show that in cases where a patent assertion entity is involved,
CashLevel and CashShock are large and significant predictors of litigation action. In contrast,
in cases involving small innovators, neither CashLevel nor CashShock are significant predictors
of targeting, and both have coefficients that are close to 0. Consequently, we see that patent
assertion entities are responsible for nearly the entire magnitude of the coefficients on both
cash variables shown in Table II.


4.5    Comparing the Types of Patents Asserted by NPEs and PEs

We now compare the types of patents asserted by NPEs to those asserted by PEs. There
are many ways to parameterize patent similarity; we use a number of different metrics and
measures of patent quality in comparing the patents asserted by NPEs to those asserted
by PEs. First, following Love (2014), we examine whether NPEs disproportionately assert
patents just before those patents’ expiration dates. We show the breakdown of patent age
between NPEs and PEs in Table VI. From this table, we first see that NPE-asserted patents
are significantly older than PE-asserted patents. From the first row of Table VI, we see that
NPEs assert patents that are 25% older than those PEs assert (t = 20.91).
   NPEs not only appear to be asserting patents closer to expiration than PEs, but relative
to PEs, NPEs are much more likely to sue many times on any given asserted patent. In the
second row of Table VI, for instance, we see that NPEs litigate each patent they assert 4.5
times as frequently as PEs do (13.02 times for NPEs vs. 2.84 times for PEs (t = 59.76)).
   Using a recently assembled dataset which contains information on the number of issued,
pending, abandoned patents by NBER technology group for each month (Marco, Carley,
Jackson, and Myers (2015)), we see that patents asserted in NPE cases are more likely to
be issued at times when the USPTO issues more patents compared to total pending and
abandoned applications (t = 13.74)—that is, at times when the USPTO is especially busy.


                                              24
Furthermore, and consistent with NPEs asserting broad patents, we also find that patents
asserted by NPEs have a significantly higher number of associated technology classes.34
       When we compare the linguistic content of the claims in patents asserted by NPEs and
PEs, we find striking differences. Consistent with the previous finding that NPE patents
are broader than PE patents, evidence suggests NPE patents contain significantly more
independent claims than PE patents do (4.86 vs. 3.80 (t = 21.11)) and more dependent claims
(29.98 vs. 21.19 (t = 22.92)). Moreover, the descriptions of patents asserted by NPEs contain
more words, both in dependent and independent claims, than are found in patents asserted by
PEs. For instance, an average patent asserted by NPEs contains 802 words in its independent
claims, whereas an average patent asserted by PE contains 531 words (with the difference of
271 words highly significant (t = 26.54). The same holds true for lengthier-worded dependent
claims, with a difference of 361 words (t = 26.54)—802 for NPEs vs. 531 for PEs.
       Collectively, our results suggest NPEs assert patents that are significantly different from
those of PEs. In particular, NPEs assert patents that are broader in scope and wordier. In
addition, they assert these broader patents significantly more aggressively, and closer to the
expiration of patent rights.


4.6       Geography of NPE Litigation

Even if NPEs target lawsuits opportunistically, this need not show up in outcomes, as
courts remain the ultimate arbiters of patent infringement. Thus, for NPEs to target cash
successfully, they would—at minimum—need a credible threat of having courts rule in their
favor sufficiently often.
       Figure 2 shows the geography of NPE patent litigation in the United States. Unsurprisingly,
some well-known innovation hubs (e.g., Silicon Valley) have large amounts of NPE IP litigation.
However, validating common anecdotal accounts, we see that the preponderance of NPE
patent litigation (over 30% of all cases) takes place in the Eastern District of Texas (Marshall,
  34
    Patents asserted by NPEs (resp. PEs) on average have 5.86 (resp. 4.83) associated technology classes
(t = 21.50).

                                                  25
TX). Eastern Texas is not a major innovation center; rather, its courts are favored by NPEs
because they are perceived to be plaintiff-friendly (both anecdotally and because of specific
rules regarding judgment (Leychkis (2007))).
   The practice of “forum shopping” (i.e., “choosing the most favorable jurisdiction or court
in which a claim might be heard” (Garner and Black (2004))) is not unique to IP litigation.
However, again, even within the space of IP litigation, we see that NPEs seem to “forum
shop” a uniquely large amount. NPE cases and PE cases have very different geographic
patterns. For instance, when we run a Wilcoxon test comparing the geographic distributions
of NPE and PE litigation, we see a significant difference (z = 2.35), with, again, NPEs more
concentrated in East Texas.


4.7    Probability of Paying

In this section, we test whether proxies for firm’s readiness (and ability) to stave off NPE
litigation impact firms’ probabilities of being targeted. We create two measures: one measure
couting the number of lawyers firms have at their disposal, and the second counting how
busy firms are with non-IP litigation actions.
   The idea of the first measure—number of lawyers—is that large legal teams may serve to
deter NPEs because they could to prolong the court (or settlement) process. The second
measure—how busy the firm is with outside litigation—is meant capture the within-firm
resource constraint on time and costs spent battling litigation. We expect that if NPEs
opportunistically target firms that are unlikely to be able to defend themselves, then (1)
having many lawyers should deter suits (so there should be a negative coefficient on the
number of lawyers), and (2) being involved in extraneous, non-IP cases should draw more
suits (so the associated coefficient should be positive).
   In order to measure firms’ legal teams, we extract data from the ALM Legal Intelligence
Database. We obtain a list of all law firms and their clients from ALM Legal Intelligence
between 2005 and 2012. Then, we follow the procedure outlined in Appendix Table 2 to


                                              26
define a dummy variable IPLegalTeamSize which takes a value of 1 if the firm employs more
IP focused law firms than a comparable firm with similar characteristics. Our second measure,
OngoingCases, measures the existence and number of reported, ongoing non-IP-related
litigation actions. From Table VII, we see that controlling for all other characteristics, NPEs
are less likely to sue a firm with more legal representation. The coefficient on IPLegalTeamSize
in Column 2 implies that a one standard deviation increase in IP legal team size decreases
the likelihood of suit by 7.2% (t = 2.13). NPEs are also more likely to target firms that are
busy with ongoing, non-IP litigation. The Column 2 coefficient on OngoingCases of 0.0171
(t = 2.38) implies that firms that are occupied with large number of non-IP litigation cases
are 19% more likely to be targeted by NPEs.
   The empirical specification considered in this section also provides evidence against a
precautionary savings interpretation of the cash-targeting results shown in Table II. If pre-
cautionary savings were driving the relationship seen in Table II, then we would expect the
coefficient on LegalTeamSize to be positive—firms saving cash to stave off infringement litiga-
tion should also be growing their legal teams(!). (At the very least, under the precautionary
savings hypothesis, we would not expect the negative and significant relationship observed in
the data.) To believe the precautionary savings hypothesis, we would need to believe that
firms are raising cash to preempt litigation at the same time as they are actively decreasing
their legal representation; this seems unlikely. Instead, the findings as a whole appear more
consistent with NPEs acting opportunistically—targeting cash-rich firms that are more likely
to settle, either because they have recently reduced their legal teams or because they are
embroiled in outside litigation.


4.8    Sum of Evidence

In summary, our empirical evidence shows that:


   1. NPEs specifically target litigation against firms that are flush with cash.



                                              27
  2. Cash-targeting appears to be unique to NPE IP litigation.

        • Cash is neither a significant positive predictor of PE IP lawsuit targeting, nor of
          non-IP lawsuit targeting (rather, these other classes of lawsuits appear to have
          most of the R2 driven by infractions themselves).

        • More generally, NPE behavior is different from PE behavior even conditioning on
          the same type of infraction (alleged IP infringement).

  3. NPEs target cash unrelated to the alleged infringement with essentially the same
     frequency that they target cash related to the alleged infringement.

  4. The cash-targeting behavior we observe is driven by large aggregator NPEs, and is not
     the behavior of small innovators.

  5. The patents NPEs assert are seemingly different in quality from those asserted by
     PEs (in particular, on average NPEs assert patents that broader and closer to expiry).
     Moreover, NPEs assert patents more aggressively than PEs do.

  6. NPEs appear to forum shop, trying the preponderance of their cases in a single district
     in Texas.

  7. NPEs target firms that may have reduced ability to defend themselves against litigation.


   While none of our results alone proves opportunistic legal behavior (patent trolling) on
the part of NPEs, the sum of the evidence to this point appears most consistent with NPEs
behaving as patent trolls.
   In line with our evidence, there have been increasingly frequent high-profile anecdotal
accounts of trolling by NPEs (nearly always litigated in Marshall, Texas). For instance,
Lumen View Technology LLC sued numerous online dating companies for alleged infringement
on a patent on computerized matchmaking that United States District Judge Denise Cote
later pronounced to be obviously invalid. “There is no inventive idea here,” Judge Cote


                                             28
declared, pointing out that “matchmaking” is literally ancient (Mullin (November 23, 2013)).
Meanwhile, MPHJ Technology Investments sued over sixteen thousand small businesses
(along with a number of branches of the United States Government) alleging infringement
on a patent covering “scan-to-email” functionality. Many of MPHJ’s cases were not only
dismissed, but prompted countersuits for deceptive practices (Mullin (January 14, 2014)).
       We conduct several robustness checks on our analysis in Section 4.9, and then assess the
impact of NPEs on real outcomes in Section 5. We tie back to the theory and discuss welfare
implications in Section 6.


4.9       Robustness Tests

In this section, we provide a number of robustness tests, including an out-of-sample test and
a number of additional specifications.


4.9.1      Out-of-Sample Test

As mentioned in Section 3, the analyses discussed in the text use data from RPX Corporation,
a company that tabulates information on NPE behavior. While the data is all sourced from
public documents (namely the USPTO and public court records), RPX retains the dataset
itself as proprietary. Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) recently hand-coded and classified
NPE IP litigation events for a two-year sample (2010 and 2012), and made this data publicly
available at www.npedata.com.
       We have re-run all of our analyses on the Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) data; the
results of this out-of-sample test are shown in Appendix Table A4. We find the same results
using the Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) data as with the RPX data: cash is a large
and significant predictor of NPE targeting, and this behavior is driven by PAEs.35
  35
    The estimated magnitudes on cash are actually a bit larger in the Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014)
sub-sample (given the larger standard deviation of cash in later 2010-2012 period), with the coefficient on
large aggregators being roughly triple the size of small innovators, and statistically significantly larger. We
also calculate the overlap rate between the RPX and Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) samples for the
two years available (2010 and 2012) and find a roughly 90% overlap.



                                                     29
4.9.2    Thicket Industries and Additional Specifications

Patent thickets are dense, overlapping webs of patents that make it difficult to commercialize
because products may overlap with large numbers of patented technologies. Certain industries
are known to be more prone to patent thickets, and those industries themselves have been
linked to strategic patenting behavior (Bessen and Meurer (2013)). We test whether the cash-
targeting behavior of NPEs differs between thicket- and non-thicket industries.36 Columns 1-2
of Table VIII, Panel A show the results.
    Column 3 runs the same analysis excluding IT firms (SIC Code 35 (e.g., Apple and IBM)
and SIC Code 73 (e.g., Yahoo! and Ebay)); again, cash a strong determinant of targeting,
nearly identical in magnitude and significance. Column 4 uses a cash measure that incorporates
marketable securities of the firm. The economic magnitude implied by the coefficient of
CashLevel in this specification is similar to our baseline specification. Column 5 allows
additional non-linearities in cash (cash level squared and cubed); neither loads significantly,
and allowing non-linearity does not appear to have a impact on the estimated magnitude
or significance of the CashLevel and CashShock coefficients. In this specification, we also
include a new variable (FinancialConstraints) that measures how financially constrained
firms are, and find that it is not a statistically significant predictor of NPE targeting.37
    Panel B of Table VIII shows a number of additional specifications. First, throughout the
paper we have used whether or not a firm is sued by an NPE in a given year (SuedByNPE ).
However, a number of firms are sued multiple times by different (or even the same) NPEs
within a single year. In Table VIII, Panel B we replace the dependent variable with the
the number of times a firm is sued by an NPE in a given year. We find similar results to
those presented in Table II: CashLevel and CashShock are large and significant predictors of
the number of times a firm is sued in a given year (both in OLS and Tobit specifications).
  36
     We define thicket industries as those having two-digit SIC codes of 35, 36, 38 and 73, following Bessen
and Meurer (2014). These industries encompass software, semiconductors, and electronics, and include firms
such as Apple, Google, and Intel.
  37
     Here, we use the Hadlock and Pierce (2010) financial constraints index of firms’ constraints on accessing
the external funds.


                                                     30
For instance, Column 1 of Table VIII, Panel B shows a coefficient on CashLevel of 0.4439
(t = 2.71), implying that a one standard-deviation increase in cash doubles the number of
times a firm is targeted by NPEs. Additionally, Columns 3 and 4 of Table VIII, Panel B show
the base categorical variable specification of the dependent variable (SuedByNPE ), but in
Probit and Logit regression estimations. Again cash remains a large and significant predictor
of NPE targeting behavior.



5        Impact of NPE Litigation on Real Outcomes

Up to this point, we have examined which firms NPEs target, and when. We now examine
the real impacts of NPE litigation on the firms being targeted. Of course the difficulty in
obtaining any causal estimates here is that we have a clear selection problem (that is, it
might be the case that the firms that NPEs target experience some outcome not because
of NPE litigation, but because they share some common unobservable characteristic). We
attempt to alleviate selection concerns somewhat by conditioning on being targeted—we
compare two groups of firms, both selected to be sued by NPEs. Specifically, we compare all
firms targeted by NPEs, separating targeted firms specifically according to whether (1) they
were forced to pay out to NPEs (they either lost in court or settled) or (2) the cases against
them were dismissed (including when the court ruled against the NPE).38 We test whether
losing to an NPE and having an NPE lawsuit dismissed lead in different directions in terms
of future R&D productivity. Specifically, we focus on how R&D expenditures on projects
differ (pre- and post-litigation) among the two classes of targeted firms.
       Table IX reports the difference-in-differences results. From Panel A of Table IX, we see
that losing to an NPE has a large and negative impact on future R&D activities—again, even
conditioning on being selected for litigation. We compare average annual R&D expense two
years following the litigation to average annual R&D expense two years before the litigation.
  38
    Following Allison, Lemley, and Walker (2010), we exclude case outcomes such as “stay,” “transfer,” and
“procedural disposition.”



                                                   31
To get an idea of the effect magnitude, the results shown in Panel A imply that firms that
lose to a large aggregator NPE (Settled + Won by NPE) invest significantly less in R&D
in the years following the loss ($163 million less, t = 7.18) relative to firms that were also
targeted by NPEs but won (Dismissed + Lost by NPE).
       Panel A also shows that we see no such patterns for PE vs. PE cases—unlike firms that
lose to NPEs, firms that lose to PEs show no reduction in R&D investment. Panel B of
Table IX runs parallel trends analysis, showing that the firms in our comparison groups had
similarly-moving R&D expenditures prior to the NPE lawsuits.
       Lastly, Panel C of Table IX shows an analysis of the same firms pre- and post-difference-
in-differences analysis, but in a regression framework where more firm-level determinants of
R&D can be included. From Panel C, we see that losing to a large aggregator NPE (again,
selecting on being targeted) leads to 1.73% reduction in future R&D expense (scaled by
assets).39 Considering the mean of dependent variable is 8.7%, this magnitude is economically
large and statistically significant, representing a roughly 20% reduction (t = 2.43) in R&D
investment. Again, from Column 3 of Table IX, Panel C, we see that there is no resultant
reduction in R&D expenditure following losses in PE vs. PE cases.
       In all, the evidence in this section strongly supports the idea that NPEs have a real and
negative impact on innovation of United States firms, and that within the IP space—like the
cash-targeting behavior we have observed—the negative impact on R&D is unique to NPE
lawsuits.



6        Discussion

Our results show that NPEs on average sue firms that have substantial cash holdings. While
we cannot observe directly whether infringement has occurred in a given case, our results
suggest that cash—rather than policing infringement—drives NPE targeting. Cash is a
  39
    In these tests we control for CitationCommonality, a pairwise patent similarity measure provided to us
by Ambercite (see Appendix Table A1).



                                                   32
first-order determinant of NPE IP litigation even when that cash is unrelated to the alleged
infringement, and even though cash is neither a key driver of PE IP suits nor of non-IP
litigation. Meanwhile, NPEs appear to bring lower quality lawsuits, and there is some
evidence that NPEs are actively forum shopping.
   NPE litigation has a real negative impact on innovation at targeted firms: PEs substan-
tively reduce their innovative activity after settling with NPEs (or losing to them in court).
Measuring NPEs’ net impact on innovation, however, requires accounting for the potential of
NPE litigation to positively incentivize innovation by individual inventors. Unfortunately,
because most settlement values are not disclosed, we cannot measure the full size of the
transfer from PEs to NPEs (much less the transfer from NPEs to end inventors). Furthermore,
we cannot measure the increase in innovation incentives that might come from PEs being less
likely to infringe (given NPE behavior). Thus, we cannot explicitly measure the potential
welfare gains from NPE litigation. Nevertheless, we note that as our theoretical model
suggests, the benefits of NPEs in terms of increased innovation incentives for end inventors
(both the direct benefits through lawsuits, and the indirect benefits in terms of enhanced
licensing potential) depend on the fraction of NPE profits passed through to end inventors.
   There are three pieces of empirical evidence that somewhat speak to the impact of NPEs
on small inventors’ innovation incentives. First, Bessen, Ford, and Meurer (2011) directly
estimate the pass-through parameter that our theory highlights as the key mediator of NPEs’
benefits for end inventors. Bessen, Ford, and Meurer (2011) find very low pass-through,
estimating that only five cents of every dollar in damages paid by PEs to NPEs makes it
back to end innovators. Thus, one would need to believe in a large multiplier (summing
both direct and indirect spillover effects) to justify, from a social-welfare perspective, NPE
litigation practices as an efficient mechanism to transfer the marginal dollar of innovative
capital—even if all NPE lawsuits were well-founded. Second, Feldman and Lemley (2015)
find evidence that patent licensing does little or nothing to increase innovation—irrespective
of whether NPEs or PEs are the licensors. Lastly, we conduct a simple empirical analysis,


                                             33
presented in Table X, in which we measure changes in innovation outcomes in the exact
technology areas in which NPE litigation is most frequent. In NPE-heavy areas, both the
direct and indirect benefits of NPE litigation should be largest, but Table X shows that there
has been no observable increase in innovation by small innovators.
       The marginal welfare impact of NPEs is also largely determined by the frequency with
which NPEs successfully bring “nuisance” cases instead of meritorious ones.40 As our model
suggests, NPE nuisance suits stand to crowd out socially valuable innovation (and possibly
to induce socially inefficient infringement), without any measurable social gains.



7        Conclusion

We provide the first large-sample evidence on the behavior and impact of NPEs. Our
theoretical model illustrates that while NPE litigation can reduce infringement and support
small inventors, as NPEs become effective at bringing opportunistic lawsuits, they can
inefficiently crowd out some firms that would otherwise produce welfare-enhancing innovations
without engaging in infringement. Our complementary empirical analysis shows that on
average, NPEs appear to behave as opportunistic patent trolls. They sue cash-rich firms—a
one standard deviation increase in cash holdings increases a firm’s chance of being targeted
by NPE litigation more than twofold. By contrast, cash is neither a key driver of IP lawsuits
by PEs, nor of any other type of litigation against firms. The cash-targeting behavior we
observe is driven by large aggregator NPEs, and is not the behavior of small innovators.
NPEs even target conglomerate firms that earn their cash from segments having nothing to
do with their allegedly infringing patents. (Profitability in unrelated businesses is almost
as predictive of an NPE suit as is profitability in business segments related to NPE-alleged
patent infringement.) We find further suggestive evidence of NPE opportunism, such as
late-stage litigation, forum shopping, and targeting of firms that may have reduced ability to
  40
     From the model of NPE behavior in Section 2, this corresponds to the relationship between pn (NPEs’
ability to bring groundless suits) and pn (NPEs’ ability to bring meritorious suits).



                                                  34
defend themselves against litigation. We find that this NPE litigation has a real negative
impact on innovation at targeted firms: PEs substantively reduce their innovative activity
after settling with NPEs (or losing to them in court). Moreover, we neither find any markers
of significant NPE pass-through to end innovators, nor of a positive impact of NPEs on
innovation in the industries in which they are most prevalent in litigating infringement.
   Setting intellectual property policy regarding patent assertion is first-order. If widespread
opportunistic patent litigation makes the United States a less desirable place to innovate, then
innovation and human capital—and the returns to that innovation and human capital—will
likely flee overseas. That said, innovators will also leave if they feel they are not are protected
from large, well-funded interests that might infringe on innovative capital without recompense.
Our results provide evidence that NPEs—in particular, large patent aggregators—on average
do not protect innovation. Rather, our results are consistent with the view that, on average,
NPEs behave as patent trolls that chase cash and negatively impact innovative activities at
targeted firms. Given our findings, the marginal policy response should be to more carefully
limit the power of NPEs or, in the framework of our model, introduce cost-shifting or screening
measures to reduce the incentive to bring nuisance suits.




                                                35
References

Abrams, D. S., U. Akcigit, and J. Popadak (2013): “Patent Value and Citations:
  Creative Destruction or Strategic Disruption?,” NBER Working Paper No. 19647.

Allison, J. R., M. A. Lemley, and J. Walker (2010): “Patent quality and settlement
  among repeat patent litigants,” Georgetown Law Journal, 99, 677–712.

Arena, M., and B. Julio (2011): “Litigation Risk, Cash Holdings, and Corporate
  Investment,” Marquette University and London Business School Working Paper.

Beatty, A., J. Weber, and J. J. Yu (2008): “Conservatism and debt,” Journal of
 Accounting and Economics, 45(2), 154–174.

Bessen, J. E., J. Ford, and M. J. Meurer (2011): “The Private and Social Costs of
  Patent Trolls,” Regulation, 34(4), 26–35.

Bessen, J. E., and M. J. Meurer (2006): “Patent Litigation with Endogenous Disputes,”
 American Economic Review, 96(2), 77–81.

        (2014): “The Direct Costs from NPE Disputes,” Cornell Law Review, 99(2), 387–424.

Budish, E. B., B. N. Roin, and H. L. Williams (2015): “Do Firms Underinvest in
  Long-Term Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials,” American Economic Review,
  105(7), 2044–2085.

Cheng, A., H. He Huang, Y. Li, and G. Lobo (2010): “Institutional monitoring through
  shareholder litigation,” Journal of Financial Economics, 95(3), 356–383.

Chien, C. V. (2013a): “Patent Assertion and Startup Innovation,” Report of the New
  America Foundation’s Open Technology Institute.

         (2013b): “Patent Trolls by the Numbers,” Santa Clara University Legal Studies
  Research Paper No. 08-13.

                                              36
        (2014): “Startups and Patent Trolls,” Stanford Technology Law Review, 17, 461–506.

Choi, J. P., and H. Gerlach (2014): “A Model of Patent Trolls,” Michigan State
  University Working Paper.

Cooter, R. D., and D. L. Rubinfeld (1989): “Economic analysis of legal disputes and
  their resolution,” Journal of Economic Literature, 27(3), 1067–1097.

Cotropia, C. A., J. P. Kesan, and D. L. Schwartz (2014): “Unpacking patent
  assertion entities (PAEs),” Minnesota Law Review, 99, 649–703.

Daughety, A. F., and J. F. Reinganum (2000): “On the economics of trials: Adversarial
  process, evidence, and equilibrium bias,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
  16(2), 365–394.

Executive Office of the President (2013): “Patent Assertion and U.S. Innovation,”
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/patent_report.pdf.

Feldman, R. (2014): “Patent Demands & Startup Companies: The View from the Venture
  Capital Community,” Yale Journal of Law & Technology, 16, 236–284.

Feldman, R., and M. A. Lemley (2015): “Do Patent Licensing Demands Mean Innova-
  tion?,” Iowa Law Review, 101, 137–189.

Francis, J., D. Philbrick, and K. Schipper (1994): “Shareholder litigation and
  corporate disclosures,” Journal of Accounting Research, 32(2), 137–164.

Galasso, A., and M. Schankerman (2010): “Patent thickets, courts, and the market for
  innovation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 41(3), 472–503.

Galasso, A., M. Schankerman, et al. (2015): “Patents and Cumulative Innovation:
  Causal Evidence from the Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1), 317–369.




                                            37
Galasso, A., M. Schankerman, and C. J. Serrano (2013): “Trading and enforcing
  patent rights,” RAND Journal of Economics, 44(2), 275–312.

Garner, B. A., and H. C. Black (2004): Black’s Law Dictionary. Thomson/West.

Hadlock, C. J., and J. R. Pierce (2010): “New evidence on measuring financial
  constraints: Moving beyond the KZ index,” Review of Financial studies, 23(5), 1909–1940.

Hanley, K. W., and G. Hoberg (2012): “Litigation risk, strategic disclosure and the
  underpricing of initial public offerings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 103(2), 235–254.

Hay, B., and K. E. Spier (1998): “Settlement of litigation,” in The New Palgrave
  Dictionary of Economics and the Law, ed. by P. Newman, vol. 3, pp. 442–451. Palgrave
  Macmillan.

Helmers, C., B. Love, and L. McDonagh (2013): “Is there a patent troll problem in
  the UK,” Fordham Intellectual Property Media & Entertainment Law Journal, 24, 509–553.

Jayaraman, S., and T. Milbourn (2009): “Does equity-based CEO compensation really
  increase litigation risk?,” Working paper, Washington University.

Johnson, M. F., R. Kasznik, and K. K. Nelson (2000): “Shareholder wealth effects of
  the private securities litigation reform act of 1995,” Review of Accounting Studies, 5(3),
  217–233.

Kerr, W. R. (2008): “Ethnic scientific communities and international technology diffusion,”
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(3), 518–537.

Kiebzak, S., G. Rafert, and C. E. Tucker (2016): “The effect of patent litigation and
  patent assertion entities on entrepreneurial activity,” Research Policy, 45(1), 218–231.

Kogan, L., D. Papanikolaou, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2012): “Technological
  innovation, resource allocation, and growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 17769.


                                             38
Lemley, M. A., and A. D. Melamed (2013): “Missing the Forest for the Trolls,” Columbia
  Law Review, 113(8), 2117–2189.

Lemley, M. A., and C. Shapiro (2005): “Probabilistic Patents,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 19(2), 75–98.

         (2006): “Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking,” Texas Law Review, 85, 1991–2163.

Lerner, J. (2009): “The Empirical Impact of Intellectual Property Rights on Innovation:
  Puzzles and Clues,” American Economic Review, 99(2), 343–348.

Leychkis, Y. (2007): “Of Fire Ants and Claim Construction: An Empirical Study of the
  Meteoric Rise of the Eastern District of Texas as a Preeminent Forum for Patent Litigation,”
 Yale Journal of Law & Technology, 9, 193–232.

Love, B. J. (2014): “An Empirical Study of Patent Litigation Timing: Could a Patent Term
  Reduction Decimate Trolls Without Harming Innovators?,” University of Pennsylvania
  Law Review, 161, 1309–1359.

Lowry, M., and S. Shu (2002): “Litigation risk and IPO underpricing,” Journal of
  Financial Economics, 65(3), 309–335.

Marco, A. C., M. Carley, S. Jackson, and A. F. Myers (2015): “The USPTO
  Historical Patent Data Files: Two Centuries of Innovation,” Working Paper, United States
  Patent and Trademark Office.

McGahan, A. M., and B. S. Silverman (2001): “How does innovative activity change as
  industries mature?,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19(7), 1141–1160.

Mowery, D. C., and A. A. Ziedonis (2001): “The geographic reach of market and
  non-market channels of technology transfer: Comparing citations and licenses of university
  patents,” NBER Working Paper No. 8568.



                                             39
Mullin, J. (January 14, 2014): “Patent stunner: Under attack, nation’s most notorious
 “troll” sues federal gov’t,” Ars Technica.

         (November 23, 2013): “FindTheBest destroys “matchmaking” patent, pushes RICO
  case against troll,” Ars Technica.

Polinsky, A. M., and S. Shavell (1989): “Legal Error, Litigation, and the Incentive to
  Obey the Law,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 5(1), 99–108.

Rogers, J. L., and A. Van Buskirk (2009): “Shareholder litigation and changes in
  disclosure behavior,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 47(1), 136–156.

Sakakibara, M., and L. Branstetter (2001): “Do Stronger Patents Induce More
  Innovation? Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” RAND Journal of
  Economics, 32(1), 77–100.

Schwartz, D. L., and J. P. Kesan (2014): “Analyzing the role of non-practicing entities
  in the patent system,” Cornell Law Review, 99(2), 425–456.

Scott Morton, F. M., and C. Shapiro (2014): “Strategic Patent Acquisitions,” Antitrust
  Law Journal, 79(2), 463–500.

Seetharaman, A., F. A. Gul, and S. G. Lynn (2002): “Litigation risk and audit fees:
  Evidence from UK firms cross-listed on US markets,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
  33(1), 91–115.

Shrestha, S. K. (2010): “Trolls or Market-makers? An empirical analysis of nonpracticing
  entities,” Columbia Law Review, 110, 114–160.

Shu, S. Z. (2000): “Auditor resignations: Clientele effects and legal liability,” Journal of
  Accounting and Economics, 29(2), 173–205.

Silverman, B. S. (2003): Technological Resources and the Logic of Corporate Diversification.
  Routledge.

                                              40
Skinner, D. J. (1994): “Why firms voluntarily disclose bad news,” Journal of Accounting
  Research, 32(1), 38–60.

         (1997): “Earnings disclosures and stockholder lawsuits,” Journal of Accounting and
  Economics, 23(3), 249–282.

Smeets, R. (2015): “Does Patent Litigation Reduce Corporate R&D? An Analysis of US
  Public Firms,” Working Paper, Rutgers University.

Spier, K. (2005): “Economics of Litigation,” in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
  ed. by S. Durlauf, and L. Blume. Macmillan.

Tucker, C. E. (2014): “Patent Trolls and Technology Diffusion: The Case of Medical
  Imaging,” Working Paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

United States Government Accountability Office (2013): “Assessing Factors That
  Affect Patent Infringement Litigation Could Help Improve Patent Quality,” GAO-13-465.

United States Patent and Trademark Office (2015): “Request for Comments on
  Enhancing Patent Quality,” Federal Register, 80, 6475–6481.

Williams, H. L. (2013): “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from the
  Human Genome,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1), 1–27.

         (2015): “Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation: Evidence from Health Care
  Markets,” in Innovation Policy and the Economy, ed. by J. Lerner, and S. Stern, vol. 16.
  University of Chicago Press.




                                            41
                      Table I. Summary Statistics, 2005–2015
Panel A of this table presents summary statistics on the firms included in the tests. Appendix Table
A1 contains the definitions of the variables we use. Total Assets, Market Value, R&D Expense,
and Cash is reported in billion USD. In Panel B, we tabulate number of dockets reported in the
RPX database by year. RPX records information on cases in which the plainti↵ is an NPE or
an Operating Company (PE). According to RPX, an NPE is an entity that derives or plans to
derive the majority of its revenue from the licensing or enforcement of patents and for which RPX
has been unable to obtain verifiable evidence that the entity sells products or services that would
make it vulnerable to patent counter-assertion. NPEs include the following organizational forms:
(1) patent assertion entities (Patent Asserter), entities believed to earn revenue predominantly
through asserting patents, (2) individual inventors (Small Inventor), (3) non-competing entities
(NCEs), operating companies asserting patents outside their areas of products or services, and (4)
universities and research institutions. In the last column of Panel B, we tabulate the number of
observations in a di↵erent database, Lex Machina, that also provides patent litigation information.


                                Panel A. Summary Statistics on Firm Characteristics


                                     Mean        Median    St. Dev      P05       P25      P75     P95
                Total Assets         13.991      0.719     108.401      0.023     0.165    3.075   32.143
                Market Value         3.815       0.454     16.389       0.019     0.112    1.866   15.483
                B/M                  2.965       0.599     66.765       0.117     0.339    1.000   3.787
                Past Return          0.139       0.065     0.706        -0.622    -0.191   0.325   1.077
                R&D Expense          0.077       0.000     0.510        0.000     0.000    0.011   0.184
                Number of Patents    55.62       0.000     540.80       0.000     0.000    0.000   97.00
                Cash                 0.579       0.040     4.272        0.001     0.010    0.167   1.776
                Sued by NPE          0.086       0.000     0.280        0.000     0.000    0.000   1.000
                Sued by PE           0.046       0.000     0.209        0.000     0.000    0.000   0.000




                                              Panel B. Sample Description


                                                     RPX                                              Lex Machina
                                      NPE                                        PE                    NPE & PE
              Patent Asserter   Small Inventor    NCE      University     Practicing Entity   Total      Total
       2005        381               172           11         12                 1,917        2,493         2,523
       2006        499               143           16         11                 1,914        2,583         2,581
       2007        658               173           16         11                 1,831        2,689         2,775
       2008        618               222            8         15                 1,651        2,514         2,573
       2009        633               197           12         16                 1,634        2,492         2,547
       2010        787               174           19         17                 1,693        2,690         2,770
       2011       1,520              183            16        14                 1,813        3,546         3,575
       2012       3,319              161           107        31                 1,764        5,382         5,455
       2013       3,831              230            9         71                 1,873        6,014         6,114
       2014       2,881              245            63        22                 1,722        4,933         5,070
       2015       3,613              152            3          8                 1,809        5,585         5,818
               Table II. Cash and Probability of Being Sued
In this table, we use a linear probability model to estimate the probability of being sued by an NPE.
The outcome variable, Sued by NPE, is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was litigated by an NPE in
a given year. RPX data allows us to observe the type of the NPE. We focus on cases in which the
NPE is classified as a patent assertion entity (PAE) or a small inventor (INV). Appendix Table A1
contains the definitions of the variables we use. We use log transformation for Total Assets, Market
Value, B/M, Patent Stock, Past Return, R&D Expense, and Cash Level. The sample contains
firm-year observations between 2005 and 2015. Standard errors, clustered by firm, are reported in
parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.


                                   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE
              Cash Level            0.1021***     0.0994***      0.0581***    0.0565***
                                     (0.0119)       (0.0119)      (0.0113)     (0.0133)
              Total Assets          -0.0161***    -0.0149***      0.0130**     0.0199**
                                     (0.0057)       (0.0056)      (0.0059)     (0.0084)
              Market Value          0.0740***     0.0720***     0.0610***       -0.0125
                                     (0.0075)       (0.0075)      (0.0066)     (0.0083)
              B/M                     -0.0045       -0.0081*    -0.0133***    -0.0150**
                                     (0.0048)       (0.0049)      (0.0048)     (0.0061)
              Past Return           -0.0063***    -0.0072***    -0.0070***      -0.0006
                                     (0.0021)       (0.0023)      (0.0022)     (0.0025)
              R&D Expense           0.1394***      0.1398***     0.1368***     0.1220**
                                     (0.0342)       (0.0342)      (0.0295)     (0.0483)
              Number of Patents     0.0139***     0.0146***     0.0149***       0.0006
                                     (0.0026)       (0.0026)      (0.0024)     (0.0038)
              Cash Shock              0.0199*        0.0163       0.0147*      0.0167**
                                     (0.0106)       (0.0105)      (0.0089)     (0.0081)

              Firm FE                  No            No            No            Yes
              Industry FE              No            No            Yes           No
              Year FE                  No            Yes           Yes           Yes

              N                      50,965        50,965        50,965        50,965
              R2                      0.17          0.18          0.28          0.55
    Table III. Is Cash Targeting a General Feature of Litigation?
In Column 1 of this table, we define Sued by PE to be equal to 1 if a firm faces IP lawsuits
from practicing entities (PEs) in a given year. The PE litigation information is obtained from
RPX. We obtain litigation information on other types of cases from Audit Analytics database.
This database includes material federal civil litigation and class action claims disclosed to the SEC
by SEC registrants. Case disclosure comes from the firm, which is responsible for determining
whether the case is material for the company. Given the severe penalties involved in not disclosing
information that is already public (through PACER), a dominant strategy for a CEO is often
disclose not only material information but also potentially non-material information that could
later be assessed as being within disclosure guidelines. Furthermore, because our interest lies in the
public firms (which are SEC registrants, by definition), Audit Analytics provides a comprehensive
database for cases we are interested in. In Columns 2-5, we utilize case classifications reported in
Audit Analytics to investigate whether the relation between firm characteristics and NPE litigation
di↵er for di↵erent case types. Specifically, in Column 2, we first define the dependent variable to
be 1 if the firm is involved in a case related to tort. The other categories include environment,
securities, contract, and labor—as defined by PACER. Appendix Table A5 outlines the specific
case codes used to identify these cases. We define the dependent variable to be 1 if the firm is sued
in the case type specified in the column heading. We use the baseline specification used in Table
II to facilitate comparison of coefficients across case types. Standard errors, clustered by firm, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
levels.


                               Sued by PE     Tort      Environment   Securities   Contract      Labor
         Cash Level               -0.0016    -0.0228*     -0.0078     -0.0261**    -0.0343***    -0.0004
                                 (0.0111)    (0.0122)    (0.0067)      (0.0125)      (0.0127)   (0.0036)
         Total Assets            0.0127*     -0.0158*      0.0016     0.0354***        0.0059    -0.0012
                                 (0.0065)    (0.0084)    (0.0028)      (0.0097)      (0.0098)   (0.0031)
         Market Value             0.0093    0.0158**      -0.0019     0.0280***    0.0265***      -0.002
                                 (0.0073)    (0.0079)    (0.0026)      (0.0087)      (0.0095)   (0.0031)
         B/M                      -0.0012   0.0100**       0.0004       -0.0023    0.0143***     0.0001
                                 (0.0042)    (0.0042)    (0.0015)      (0.0052)      (0.0048)   (0.0016)
         Past Return              -0.0013     -0.0022      0.0005      -0.0048*       -0.0039    -0.0008
                                 (0.0020)    (0.0017)    (0.0007)      (0.0027)      (0.0024)   (0.0008)
         R&D Expense              -0.0108   -0.1590**     -0.0019       -0.0573    -0.2343***    -0.0211
                                 (0.0494)    (0.0701)    (0.0158)      (0.0424)      (0.0538)   (0.0143)
         Number of Patents      -0.0079**    0.0056*     0.0017**       -0.0003       -0.0018    0.0001
                                 (0.0036)    (0.0034)    (0.0008)      (0.0028)      (0.0034)   (0.0005)
         Cash Shock               -0.0037     -0.0055      0.0017        0.0096     0.0221***      0.001
                                 (0.0070)    (0.0073)    (0.0035)      (0.0080)      (0.0082)   (0.0029)
         Number of Employees                                                                     0.0033
                                                                                                (0.0031)

         Firm FE                  Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
         Year FE                  Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes

         N                       50,965      42,209       42,209       42,209       42,209      41,213
         R2                       0.42        0.31         0.23         0.25         0.24        0.24
Table IV. Probability of Being Sued: Related vs. Unrelated Cash
Flows
In this table, we report the probability that a conglomerate is sued by an NPE as a function of the
gross profitability of related and unrelated segments. The unit of observation is a conglomerate-
segment-year. Sued by NPE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the conglomerate was litigated by an
NPE that year. To identify conglomerate’s segments that are related to litigated patents, we use the
IPC-to-SIC concordance developed by Silverman (2003). We use Thompson Innovation database
to identify IPC classification of each asserted patent. We use financial statements disclosed in
segment filings end of each year to collect segment-level information on sales and cost of goods
sold and calculate segment gross profitability as the di↵erence. Industry Profitability is the average
profitability of all firms in the same four-digit SIC. Standard errors, clustered by conglomerate, are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent
levels.

                                                 Segment Sued by NPE   Segment Sued by NPE
               Related Segment Profitability           0.1457**             0.0569**
                                                       (0.0623)             (0.0260)
               Unrelated Segment Profitability        0.0835***             0.0265**
                                                       (0.0246)             (0.0133)
               Industry Profitability                 -0.0039***             0.0008*
                                                       (0.0009)             (0.0005)

               Conglomerate FE                           No                    Yes

               N                                       29,405                29,405
               R2                                       0.02                  0.44
Table V. Cash and Probability of Being Sued: Comparison of PAEs
to Small Inventors
In this table, we report the baseline results for di↵erent types of NPEs. In Column 1, the regressand
takes a value of 1 if the firm is sued by a Patent Asserter. In Column 1, the regressand takes a
value of 1 if the firm is sued by a small inventor. Variable definitions are provided in Appendix
Table A1. Standard errors, clustered by firm, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.


                                         Sued by Patent Asserter   Sued by Small Inventor
                     Cash Level                0.0541***                    0.0105
                                                 (0.0135)                 (0.0066)
                     Total Assets               0.0223**                    0.0046
                                                 (0.0086)                 (0.0041)
                     Market Value                -0.0148*                  -0.0021
                                                 (0.0085)                 (0.0045)
                     B/M                       -0.0170***                  -0.0038
                                                 (0.0061)                 (0.0025)
                     Past Return                  -0.0002                  -0.0011
                                                 (0.0025)                 (0.0011)
                     R&D Expense                0.1376***                 0.0797*
                                                 (0.0520)                 (0.0463)
                     Number of Patents            0.0024                   -0.0025
                                                 (0.0038)                 (0.0019)
                     Cash Shock                  0.0166**                  -0.0044
                                                 (0.0082)                 (0.0052)

                     Firm FE                      Yes                       Yes
                     Year FE                      Yes                       Yes

                     N                           50,965                    50,965
                     R2                           0.54                      0.36
                      Table VI. Asserted Patents’ Attributes
In this table, we compare patents asserted in two types of cases: NPE vs. PE, and PE vs. PE. For
each patent, we first calculate eight di↵erent metrics. Age of Patent when asserted (in months) is
the time gap between the dates of litigation filing and patent issuance. Times Asserted measures
the number of instances the patents have been asserted through litigation. Issue Time Backlog is
the ratio of number of patents issued to sum of patents issued, pending and abandoned, at the time
of asserted patent’s issue month for the asserted patent’s NBER technology group and application
time cohort. Scope of Patent is the count of the asserted patent’s U.S. technology classes. Number
of Independent and Dependent Claims are based on the claims reported in issued patent. We report
the mean values and t-test for the di↵erence across patents asserted in NPE vs. PE, and PE vs.
PE cases.

                                                  NPE vs. PE cases   PE vs. PE cases   Di↵erence   t-test
        Age of Patent when asserted (in months)        92.58             76.97          15.61      (20.91)
        Times Asserted                                 13.02               2.84          10.18     (59.76)
        Issue Time Backlog                              0.35               0.31          0.04      (13.74)
        Scope of Patent                                 5.86               4.83          1.03      (21.50)
        Number of Independent Claims                    4.86               3.80          1.06      (21.11)
        Number of Words in Independent Claims         802.27             531.58         270.69     (26.54)
        Number of Dependent Claims                     29.98              21.19          8.79      (22.92)
        Number of Words in Dependent Claims           1052.41            690.86         361.55     (24.04)
        Number of Asserted Patents                     15,261            14,590
Table VII. Impact of Legal Team Size and Outside (non-IP) Liti-
gation
In this table, we use a linear probability model to estimate the probability of being sued by an NPE.
The outcome variable, Sued by NPE, is a dummy equal to 1 if the firm was litigated by an NPE
in a given year. We introduce two dummy variables to main specification reported in Table. The
first variable, IP Legal Team Size, is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the firm employs
more IP focused law firms than a comparable firm with similar characteristics. Appendix Table A2
provides details of IP Legal Team Size calculation. The second variable, Ongoing Cases, takes value
of 1 of if the number of ongoing litigation the firm is engaged is more than 10% of sum of ongoing
litigation of its peer firms in the same industry-year. The sample contains firm-year observations
between 2005 and 2012 in the first column because of data limitation. Standard errors, clustered
by firm, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels.


                                                 Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE
                             Cash Level            0.0592***    0.0563***
                                                    (0.0155)     (0.0132)
                             Total Assets          0.0323***     0.0197**
                                                    (0.0115)     (0.0083)
                             Market Value         -0.0324***      -0.0122
                                                    (0.0103)     (0.0083)
                             B/M                  -0.0219***    -0.0151**
                                                    (0.0072)     (0.0061)
                             Past Return             0.0009       -0.0006
                                                    (0.0029)     (0.0025)
                             R&D Expense            0.1087*      0.1213**
                                                    (0.0588)     (0.0485)
                             Number of Patents       0.0009        0.0005
                                                    (0.0040)     (0.0038)
                             Cash Shock             0.0200*      0.0166**
                                                    (0.0104)     (0.0081)
                             Legal Team Size       -0.0062**
                                                    (0.0029)
                             Ongoing Cases                       0.0171**
                                                                 (0.0072)

                             Firm FE                 Yes           Yes
                             Year FE                 Yes           Yes

                             N                     37,947         50,965
                             R2                     0.56           0.55
                                               Table VIII. Robustness Tests
In Panel A of this table, we report the results for several robustness tests. In the first two columns, we report results for thicket
industries (i.e., industries that are characterized with dense overlapping intellectual property rights and strategic patenting behavior)
and non-thicket industries. In Column 3, we exclude IT industry from the sample. We use SIC codes 35, 36, 38 and 73 to identify thicket
industries. We use SIC codes 35 and 73 to identify IT firms (see Bessen and Meurer (2014)). In Column 4, we use an alternative cash
measure (sum of cash and marketable securities) as our main variable of interest. In the last specification, we add three new variables to
the baseline specification: cash level squared, cash level cubed and Hadlock and Pierce (2010) financial constraints index. The Hadlock
and Pierce (2010) index measures how constrained the firm is in terms of accessing external funds; it combines information on firm asset
size, firm asset size squared, and firm age. We use mean firm age for firms whose ages are missing, to keep the sample size constant
across specifications (the coefficient of cash is 50% larger when we use the subsample that does not have information on firm age). In
Panel B, we report several specifications based on di↵erent estimation methods. In the first two columns, we change the left-hand side
variable to the number of times sued in a given year and use OLS and Tobit respectively. In the last column, we use Probit models.
                                        Panel A. Thicket Industries vs. Non-Thicket Industries

                          Sued by NPE            Sued by NPE             Sued by NPE             Sued by NPE           Sued by NPE
                        Thicket Industries   Non- Thicket Industries   Excluding IT Firms   Alternative Cash Measure   All Industries
Cash Level                  0.0891**               0.0515***               0.0543***                0.0324***            0.0613**
                            (0.0353)                (0.0143)                 (0.0137)                (0.0124)             (0.0291)
Total Assets                 0.0343                 0.0192**                0.0187**                 0.0217**            0.0209**
                            (0.0311)                (0.0085)                 (0.0085)                (0.0084)             (0.0092)
Market Value                 0.0014                 -0.0178*                -0.0178**                 -0.0126              -0.0124
                            (0.0180)                (0.0095)                 (0.0089)                (0.0083)             (0.0083)
B/M                           -0.018               -0.0147**                -0.0156**               -0.0145**            -0.0149**
                            (0.0152)                (0.0067)                 (0.0064)                (0.0061)             (0.0061)
Past Return                  -0.0017                 -0.0006                  -0.0008                 -0.0002              -0.0006
                            (0.0052)                (0.0029)                 (0.0027)                (0.0025)             (0.0025)
R&D Expense                   0.0578                 0.1098*                 0.1094**               0.1362***             0.1230**
                            (0.0867)                (0.0573)                 (0.0508)                (0.0488)             (0.0482)
Number of Patents             0.0054                 -0.0058                  -0.0037                  0.0007               0.0006
                            (0.0057)                (0.0049)                 (0.0041)                (0.0038)             (0.0038)
Cash Shock                  0.0339**                  0.0107                 0.0211**                0.0202**             0.0167**
                            (0.0171)                (0.0092)                 (0.0088)                (0.0081)             (0.0081)
Financial Constraints                                                                                                       0.0012
                                                                                                                          (0.0035)
Cash Level Squared                                                                                                         -0.0044
                                                                                                                          (0.0218)
Cash Level Cubed                                                                                                            0.0008
                                                                                                                          (0.0040)

Firm FE                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes
Year FE                        Yes                    Yes                     Yes                     Yes                   Yes

N                            13,791                  37,174                  43,430                  50,965               50,965
R2                            0.56                    0.54                    0.54                    0.55                 0.55
                              Panel B. Alternative Estimation Methods

                           Sued by NPE                   Sued by NPE               Sued by NPE
                    OLS (Number of Times Sued)   Tobit (Number of Times Sued)   Probit (Sued or Not)
Cash Level                  0.4439***                     1.9722***                  0.2896***
                             (0.1638)                      (0.1645)                   (0.0466)
Total Assets                0.2309**                       -0.1947*                    -0.0113
                             (0.0939)                      (0.1018)                   (0.0315)
Market Value                -0.2695**                     2.3869***                  0.3408***
                             (0.1065)                      (0.1151)                   (0.0364)
B/M                        -0.1620***                       -0.0943                    -0.0385
                             (0.0392)                      (0.1394)                   (0.0393)
Past Return                   -0.0147                       -0.1791                    -0.0087
                             (0.0146)                      (0.1322)                   (0.0193)
R&D Expense                 5.9518***                     2.6446***                     0.1843
                             (1.8900)                      (0.2524)                   (0.1274)
Number of Patents            0.1408**                     0.5181***                  0.0918***
                             (0.0664)                      (0.0350)                   (0.0120)
Cash Shock                     0.0086                        0.1677                     0.0564
                             (0.0580)                      (0.2272)                   (0.0420)

Firm FE                        Yes                           No                         No
Year FE                        Yes                           Yes                        Yes

N                             50,965                        50,965                     50,965
R2                             0.75                          0.14                       0.20
          Table IX. Impact of IP Litigation on Real Outcomes
In Panel A of this table, we present the impact of being sued by a NPE, Patent Asserter, or PE on
research and development expenditures in the two years following litigation filing, in comparison
to the two years before litigation filing. We use the timing of the case filing as the expectations
regarding the case outcome start impacting firm operations after the litigation event becomes
common knowledge. Following Allison, Lemley, and Walker (2010), we exclude case outcomes such
as “Stayed,” “Transfers,” and “procedural dispositions.” We only use case outcomes RPX codes
as “Dismissed,” “Settled,” “Won by NPE,” and “Lost by NPE.” In our sample, settlements and
won by NPE result in 88 percent of the outcomes, while dismissals and lost by NPE arise in 12
percent of the cases. We compare two groups of firms based on case outcomes of “Settled or Won by
NPE” to “Dismissed or Lost by NPE”. In the first row of Panel A, we consider the change in R&D
expense, before and after litigation filing, comparing defendant firms whose cases were “Settled or
Won by NPE” with those whose cases were “Dismissed or Lost by NPE”. We compare average
R&D expense spending two years following the litigation filing to average R&D expense spending
two years before the litigation filing. Using this di↵erence-in-di↵erences design, we report mean of
Change in R&D (treated) Change in R&D (untreated). We note that some settlements do not
necessarily involve conditions that could be significantly di↵erent from dismissals. Furthermore,
a given firm may be sued multiple times in a given year and these cases may end with di↵erent
outcomes. To define the treatment sample cleanly, we assume that a firm can only be grouped into
the treated sample if all the cases against that firm in a given year conclude with “Settled or Won
by NPE” outcomes. These assumptions assure that the e↵ects we document are conservative. In
Panel B, Column 3 we test whether the research outputs of the treated and untreated sets were
similar prior to litigation, i.e. R&D expense change from year t 3 to t 2. In the first column of
Panel C, we report the results of the OLS regression in which future R&D Expense (scaled by total
assets) is regressed on a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if all the cases filed by NPEs against
the firm in a particular year are settled or won by the NPE. The unit of observation is firm-year.
To measure the future R&D Expense, we use average of R&D spending two years following the
litigation. To calculate Citation Commonality, we do the following: First, we count the number
patents citing a given patent of a firm and the asserted patent of NPE. We then add up the these
figures for all patents of the firm. Standard errors, clustered by firm, are reported in parentheses.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.
                                                     Panel A. Real E↵ect Analysis


Sued by                       Treated                         Untreated                N(Treated)    N(Untreated)       Change in R&D around litigation
NPE                   Settled + Won by NPE           Dismissed + Lost by NPE             1,929            533                       -163.97
                                                                                                                                     (7.18)
Patent Asserter     Settled + Won by P. Asserter   Dismissed + Lost by P. Asserter       1,868            502                       -155.02
                                                                                                                                     (6.60)
PE                     Settled + Won by PE            Dismissed + Lost by PE              175             38                        167.657
                                                                                                                                     (1.28)

                                                    Panel B. Parallel Trend Analysis

          Sued by                       Treated                      Untreated                  Change in R&D prior to litigation
          NPE                 Settled + Won by NPE           Dismissed + Lost by NPE                           18.951
                                                                                                               (1.18)
          Patent Asserter   Settled + Won by P. Asserter   Dismissed + Lost by P. Asserter                      -1.95
                                                                                                               (0.06)
          PE                   Settled + Won by PE            Dismissed + Lost by PE                           50.79
                                                                                                               (0.31)
Panel C. Real E↵ects OLS Analysis: Settled + Won by NPE vs. Dismissed + Lost by NPE

 Sued by                               NPE         Patent Asserter       PE
                                  Future R&D/A     Future R&D/A      Future R&D/A
 Dummy (Settled + Won by NPE)        -0.0173**        -0.0179**           0.0058
                                      (0.0081)         (0.0082)         (0.0306)
 Market Value                       -0.0238***       -0.0230***        -0.0275**
                                      (0.0048)         (0.0047)         (0.0127)
 B/M                                -0.0468***       -0.0447***       -0.1266***
                                      (0.0070)         (0.0068)         (0.0361)
 Past Return                           -0.0061          -0.005           -0.0527
                                      (0.0068)         (0.0069)         (0.0410)
 Cash Level                          0.0174***        0.0160***           0.0138
                                      (0.0056)         (0.0055)         (0.0222)
 Cash Shock                           0.0137*          0.0135*            0.0162
                                      (0.0071)         (0.0071)         (0.0277)
 Citation Commonality                0.0046***        0.0048***          -0.0005
                                      (0.0008)         (0.0009)         (0.0011)
 Ongoing Cases                      -0.0513***       -0.0508***        -0.0832**
                                      (0.0097)         (0.0096)         (0.0333)

 Year Fixed E↵ects                      Yes             Yes              Yes

 N                                     2,462            2,370            209
 R2                                     0.13             0.13            0.15
Table X. NPE Litigation and Individual Inventor Patenting Activ-
ity, 1995–2015
In this table, we estimate an OLS model using past NPE litigation activity to predict the share
of all future patents produced by individual innovators (Individual Innovator Share). The unit
of observation is year-IPC subclass code. We exclude patents if a technology class (IPC code)
is not reported in the Thompson Innovation database. Individual Innovator patents are those
which name the same individual as the “innovator” and “assignee.” If a patent belongs to multiple
IPC subclasses, it is counted towards each. We define past litigation activity by calculating the
average number of NPE litigation events in the past 3, 4, and 5 years (Litigation3, Litigation4,
and Litigation5). Standard errors are clustered by year and reported in parenthesis. ***, **, and
* refer to statistical significance at 1, 5 or 10 percent level.


                         Individual Innovator Share   Individual Innovator Share   Individual Innovator Share
           Litigation5             -2.0158
                                  (2.5914)

           Litigation4                                          -2.0362
                                                               (2.3644)

           Litigation3                                                                       -2.0699
                                                                                            (2.1816)

       Tech Group FE                Yes                          Yes                          Yes
             Year FE                Yes                          Yes                          Yes

                    N              8,975                        8,975                        8,975
                   R2               0.80                         0.80                         0.80
Figure 1. Time Series of NPE, PE, and Total IP Litigation
This figure shows the number of unique dockets in PACER (Public Access to Court Electronic
Records) classified as patent cases (PACER code 830) in which at least one of the defendants is
a public firm. We use RPX’s classification of plainti↵s to split dockets according to whether the
plainti↵ is an NPE or a PE.
Figure 2. Geography of Patent Assertion
This map shows the geography of patent infringement lawsuits filed by Non-Practicing Entities
(NPEs) against publicly traded firms in the United States between 2005 and 2015.
Appendix – Patent Trolls: Evidence
       from Targeted Firms
Appendix Table A1: Definitions of Variables
                              Definition                                                                 Source
NPE/PE Litigation             A dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm was litigated by                     RPX
                              an NPE or a PE in a given year.
NPE Litigation (CKS Sample)   A dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm was litigated                      npedata.com
                              by an NPE in 2010 or 2012.
R&D Expense                   R&D Expense reported on annual income statement.                           Compustat
Patent Stock                  Number of patents issued to the firm in the past five years.               Kogan et al. (2012)
                              We use the final year of the KPSS database (2010)
                              to proxy for the patent stock of companies between 2011 and 2014.
IP Legal Team Size            A dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm employs more IP focused            ALM Legal Intelligence
                              law firms than a comparable firm with similar characteristics.
                              See Appendix Table A2 for details.
In-house Counsel              A dummy variable equal to 1 if a firm employs an in-house counsel.         ALM Legal Intelligence
Ongoing Cases                 A dummy variable equal to 1 of if the number of ongoing litigation         Audit Analytics
                              the firm is engaged is more than 10% of sum of that of its peers
                              in the same industry-year.
Market Value                  Market value of firm equity as of the end of the previous fiscal year.     Compustat
Total Assets                  Total firm assets as of the end of the previous fiscal year.               Compustat
Book to Market                Ratio of firm book value of equity to market value of equity as            Compustat
                              of the end of the previous fiscal year.
                              (Book value of equity is the sum of stockholders equity (SEQ),
                              Deferred Tax (TXDB), and Investment Tax Credit (ITCB),
                              minus Preferred Stock (PREF). Depending on data availability,
                              we use redemption (item PSTKRV), liquidation (item PSTKL),
                              or par value (item PSTK) to represent the book value of preferred stock.
Past Return                   Stock market return to equity corresponding to the fiscal year.            CRSP
Cash Level                    The firm’s level of cash at the end of the previous fiscal year.           Compustat
Cash Shock                    A dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if change in cash in the          Compustat
                              past fiscal year is among the top 5% of cash changes in its industry.
Citation Commonality          To construct this, we use the Ambercite data, which provides the           Ambercite.com
                              pairwise similarity between any two patents as the number of
                              patents citing the patent pair together. We aggregate
                              this to the portfolio level of patents for each firm, and
                              compare it to any given patent that is asserted against the firm.
                                    Appendix Table A2: Measuring Legal Team Size
In this table, we measure firms’ IP legal team sizes, using a model that predicts the number of IP law firms used by comparable firms.
We obtain list of all law firms and their client lists from ALM Legal Intelligence (from 2005–2012). For each law firm reported in the
ALM database, we collect two pieces of information from firm websites: (a) whether the law firm has an IP litigation practice, and (b)
how important the law firm’s IP practice is within the law firm. We calculate each firm’s IP legal team size variable after incorporating
this additional information. Specifically, we regress log number of (one plus) IP law firms representing the firm in a given year on total
assets of the firm, an indicator variable representing the existence of in-house council, log number of (one plus) law firms representing the
firm in all non IP cases, and firm fixed e↵ects. We use the residual of this estimation to measure of IP Legal Team Size for each firm-year
(IP Legal Team Size=1 when residuals>0.) To accommodate the possibility that a given firm may choose not to report representation
by law firms in a particular year, we impute the missing observations by using the representation information in the most immediate
previous year (our results are not sensitive to this imputation method).


                                    Number of IP Law Firms   Number of IP Law Firms   Number of IP Law Firms   Number of IP Law Firms
                 Other Law Firm           0.8173***                                                                  0.8212***
                                           (0.0080)                                                                   (0.0082)
                 Total Assets                                      0.2290***                                         -0.0206**
                                                                    (0.0241)                                          (0.0085)
                 In-house Counsel                                                           0.6702***                  -0.026
                                                                                             (0.0601)                 (0.0261)

                 Firm FE                     Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

                 N                          37,947                   37,947                   37,947                   37,947
                 R2                          0.95                      0.7                     0.71                     0.95
                                      Appendix Table A3: Alternative Specifications
In this appendix, we examine the results documented in Table II under di↵erent specifications. In Panel A, we confirm the stability of
results on Cash Level by including and excluding variables one-at-a-time. In Panel B, we replace firm fixed e↵ects with industry fixed
e↵ects. In Panel C, we cluster standard errors by year rather than by firm.


                                                          Panel A. Assessing Multicollinearity


                            Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE    Sued by NPE      Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE
        Cash Level           0.0565***     0.0711***    0.0612***        0.0563***        0.0557***     0.0564***    0.0614***     0.0596***
                              (0.0133)      (0.0124)    (0.0129)          (0.0133)         (0.0133)      (0.0133)     (0.0132)      (0.0131)
        Total Assets          0.0199**                                     0.0122          0.0153*      0.0201**     0.0248***      0.0204**
                              (0.0084)                                    (0.0075)         (0.0082)      (0.0083)     (0.0084)      (0.0083)
        Market Value           -0.0125                  -0.0034                             -0.0065       -0.0127      -0.0118       -0.0121
                              (0.0083)                  (0.0073)                           (0.0078)      (0.0081)     (0.0083)      (0.0083)
        B/M                  -0.0150**                  -0.0110*          -0.0107*                     -0.0146***    -0.0153**     -0.0152**
                              (0.0061)                  (0.0060)          (0.0059)                       (0.0056)     (0.0061)      (0.0061)
        Past Return            -0.0006                  -0.0013            -0.0013          0.0021                     -0.0008       -0.0007
                              (0.0025)                  (0.0025)          (0.0024)         (0.0023)                   (0.0025)      (0.0025)
        R&D Expense           0.1220**                  0.1347***         0.1205**         0.1229**     0.1221**                    0.1217**
                              (0.0483)                  (0.0481)          (0.0482)         (0.0484)     (0.0483)                    (0.0483)
        Number of Patents       0.0006                  0.0007             0.0007           0.0006       0.0006        0.0016         0.0006
                              (0.0038)                  (0.0038)          (0.0038)         (0.0038)     (0.0038)      (0.0038)      (0.0038)
        Cash Shock            0.0167**                  0.0172**          0.0164**         0.0170**     0.0168**      0.0166**
                              (0.0081)                  (0.0081)          (0.0081)         (0.0081)     (0.0081)      (0.0081)

        Firm FE                 Yes           Yes       Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
        Year FE                 Yes           Yes       Yes                 Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes

        N                     50,965        50,965      50,965             50,965           50,965       50,965        50,965       50,965
        R2                     0.55          0.55       0.55                0.55             0.55         0.55          0.55         0.55
                                  Panel B. Specification with Industry Fixed E↵ects instead of Firm Fixed E↵ects


                    Sued by NPE     Sued by NPE     Sued by NPE      Sued by NPE     Sued by NPE     Sued by NPE    Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE
Cash Level           0.0581***        0.2033***       0.0690***       0.0551***        0.0558***        0.0576***    0.0768***      0.0602***
                       (0.0113)        (0.0111)        (0.0101)        (0.0117)         (0.0113)         (0.0113)      (0.0111)      (0.0111)
Total Assets          0.0130**                                        0.0548***          0.0062         0.0131**        0.0092      0.0130**
                       (0.0059)                                        (0.0042)         (0.0053)         (0.0059)      (0.0059)      (0.0059)
Market Value         0.0610***                        0.0715***                        0.0704***       0.0605***     0.0678***     0.0615***
                       (0.0066)                        (0.0047)                         (0.0057)         (0.0066)      (0.0067)      (0.0066)
B/M                  -0.0133***                         -0.0065       -0.0505***                       -0.0121***     -0.0100**    -0.0131***
                       (0.0048)                        (0.0043)         (0.0047)                         (0.0047)      (0.0047)      (0.0048)
Past Return          -0.0070***                       -0.0071***       -0.0045**       -0.0055**                     -0.0075***    -0.0071***
                       (0.0022)                        (0.0022)         (0.0023)        (0.0021)                       (0.0022)      (0.0022)
R&D Expense           0.1368***                       0.1333***        0.1619***       0.1337***       0.1371***                    0.1372***
                       (0.0295)                        (0.0298)         (0.0290)        (0.0295)        (0.0295)                     (0.0295)
Number of Patents    0.0149***                        0.0147***       0.0180***        0.0146***       0.0149***     0.0213***     0.0149***
                       (0.0024)                        (0.0024)         (0.0025)        (0.0024)        (0.0024)      (0.0023)       (0.0024)
Cash Shock             0.0147*                           0.0147        0.0231**          0.0141         0.0150*       0.0166*
                       (0.0089)                        (0.0089)         (0.0090)        (0.0089)        (0.0089)      (0.0090)

Industry FE             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Year FE                 Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes

N                     50,965           50,965           50,965          50,965          50,965           50,965       50,965        50,965
R2                     0.28             0.23             0.28            0.28            0.28             0.28         0.28          0.28
                                            Panel C. Specification with errors clustred by Year E↵ects


                    Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE       Sued by NPE     Sued by NPE      Sued by NPE         Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE   Sued by NPE
Cash Level           0.0565***     0.0711***          0.0612***       0.0563***        0.0557***          0.0564***     0.0614***     0.0596***
                      (0.0107)      (0.0147)           (0.0112)        (0.0108)         (0.0107)           (0.0108)      (0.0117)      (0.0115)
Total Assets           0.0199*                                          0.0122            0.0153           0.0201*      0.0248**        0.0204*
                      (0.0106)                                         (0.0110)         (0.0088)           (0.0105)      (0.0100)      (0.0106)
Market Value           -0.0125                          -0.0034                          -0.0065            -0.0127       -0.0118       -0.0121
                      (0.0168)                         (0.0153)                         (0.0148)           (0.0163)      (0.0172)      (0.0168)
B/M                   -0.0150*                           -0.011         -0.0107                             -0.0146      -0.0153*      -0.0152*
                      (0.0080)                         (0.0063)        (0.0060)                            (0.0089)      (0.0081)      (0.0080)
Past Return            -0.0006                          -0.0013         -0.0013          0.0021                           -0.0008       -0.0007
                      (0.0034)                         (0.0034)        (0.0030)         (0.0037)                         (0.0035)      (0.0034)
R&D Expense          0.1220***                        0.1347***       0.1205***        0.1229***          0.1221***                   0.1217***
                      (0.0359)                         (0.0340)        (0.0364)         (0.0358)           (0.0361)                    (0.0362)
Number of Patents       0.0006                           0.0007         0.0007           0.0006             0.0006        0.0016         0.0006
                      (0.0038)                         (0.0038)        (0.0038)         (0.0038)           (0.0038)      (0.0037)      (0.0038)
Cash Shock             0.0167*                         0.0172*         0.0164*          0.0170*            0.0168*       0.0166*
                      (0.0084)                         (0.0085)        (0.0085)         (0.0085)           (0.0084)      (0.0085)

Firm FE                 Yes           Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes
Year FE                 Yes           Yes                Yes             Yes              Yes                Yes           Yes           Yes

N                     50,965        50,965             50,965           50,965           50,965            50,965        50,965        50,965
R2                     0.55          0.55               0.55             0.55             0.55              0.55          0.55          0.55
Appendix Table A4: NPE Categories and Analysis Using Alternative Sample from Cotropia,
Kesan, and Schwartz (2014)
In Panel A of this appendix, we utilize a second sample, constructed by Cotropia, Kesan, and Schwartz (2014) and provided on npe-
data.com (CKS). CKS hand-coded all patent-holder litigants from the years 2010 and 2012, and classified the nature of the litigants. CKS
broke down the litigants into several categories of NPEs (such as “large aggregators” and “patent holding companies”). To accommodate
comparability across databases, we matched plainti↵ types into three broad categories: (1) Patent Asserter, (2) Small Inventor, and (3)
Other. We report the percentages of litigation by category, as a percentage of total cases with NPE plainti↵s. In tabulating the CKS
database, we separated out 3,950 observations that are classified as PEs (labeled as “operating companies” by CKS). These cases are
used to replicate our PE vs. PE analysis. In first column of Panel B, we conduct the same analysis as in Table II, for 2010 and 2012 using
RPX data. In columns 2-5, we replicate our Table V using the CKS data. Because the CKS data cover only two years (2010 and 2012),
we cannot include firm fixed e↵ects in the specification; however, we do include 4-digit SIC code fixed e↵ects to capture industry-specific
variation. In the last column of Panel B, we report the baseline result after excluding IT firms (SIC Code 35 (e.g., Apple and IBM) and
SIC Code 73 (e.g., Yahoo and Ebay)). In Panel C, we perform a similar analysis for PE vs. PE cases. In column 1, we use RPX data for
years 2010 and 2012. In Column 2, we define Sued by PE to be equal to 1 if a firm faces IP lawsuits from practicing entities (PEs) in a
given year, as defined in CKS sample. In Column 3, we exclude pharmaceutical industries from the sample. Standard errors, clustered
by firm, are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels.


                                                         Panel A. NPE Classification Comparison


                                 RPX Database (2005-2015)                              CKS Database (2010 and 2012)
                                 Patent Asserter                    87.98%   62.43%    Patent holding company
                                                                             10.13%    Large aggregator
                                 Small Inventor                     9.63%    15.67%    Individual/family trust
                                                                             1.31%     IP Holding company of operating
                                                                             3.22%     Technology development company
                                 NCE                                1.31%    5.70%     Failed operating company/failed st.
                                 University/ Research Institute     1.07%    1.55%     University/College
                                 Number of cases (docket x court)   21,300   3,753     Number of cases (docket x court)
         Panel B. Analysis using Data from Cotropia, Kesan and Schwartz (2014): NPE vs. PE cases

                        RPX            CKS                 CKS                  CKS                CKS
                                                                               Sued by       Sued by NPE
                    Sued by NPE    Sued by NPE    Sued by Patent Asserter
                                                                            Small Inventor   (excluding IT)
Cash Level            0.0332*        0.0360**           0.0401***                0.0038         0.0384**
                      (0.0199)       (0.0170)            (0.0126)              (0.0102)         (0.0158)
Total Assets         0.0321***        -0.0051             -0.0072               -0.0039          0.0043
                      (0.0118)       (0.0074)            (0.0074)              (0.0035)         (0.0071)
Market Value         0.0702***      0.0354***            0.0284**             0.0181***         0.0234**
                      (0.0166)       (0.0113)            (0.0113)              (0.0055)         (0.0107)
B/M                   -0.0245*      -0.0177***          -0.0172***              -0.0015        -0.0207***
                      (0.0125)       (0.0064)            (0.0064)              (0.0031)         (0.0070)
Past Return           -0.0101*       -0.0064*             -0.0058               -0.0021         -0.0072*
                      (0.0052)       (0.0035)            (0.0035)              (0.0017)         (0.0040)
R&D Expense          0.1511***         0.1061             0.1122*              0.0566**           -0.003
                      (0.0529)       (0.0674)            (0.0677)              (0.0247)         (0.0525)
Number of Patents    0.0175***      0.0125***            0.0084**              0.0044**          0.0062
                      (0.0039)       (0.0041)            (0.0033)              (0.0019)         (0.0045)
Cash Shock             0.0081          0.0101              0.0105                0.0087          0.0016
                      (0.0205)       (0.0173)            (0.0166)              (0.0112)         (0.0174)

Industry FE             Yes            Yes                  Yes                  Yes               Yes
Year FE                 Yes            Yes                  Yes                  Yes               Yes

N                      8,746           8,746               8,746                8,746            6,406
R2                      0.35            0.17                0.16                 0.13             0.17
Panel C. Analysis using Data from Cotropia, Kesan and Schwartz (2014): PE vs. PE cases

                                RPX           CKS               CKS
                             Sued by PE    Sued by PE       Sued by PE
                                                        (Excluding Pharma.)
         Cash Level             -0.0125       0.0165            0.0209
                               (0.0177)      (0.0161)         (0.0157)
         Total Assets            0.0005       -0.0094         -0.0117*
                               (0.0086)      (0.0070)         (0.0069)
         Market Value         0.0493***     0.0405***        0.0381***
                               (0.0108)      (0.0105)         (0.0103)
         B/M                    -0.0009       -0.0061          -0.0074
                               (0.0067)      (0.0049)         (0.0050)
         Past Return            -0.0036           0            -0.0001
                               (0.0030)      (0.0037)         (0.0041)
         R&D Expense          0.1591***     0.1177***        0.1404***
                               (0.0414)      (0.0343)         (0.0454)
         Number of Patents    0.0106***     0.0140***        0.0149***
                               (0.0032)      (0.0027)         (0.0030)
         Cash Shock              0.0076        0.0243         0.0317**
                               (0.0177)      (0.0157)         (0.0150)

         Industry FE             Yes           Yes               Yes
         Year FE                 Yes           Yes               Yes

         N                      8,746         8,746             8,209
         R2                      0.23          0.19             0.19
         Appendix Table A5. PACER Nature of Suit Codes
This appendix lists the lawsuit codes and their descriptions as classified by PACER
(https://www.PACER.gov/documents/natsuit.pdf).

         Suit Type     PACER Suit Code   Nature of Suit
         TORT                310         Airplane
                             315         Airplane Product Liability
                             320         Assault, Libel, & Slander
                             330         Federal Employers’s Liability
                             340         Marine
                             345         Marine Product Liability
                             350         Motor Vehicle
                             355         Motor Vehicle Product Liability
                             360         Other Personal Injury
                             362         Personal Injury- Medical Malpractice
                             365         Personal Injury- Product Liability
                             367         Personal Injury - Health Care
                             368         Asbestos Personal Injury Product Liability
                             375         False Claims Act
                             370         Other Fraud
                             371         Truth in Lending
                             380         Other Personal Property Damage
                             385         Property Damage Product Liability

         CONTRACT            110         Insurance
                             120         Marine
                             130         Miller Act
                             140         Negotiable Instrument
                             150         Recovery of Overpayment & Enforcement of Judgment
                             151         Medicare Act
                             152         Recovery of Defaulted Student Loans (Excl. Veterans)
                             153         Recovery of Overpayment of Veteran’s Benefit
                             160         Stockholders’s Suit
                             190         Other Contract
                             195         Contract Product Liability
                             196         Franchise

         LABOR               710         Fair Labor Standards Act
                             720         Labor/Management Relations
                             730         Labor/Management Reporting & Disclosure Act
                             740         Railway Labor Act
                             751         Family and Medical Leave Act
                             790         Other Labor Litigation
                             791         Employee Retirement Income Security Act

         SECURITIES          850         Securities/Commodities/Exchange

         ENVIRONMENT         893         Environmental Matters
                Appendix Table A6: PE vs. PE case coding
This appendix reports the criteria used to code case outcome variables for the PE vs. PE sample.
We find docket numbers of PE vs. PE cases in Lex Machina and record “Patent Case Resolution.”
We then read the judgment to identify the nature of dismissal or the party that judgment favored.
In cases where the judgment refers to stipulated dismissal, we code the outcome as “settlement.”
In Panel B, we report the distribution of PE vs. PE cases based on outcome.


                           Coded as   Criteria
                         Settlement   Likely Settlement: Stipulated Dismissal
                    Won by Plainti↵   Judgment: Consent Judgment : Claimant Win
                   Won by Defendant   Judgment: Consent Judgment : Claim Defendant Win
                          Dismissed   Judgement: Trial : Dismissed with prejudice
                          Dismissed   Judgement: Trial : Dismissed w/o prejudice
                       Not included   Stayed, Transfers or procedural dispositions


                                                 PE vs. PE (%)   NPE vs. PE (%)
                                  Dismissed           5.99           6.49
                            Lost by Plainti↵          9.53           5.68
                                     Settled         72.73           87.39
                            Won by Plainti↵          11.75           0.45

                               Total dockets          451            6,042
