                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRADE LIBERALIZATION, QUALITY, AND EXPORT PRICES

                                            Haichao Fan
                                           Yao Amber Li
                                         Stephen R. Yeaple

                                        Working Paper 20323
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20323


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Mary Amiti, Keith Head, Amit Khandelwal, Thomas Chaney, Peter Schott, Michael Waugh,
Robert Staiger, Hiroyuki Kasahara, Frédèric Warzynski, Kalina Manova, Ann Harrison, Lorenzo Caliendo,
Roberto Samaniego, Ping Lin, Larry Qiu, Jiandong Ju, Edwin Lai, David Cook, Pengfei Wang, the
participants at numerous seminars. Stephen Yeaple would also like to thank the Human Capital Foundation
for support. Yao Amber Li gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Research Grants Council
of Hong Kong, China (General Research Funds and Early Career Scheme GRF/ECS Project no. 646112).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Haichao Fan, Yao Amber Li, and Stephen R. Yeaple. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Liberalization, Quality, and Export Prices
Haichao Fan, Yao Amber Li, and Stephen R. Yeaple
NBER Working Paper No. 20323
July 2014
JEL No. F0,F1,F14

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper presents theory and evidence from highly disaggregated Chinese data that tariff reductions
induce a country’s producers to upgrade the quality of the goods that they export. The paper first documents
two stylized facts regarding the effect of trade liberalization on export prices and its relation with product
differentiation. Next, the paper develops a simple analytic framework that relates a firm’s choice of
quality to its access to imported intermediates. The model predicts that a reduction in the import tariff
induces an incumbent importer/exporter to increase the quality of its exports and to raise its export
price in industries where the scope for quality differentiation is large while to lower its export price
in industries where the scope for quality differentiation is small. The predictions are consistent with
the stylized facts based on Chinese data and robust to various estimation specifications.


Haichao Fan                                                     Stephen R. Yeaple
School of International Business Administration                 Department of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics                    The Pennsylvania State University
fan.haichao@mail.shufe.edu.cn                                   520 Kern Building
                                                                University Park, PA 16802-3306
Yao Amber Li                                                    and NBER
Department of Economics                                         sry3@psu.edu
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
1 University Road, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon
Hong Kong SAR
yaoli@ust.hk
1        Introduction

Over the last twenty years many developing countries have abruptly and substantially lowered tariffs
and scaled back other trade barriers. This policy change has created the opportunity to observe the
extent to which trade barriers affect the behavior of individual firms. A rapidly growing literature
shows that trade liberalization has led to a surge in imports of intermediate inputs and that the
improved access to foreign made inputs has had a large impact on firm productivity and the scope
of product offerings at the firm level.1 Given the transformative impact of trade liberalization on
documented productivity, it is natural to consider the effect trade barriers may have had on firms’
decisions regarding the quality of the products that they produce.

        This paper asks whether lower tariffs on imported intermediates induce firms to upgrade the
quality of the goods that they export. Such a link between trade liberalization and export quality is
important because the production of high-quality goods is often viewed as a pre-condition for export
success and for economic development (Amiti and Khandelwal, 2013).2 To address this question, we
present theory and evidence from highly disaggregated Chinese linked firm-level production data and
customs data that tariff reductions induced Chinese exporters to upgrade the quality of the goods
that they export, particularly in industries where the scope for quality variation is high. Chinese firms
that enjoy the largest tariff reductions are observed to raise the prices of their exports to existing
export markets and to shift their export volumes geographically from countries where demand for
high quality goods is relatively weak to markets where demand for high quality goods is strong.

        We first document two stylized facts regarding the relationship between the arguably exogenous
tariff reductions imposed on China by accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the
export prices for ordinary (non-processing) Chinese incumbent exporters. We show that in industries
in which products are highly differentiated firms raise their export prices in response to a fall in the
tariffs they pay on imported inputs. In industries featuring primarily homogeneous goods, the pattern
is ambiguous or even reversed: a reduction in imported intermediate tariffs results in lower prices.

        We explain these facts in the context of a simple model of firm quality choice. The model generates
linear equations that relates changes in the export prices charged by the firm and changes in the
output quality produced by the firm to changes in the tariffs of the set of goods imported by the firm.
Importantly, the magnitude (and potentially the sign) of the coefficient on import tariffs depends on
the scope for quality heterogeneity within the industry.

        We then estimate our model using panel data for Chinese firms over the period 2001-2006. The
unilateral trade liberalization imposed on China as a condition for WTO accession provides a source
    1
     For instance, greater access to foreign intermediate inputs has been associated with higher firm-level productiv-
ity (Amiti and Konings, 2007, among others), and other firm-level adjustments such as domestic product scope (e.g.,
Goldberg et al., 2010).
   2
     Schott (2004) shows that international specialization is less about the industrial composition of a country’s exports
and is more about the level of quality of a fixed set of goods.



                                                            2
of exogenous variation that allows us to estimate the impact of tariff reduction on firm export prices.3
Another advantage of our data is that it allows us to create very precise firm-level measures of import
tariff reductions and so allow us to capture the true extent of within industry heterogeneity in the size
of the direct impact of trade liberalization on a firm’s marginal costs.4 By using long-differences within
firm-destination-product categories, we eliminate many potential sources of spurious correlation. We
also address the potential endogeneity of firm-level import behavior using instrumental variables.

    Our coefficient estimates confirm the main predictions of our model. First, firms that face larger
reduction in the tariffs imposed on their imported inputs increase rather than decrease their export
prices when the good in question is in an industry where the scope for quality differentiation is large
but not when the exported good is in an industry where the scope for quality differentiation is small.
This result is robust to the inclusion of a wide range of time-varying firm controls, alternative measures
of tariff liberalization, and samples confined to only small firms that have little room to adjust mark-
ups. Importantly, the result does not obtain in a placebo sample of export processing firms that were
never subjected to tariffs. In addition, we present indirect evidence at the extensive margin of quality
upgrading: firms experiencing large reductions in tariffs on their imported intermediates tend to enter
new markets with relatively highly priced goods and exit markets where prices had tended to be low.

    Our paper contributes to a vibrant literature that links improved access to imported intermediate
inputs to superior firm performance. Dimensions along which superior performance has been measured
include improved total factor productivity (Amiti and Konings, 2007; Kasahara and Rodrigue, 2008;
Halpern et al., 2011; Gopinath and Neiman, 2011), expanded product scope (Goldberg et al., 2010),
and quality upgrading (Amiti and Khandelwal, 2013).

    Within this literature, our paper is most closely related to Amiti and Khandelwal (2013) who
compute measures of industry-level quality by export market and who show that a tariff reduction that
leads to greater competition in the home market is associated with an increase in export quality. While
also focused on quality and prices in export markets, our paper differs from Amiti and Khandelwal
(2013) along several dimensions. First, while Amiti and Khandelwal (2013) focus on the effect on
the competition effects of tariff reductions in output on quality choice, our focus is on the effect of
tariff reductions on inputs. Second, while we focus on the experience of just one country, our data
allow us to eliminate compositional effects by relating firm output quality responses to an exogenous
shock at product-destination level. Third, our measures of the extent of trade liberalization take
into account heterogeneity across firms in the magnitude of the shock and allows for the effects of
trade liberalization to vary across industries that differ in their scope for quality upgrading. Fourth,
we document how individual firms respond to improved access to imported intermediates by shifting
    3
      As is well known, China has long enjoyed MFN treatment by major trading partners prior to joining the WTO.
For some trading partners, the MFN treatment was somewhat precarious and so may have discouraged longer-term
relationships between foreign partners and Chinese firms.
    4
      For robustness, we also consider more conventional measures of tariff reduction using IO table coefficients as weights.
Doing so generates qualitatively similar results.



                                                             3
their export sales to markets where demand for high quality goods is strong.

        Our paper is also closely related to a literature that relates output quality to imported inputs.
An important contribution in this literature is Manova and Zhang (2012a) who establish many facts
concerning the pricing decisions of Chinese firms. Most important for our research is their observation
that firms that pay more for their imported inputs charge consistently higher prices for their exports
while being more successful in export markets as measured by export revenue and the diversity of
export destinations.5 The key papers in this literature, which also include Verhoogen (2008) and
Kugler and Verhoogen (2009, 2012), are more geared toward understanding in greater detail the nature
of selection across firms into different activities. Our contribution to this literature is to go beyond cross
sectional comparisons among firms to carefully investigate the causal impact of trade liberalization on
firm output quality holding fixed firm identities.6

        The remainder of this paper is organized into eight sections. Section 2 describes the data and
Section 3 documents the stylized facts. To explain the stylized facts, Section 4 presents a trade
model with heterogeneous firms, featuring endogenous product quality and highlighting the difference
between goods with large and small scope for quality differentiation. Section 5 introduces the strategy
of the empirical analysis and the measurement issues. Section 6 presents the main results and also
indirect evidence on extensive margins of exports. Sections 7 and 8 further report more statistical and
conceptual robustness checks, respectively. The final section concludes.


2        Data

Our analysis of the effects of tariff reduction on export quality relies on data extracted from three
sources. First, firm-product-level export and import data is obtained from China’s General Adminis-
tration of Customs. Second, product-level tariff data is obtained from the World Trade Organization.
Finally, measures of the characteristics of Chinese firms are obtained from the National Bureau of
Statistics of China (NBSC). We briefly discuss the construction of our dataset but leave the details to
Appendix A.

        China’s General Administration of Customs provides us with the universe of all Chinese trade
transactions by importing and by exporting firm at the HS 8-digit level for the years 2001-2006.
Each trade transaction includes import and export values, quantities, products, source and destina-
tion countries, custom’s regime (e.g. “Processing and Assembling”and “Processing with Imported
    5
     Kugler and Verhoogen (2009) find a similar pattern among Colombian manufacturing firms. Further, they also show
that among the inputs purchased by firms, those that were imported were more expensive, suggesting that they are
indeed of higher quality than domestic inputs. These facts are further elaborated in Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) who
argue that unit values for inputs and outputs for Colombian firms suggest that the ability to produce high quality output
from high quality inputs is a key characteristic of successful firms.
   6
     In this sense our paper is related to Verhoogen (2008) who establishes that firms that are induced to export increase
their output quality. Of course, quality choice in that paper is driven by real exchange rate changes rather than by tariff
reductions.



                                                            4
Materials”), type of enterprise (e.g. state owned, domestic private firms, foreign invested, and joint
ventures), and contact information for the firm (e.g., company name, telephone, zip code, contact
person).7 We selected a subsample of firms from this dataset that met several requirements. First,
as our interest is the effect of tariff reduction on export quality, we excluded from our main analyses
export processing firms because these firms never had to pay tariffs in the first place. As a robustness
check, however, we consider a sample of export processors for a placebo analysis. Second, we also
exclude all intermediary firms from the customs data, following the similar method as in Ahn et al.
(2011) and Tang and Zhang (2012). The trade data is then aggregated to firm-product-country-year.
We have aggregated the data to the HS 6-digit level so as to be able to concord it consistently over
time because China changed HS 8-digit codes in 2002, and the concordance between the old and new
HS 8-digit codes (before and after 2002) is not available. To ensure the consistency of the product
categorization over time (2001-2006), we adopt HS 6-digit codes maintained by the World Customs
Organization (WCO) and use the conversion table from the UN Comtrade to convert the HS 2002
codes into the HS 1996 codes. For the export price, we compute unit values by dividing deflated
export values by physical quantities.8

    The Chinese import tariff data are obtained from the WTO website, available as MFN (most-
favored nation) applied tariff at the HS 8-digit level and our sample period is 2001-2006.9 To match
our trade data, we aggregate the tariff data to the HS 6-digit level using each HS8 tariff line within
the same HS6 code. In our analysis, product/variety refers to either HS6 product category or HS6-
destination country combination.

    Our analysis uses additional information about the characteristics of Chinese exporters for two
reasons. First, we use a number of firm characteristics, such as TFP, employment, and capital intensity,
as controls. Second, we will want to explore how the size of the effect of import tariff reduction on
export quality varies with firm characteristics. We therefore merge the firm-product-level trade data
from Chinese Customs with firm-level production data, collected and maintained by the National
Bureau of Statistics of China (NBSC). This database covers all state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and
non-state-owned enterprises with annual sales of at least 5 million RMB (Chinese currency). The
NBSC database contains detailed firm-level information of manufacturing enterprises in China, such
as employment, capital stock, gross output, value added, firm identification (e.g., company name,
telephone number, zip code, contact person, etc.), and complete information on the three major
accounting statements (i.e., balance sheets, profit & loss accounts, and cash flow statements).

    We use the contact information of manufacturing firms to match the firm-product-level trade data
from the Chinese Customs Database to the NBSC Database.10 Compared with all the exporting and
   7
     China’s customs data contain only realized transactions and not the “reported” transactions from invoice records.
As such we are not concerned about the possibility of fake invoicing.
   8
     We deflate the export value using output deflators and the import value using input deflators from Brandt et al.
(2012). The deflator is at 4-digit CIC (Chinese industrial classification) industry level (see appendix A for more details).
   9
     The tariff data are available at http://tariffdata.wto.org/ReportersAndProducts.aspx.
  10
     In the NBSC Database, firms are identified by their corporate representative codes and contact information. While


                                                             5
importing firms under the ordinary trade regime reported by the Customs Database, the matching
rate of our sample (in terms of the number of firms) covers 45.3% of exporters and 40.2% of importers,
corresponding to 52.4% of total export value and 42% of total import value reported by the Customs
Database. Compared with the manufacturing exporting firms in the NBSC Database, the matching
rate of our sample (in terms of the number of firms) varies from 54% to 63% between 2001 and 2006,
which covers more than 60% of total value of firm exports in the manufacturing sector reported by
the NBSC Database. We cannot compare our sample with the NBSC Database regarding the number
of importers and total import value because the NBSC Database does not contain any information on
firms’ imports. To explore whether the reduction in the sample due to the merging of the databases
is an issue, we compare the relationship between export prices and quality and import tariffs in the
full sample of the Customs Database to the smaller merged sample and find no significant differences.


3    Stylized Facts

This section documents two key facts concerning the relationship between Chinese trade liberalization
and Chinese export prices. We proxy for prices with unit values.11 As China joined the WTO in
December of 2001, we use the data from 2001 to represent the pre-liberalization period, and then use
the data from 2006 to represent the post-liberalization period. During 2001-2006, most products in
China experienced substantial tariff reductions (see Figure A.1 in Appendix). We define a product
at either HS6 or HS6-destination combination. Contrasting the changes in the measures of export
prices at different levels of aggregation allows us to observe how changes in the composition of export
destinations affect the average price received by exporters.

    First, we examine the changes in (log) export prices by the incumbent exporting/importing firms
that are present in both pre- and post-liberalization periods via the levels of export prices in both 2001
and 2006 (see Table 1). We divide firms into two groups, namely, high-productivity firms and low-
productivity firms, according to whether their labor productivity (value added per worker) is above
or below the median in the pooled sample in 2001.12 Within each group, we compute the median and
mean (log) export price per product per firm in 2001 and in 2006 as well as the percentage change in
parentheses.

    Table 1 shows that on average, within each group of firms (i.e., either more productive or less
productive firms), the price levels in 2006 are always higher than the price levels in 2001. This
suggests that from 2001 to 2006 those incumbent firms all raise unit value export prices. Note that
unit value export prices are computed by deflating the export value using the domestic deflator so
in the Customs Database, firms are identified by their corporate custom codes and contact information. These two
coding systems are neither consistent, nor transferable with each other.
  11
     This is common within the literature. According to (Feenstra and Romalis, forthcoming) “the observed differences
in export unit-values are attributed predominantly to quality”.
  12
     Using estimated total factor productivity (TFP) by various methods as group criteria yields similar patterns.



                                                         6
                                           Table 1: Export Prices in 2001 and 2006


                                                 Productivity ≤50th (in 2001)                 Productivity >50th (in 2001)
                                                  (1)            (2)                           (3)            (4)
                                                 2001           2006                          2001           2006
 Export Price (HS6)
      Per Firm-product, median                   1.28         1.46 (14.06%)                   1.52           1.63 (7.24%)
      Per Firm-product, mean                     1.41         1.62 (14.89%)                   1.90           1.99 (4.74%)
 Export Price (HS6-country)
      Per Firm-product-country, median           1.25         1.41 (12.80%)                   1.53           1.59 (3.92%)
      Per Firm-product-country, mean             1.36         1.55 (13.97%)                   1.90           1.98 (4.21%)
                             1.5




                                                                                   1.5
                             1




                                                                                   1
                   Density




                                                                         Density
                             .5




                                                                                   .5
                             0




                                                                                   0




                                   −1   −.5     0       .5      1                        −1       −.5         0     .5         1
                                        Export Price (HS6)                                      Export Price (HS6−Country)

                                          2001               2006                                     2001              2006




                                   Figure 1: Distribution of Export Prices in 2001 and 2006


firms increase export prices relative to the domestic deflator after trade liberalization. Also, in the
same year, the price levels of high-productivity firms are always higher than those of low-productivity
firms.

   To further illustrate the shifting pattern of export prices from 2001 to 2006, we plot the distribu-
tions of the export price (in natural logarithm). In the left panel of Figure 1, we include only firm-HS6
product pairs that are present in both years for the distribution of prices. Then we compare export
prices over time by regressing them on firm-HS6 product fixed effects and plotting the residuals. Anal-
ogously, in the right panel of Figure 1, we include only firm-product-country combinations that are
present in both years. Then we compare export prices for each combination over time by regressing
them on firm-product-country fixed effects and plotting the residuals. To ensure that our results are
not driven by outliers, we remove outliers in the bottom and top 2nd percentiles. The distributions of
export prices for both HS6 product and HS6-country move to the right in 2006. Thus, we summarize
the first stylized fact as follows:

Stylized fact 1. Firms tend to raise export prices in the post-liberalization period at both


                                                                     7
product-destination level and product level.

     Table 2: Change in Export Prices (from 2001 to 2006): Differentiated vs. Homogeneous Products


                                                           (1)                          (2)                 (3)
                                                       Whole sample            Differentiated goods   Homogeneous goods
          Change in Export Prices (HS6):
               Per Firm-product, median                    11.80%                     14.10%                 -1.19%
               Per Firm-product, mean                      15.72%                     17.35%                 3.43%
          Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
               Per Firm-product-country, median            9.14%                      10.36%                 -0.02%
               Per Firm-product-country, mean              13.30%                     14.68%                 0.90%



         Panel (a): Differentiated Goods
                1.5




                                                                        1.5
                   1




                                                                           1
             Density




                                                                     Density
            .5




                                                                    .5
                0




                                                                        0




                       −1     −.5     0       .5       1                         −1      −.5         0     .5         1
                              Export Price (HS6)                                       Export Price (HS6−Country)

                                 2001               2006                                       2001            2006

         Panel (b): Homogeneous Goods
                2




                                                                        2
              1 1.5




                                                                      1 1.5
            Density




                                                                    Density
                .5




                                                                        .5
                0




                                                                        0




                       −1     −.5      0       .5      1                         −1      −.5         0     .5         1
                               Export Price (HS6)                                      Export Price (HS6−Country)

                                 2001               2006                                       2001            2006




            Figure 2: Distribution of Export Prices by Product Differentiation (2001 vs. 2006)

   Second, to explore whether the effect of trade liberalization on prices depends on product differen-
tiation, we divide products into two groups: products with large scope for quality differentiation and
products with small scope for quality differentiation. Adopting Rauch’s product classification (Rauch,
1999), we use differentiated goods and homogeneous goods as proxies for the above two groups, and
compute the change in export prices for these two groups of products. Table 2 shows that the price
changes of differentiated goods are significantly larger than those of the whole sample and of homo-
geneous goods, while the price changes in homogeneous goods are ambiguous. To further illustrate
the time it takes to adjust price, we also compute the average price change year by year (see Table
A.1 in Appendix) and find that the price responses clearly ascend with longer time intervals for the

                                                              8
whole sample and for differentiated goods. Figure 2 also presents the differential effect of product dif-
ferentiation on price distributions: the export prices of differentiated goods significantly increase from
2001 to 2006 (see Panel (a)); while the export prices of homogeneous goods nearly remain unchanged
over time, and in part of the distribution (at HS6 level) even decrease after trade liberalization (see
Panel (b)). This suggests that the effect of tariff reduction on export prices depends on the scope for
product differentiation. The result is summarized as the following finding:

Stylized fact 2. In the post-liberalization period, export prices in industries where the
scope for quality differentiation is large tend to increase significantly while the change
in export prices in industries associated with small scope for quality differentiation is
nonsignificant or even ambiguous.


4        A Model of Export Price and Quality

In this section, we provide a simple, partial equilibrium model to organize our econometric analysis.
We consider the behavior of a firm that is sufficiently productive to incur fixed costs to both export a
final good and to import intermediate inputs. A reduction in the tariff on imported intermediate inputs
lowers the firm’s marginal costs on its existing set of imported intermediates (intensive margin) and
induces the firm to expand the set of varieties imported (extensive margin). The resulting reduction in
the firm’s marginal cost has effects that are similar to an increase in the firm’s underlying productivity.
We allow the firm to choose the quality of the final good that it exports. Higher quality increases
demand but comes at the cost of higher marginal costs of production. When goods are sufficiently
differentiated in terms of quality, the impact of a tariff reduction on imports is an increase in quality
of the export that is sufficiently large that the price of exports increases. When goods are relatively
homogeneous, quality increases but by a small enough amount that the price charged by the exporter
falls.


4.1      Assumptions

As we are interested in how firms behave both within and across industries, we consider the following
system of preferences:

                                   I
                                   X            Z           ηi     σi −1
                                                                                     σi
                                                                                     σi −1
                              U=        νi ln           q(ω) x(ω)
                                                             σi      σi
                                                                            dω               ,
                                    i            ω∈Ωi

where νi is the share of industry i in total expenditure, q(ω) is a measure of quality of variety ω, x(ω)
is the quantity of variety ω consumed, σi > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across varieties of good
i, ηi > 0 is a measure of the scope for quality differentiation, and Ωi is the set of varieties available of
good i. These preferences imply that in a market in which aggregate expenditure is E, the demand



                                                         9
for variety ω in industry i is
                                   xi (ω) = νi EPiσi −1 q(ω)ηi p(ω)−σi .                              (1)

where Pi is the industry-level price index that is exogenous from the point of view of individual firms.

    Firms are heterogeneous in terms of their productivity with the productivity of the firm producing
variety ω given by φ(ω). Final output of variety ω is created using bundles of primary factors, L(ω),
and a composite intermediate input M (ω) that is firm-specific. The production technology for a firm
of productivity φ(ω) in industry i producing a variety with quality q(ω) is given by

                                 Yi (ω) = χφ(ω)q(ω)−α L(ω)1−µ Mi (ω)µ ,                               (2)

where µ ∈ (0, 1), χ = µµ (1 − µ)1−µ , and α > 0 implies that a higher quality variety (those with
a wide range of attributes) require more physical inputs to generate the same level of output as a
lower quality variety. The composite intermediate input is costlessly assembled from a continuum of
intermediates that are indexed by z according to the production function
                                             Z ∞                   
                                Mi = Ψi exp        bi (z) ln m(z)dz                                   (3)
                                                     0
                  R∞               
where Ψi = exp 0 bi (z) ln bi (z)dz , m(z) is the quality adjusted level of input z, and the cost shares
              R∞
bi (z) satisfy 0 bi (z)dz = 1.

    Product design incurs fixed costs and these fixed costs depend on the number of attributes that
the firm chooses to build into the variety. We assume that these fixed costs, measured in terms of
bundles of the primary inputs is given by f q βi . The industry subscript on βi > 0 indicates that given
the nature of goods in some industries, designing products with a larger number of attributes desired
by consumers differs. The higher is βi the more difficult it is to design products that consumers value
more. Hence, a large value of βi or a low value of ηi indicate that the scope for quality differentiation
is limited.


4.2      Implications

Choosing a bundle of primary factors as the numeraire, the marginal cost of production of a variety
of final output of a firm of productivity φ operating in industry i facing technology given by (2) and
(3) is
                                                              qα m µ
                                        Ci (q, Pim , φ) =       (P )                                  (4)
                                                              φ i
where Pim is the price of the composite intermediate input. For a cost minimizing firm, the price of
the composite intermediate is given by
                                                Z   ∞                   
                                  Pim   = exp            bi (z) ln cm (z)dz ,
                                                 0



                                                         10
where cm (z) is the lowest quality-adjusted cost input available to the firm. The cost to the firm of an
intermediate of type z depends on whether the intermediate was purchased from a domestic supplier or
from a foreign supplier.13 If the firm purchases intermediate z locally, it pays the domestic unit price
cdm (z). Alternatively, the firm may incur a fixed cost, fm , measured in terms of primary factors that
gives the firm access to the market for foreign produced inputs. If the firm imports the intermediate z,
then it must first pay the international unit price of cfm (z) and then pay tariffs of (τ − 1) cfm (z), where
τ > 1 is one plus the tariff rate. We assume that foreign producers have a comparative advantage in
low z goods and domestic producers have a comparative advantage in high z goods. Formally, define
A(z) = cfm (z)/cdm (z). We assume that A(0) < 1, A′ (z) > 0, and limz→∞ A(z) > 0. Firm optimization
requires that cm (z) = min(τ cfm (z), cdm (z)), and so we can define a cutoff intermediate z ∗ such that
z < z ∗ are imported and z > z ∗ are purchased locally, where

                                                                    τ A(z ∗ ) = 1.                                               (5)

It follows that the cost of a bundle of imported intermediates is given by

                                           Z                                     Z                                      !
                                                   z∗                                      ∞
                        Pim    = exp                    bi (z) ln τ cfm (z) dz +                 bi (z) ln cdm (z)dz         .   (6)
                                               0                                            z∗


       Conditional on its cost-minimizing choice on the source of intermediate inputs, the firm chooses
its price, p, and its quality, q, to maximize its export profits of the firm, which are given by

                                                                                        
                                                            m                         βi
                                   π(φ) = max (p − Ci (q, Pi , φ)) xi (q, p, ω) − f q      ,
                                               p,q

where demand xi (q, p, ω) is given by (1) and marginal cost Ci is given by (4).14 Note that we have
neglected the domestic market as it is largely irrelevant to our econometric analysis.15 To obtain an
interior solution, we impose the parameter restrictions βi > ηi − α(σi − 1) > 0 so that the firm will
choose a quality level that is strictly positive but finite. The first-order conditions allow us to solve
for the optimal quality, q(φ, Pim ), and the optimal price, p(φ, Pim ), which are respectively

                                                                                           −        σi −1
                                                                   1              (Pim )µ        βi −ηi +α(σi −1)
                         q(φ, Pim )       = (Λi )          βi −ηi +α(σi −1)
                                                                                                                    ,            (7)
                                                                                     φ
                                                                                                             βi −ηi
                                                      σi                 α                  (Pim )µ       βi −ηi +α(σi −1)
                         p(φ, Pim )       =                (Λi ) βi −ηi +α(σi −1)                                            ,   (8)
                                                    σi − 1                                     φ
                                                             1−σi
                     EPiσ−1        ηi −α(σi −1)            σi
where Λi ≡ νi          f               βi σi              σi −1           is a constant that is common to all firms in industry
  13
     We assume perfect substitution between imported and domestic intermediates.
  14
     To simplify notation, we have omitted any fixed costs associated with accessing international markets. As we focus
on firms that both export and import in our empirical analyses, all firms in the dataset would have incurred these costs.
  15
     It is worth mentioning that in the data firms produce multiple products for multiple locations making it generally
impossible to connect input usage to outputs.


                                                                          11
i. Equations (7) and (8) combined with (4) and (6) fully determine the variables of interest.16

       We begin our analysis of the effect of tariffs on imported inputs by differentiating (6) with respect
to τ to obtain
                                   Z       z∗                       h                             i dz ∗
                     τ dPim
                            =                   bi (z)dz + bi (z ∗ ) ln τ cfm (z ∗ ) − ln cdm (z ∗ ) τ     > 0,              (9)
                    Pim dτ             0                                                               dτ

where dz ∗ /dτ < 0 is obtained by differentiating (5). The first term on the right-hand side is the
intensive margin effect of a change in tariffs while the second term is the extensive margin effect. Note
that the extensive margin effect is second-order in τ and vanishes for small dτ as can be seen from
(5). Now, simple differentiation of equations (7) and (8) establishes the following two propositions.

Proposition 1. A reduction in the tariff, τ , induces an incumbent importer/exporter to increase the
quality of its exports.

Proposition 2. A reduction in the tariff, τ , induces an incumbent importer/exporter to raise its
export price in industries where the scope for quality differentiation is large (βi < ηi ) and to lower its
export price in industries in which the scope for quality differentiation is small (βi > ηi ).

       The results presented in the propositions are intuitive. Consider first proposition one. A reduction
in the tariff lowers the cost of intermediates Pim and hence lowers marginal cost Ci for any given quality
level. Ceteris paribus, firms would sell a greater number units and so the fixed cost of designing higher
quality products is now less onerous relative to the gain in sales associated with expanding quality.

       Now consider proposition two. When the scope for quality differentiation is large, firms respond
to a reduction in the cost of obtaining intermediate inputs by drastically increasing their quality. The
increase in demand for their product due to heightened quality more than compensates for the loss
of sales due to a higher price. The opposite occurs when the scope for quality differentiation is small
where the benefit of expanding sales through selling more units is relatively more important.


4.3      Estimating Equations

Our empirical analysis will rest primarily on propositions 1 and 2, but it is worth pointing out some
additional implications of the model. Logarithmically differentiating equations (7) and (8) yields the
basis of our analysis:

                                                                σi − 1
                        ∆ ln q(φ, Pim ) = −                                  (µ∆ ln(Pim ) − ∆ ln φ) ,                       (10)
                                                         βi − ηi + α(σi − 1)
                                                             βi − ηi
                        ∆ ln p(φ, Pim ) =                                  (µ∆ ln(Pim ) − ∆ ln φ) ,                         (11)
                                                       βi − ηi + α(σi − 1)

where
                                                                                    (Pim )µ 1−σi
  16
    The net revenue could be written as σ1i νi EPiσi −1 q(ω)ηi −α(σi −1) ( σiσ−1
                                                                              i
                                                                                       φ
                                                                                           )       which could be compared with a
standard Melitz model for a fixed quality q.


                                                                    12
                                  X                          X              h               i            
                   ∆ ln(Pim ) =         bi (z)∆ ln τ (z) +           bi (z) ln τ ′ (z)cfm (z) − ln cdm (z)              (12)
                                  z∈Z                        z∈Z ′

is the empirical analog of (9) that allows for tariff reductions ∆ ln τ (z) to vary across intermediates.
The first term is the intensive margin for the set of existing intermediates, Z, imported before the
tariff reduction. The second term is the extensive margin for the set of newly imported intermediates,
Z ′ , and τ ′ (z). As the theory suggests that the extensive margin is hard to evaluate, we will ignore this
second term in our baseline econometric specifications but we also control for the extensive margin
for robustness.17

    Proposition 2 highlights the heterogeneity across industries in the impact of a tariff reduction
based on the scope for quality differentiation. We will allow for this slope heterogeneity by estimating
price equations for different sets of industries.

    Finally, note that firm productivity ∆ log φ enters both equations (10) and (11) so that shocks
to TFP could also have an impact on qualities and prices. If these shocks to TFP were correlated
with the size of the effect of tariff reductions on imported intermediates, then we could attribute to
the lower cost of intermediates some of the impact that works through TFP. For this reason, we will
control for the change in TFP at the firm level in some of our econometric specifications below.


5     Empirical Specifications and Measurement

In this section, we specify our econometric models and describe the data that is used to estimate them.


5.1     Baseline Specifications

Our interest is in estimating the effect of tariff reductions, which we maintain to be exogenous to
individual firms, on the price that Chinese firms charge for their exported goods and on the inferred
quality of these exports. We begin with the determinants of export prices.


5.1.1     Price Equations

As noted earlier, our theory relates export prices to import tariffs through equations (11) and (12).
We will estimate two types of econometric models motivated by these equations that differ in whether
they are estimated in levels or in long-differences. These equations are respectively given by

                      ln(pf h(c)t ) = βτ Dutyf t + β f χf t + βi HHIit + ϕf h(c) + ϕt + ǫf h(c)t ,                      (13)
  17
     We include both intensive margin and extensive margin in one of the alternative tariff measures and our results are
robust. Please see Section 5.2 for details of constructing alternative tariff measures and Section 7.1 for robustness results.




                                                              13
and
                           ∆ ln(pf h(c) ) = βτ ∆Dutyf + β f ∆χf + βi HHIi + ǫf h(c) ,                               (14)

where pf h(c) denotes the unit value export price of HS6 product h exported by firm f (to destination
country c when product is defined as HS6-country combination), and the key explanatory variable,
Dutyf , is import tariff faced by firm f , which is computed by aggregating all import tariffs across
firm f ’s intermediates (see Section 5.2 for details). In addition to these key variables, we include a
vector of firm level controls, χf , and an industry level measure of competition, the Herfindahl index,
HHIi . When we estimate the model in levels, we include firm-product(-country) and time dummies.
When estimating the model in long-differences, ∆ denotes a change in any variable during a five-year
period, i.e, between 2001 and 2006.

       We will focus on the long difference specification given by (14). Adjustment to the shock of trade
liberalization may be slow and there may be issues of autocorrelation when estimating the model in
levels (see, for instance, Trefler (2004)). Results associated with shorter differences are qualitatively
similar, however, and are reported in Table A.2 in Appendix.

       The vector χf consists of the observables at firm level that potentially impact export prices to
control for productivity, imported varieties, and any effect of firm scale. Specifically, these controls
include estimated TFP, capital intensity, firm size (measured by total employment), average wage
bill per worker, and the number of imported varieties.18 We also control for the effect of changing
competition within industry i by adding Herfindahl index, HHIi , computed at the 4-digit CIC (Chi-
nese Industrial Classification) industry level in the initial year 2001. As the variable of interest in
equation (14) is the change in firm-level tariffs, ∆Dutyf , we cluster error terms at the level of the
firm to address the potential correlation of errors within each firm across different products.19 Thus,
identification in the baseline specification is based on changes over time in the export prices within a
firm for each product due to changes in tariffs.

       We estimate (13) and (14) at various levels of aggregation in order to infer how changes in the
composition of a firm’s export destinations might vary over time. Our main focus will be at the
firm-product-country level, but we will also consider weighted average of export prices across export
destinations. By contrasting the coefficient estimates in these two different samples, we can obtain a
feel for how important changes in the portfolio of export destinations were over this period of time.
In addition, we adopt a variant of equation (14), with dependent variable ∆pf representing the price
change at the firm level that is constructed using a Tornqvist index, as in Smeets and Warzynski
(2013):
                                                       X
                                              ∆pf =         s̄f h ∆ ln(pf h )                                       (15)
                                                        h
  18
     By adding the change in the number of imported varieties, we partially control for the extensive margin effect.
  19
     Our main tariff measure is firm specific, not firm-product specific because the tariff measure is computed across
all imported inputs for each firm. Nevertheless, we also construct an alternative firm-product specific measure of tariff
reductions and cluster the error term at firm-product level. See related discussion in Section 5.2.


                                                            14
where
                                           ∆ ln(pf h ) = ln(pf ht ) − ln(pf h(t−5) )

and
                                                                          
                                                 s̄f h = sf ht + sf h(t−5) /2

where t is set to be 2006, pf ht is the average price of product h by firm f in year t, and sf ht is the
share of exported product h in firm f ’s total export sales at year t. Therefore, ∆pf is computed as a
weighted average of the growth in prices for all the individual products within firm f .


5.1.2      Quality Equations

We follow the majority of the trade literature in defining “quality” as unobserved attributes of a variety
that make consumers willing to purchase relatively large quantities of the variety despite relatively high
prices charged for the variety. Following Khandelwal et al. (forthcoming), we estimate the “effective
quality” (quality as it enters consumer’s utility) of exported product h shipped to destination country
c by firm f in year t, (qf hct )η , via the following empirical demand equation:

                                                 xf hct = qfηhct p−σ     σ−1
                                                                  f hct Pct Yct                                (16)

where xf hct denotes the demand for a particular firm f ’s export of product h in destination country
c in year t and Yct is total income in country c. We take logs of the above equation, and then use the
residual from the following OLS regression to infer quality:

                                        ln(xf hct ) + σ ln(pf hct ) = ϕh + ϕct + ǫf hct                        (17)

where the country-year fixed effect ϕct collects both the destination price index Pct and income Yct ; the
product fixed effect ϕh captures the difference in prices and quantities across product categories due to
the inherent characteristics of products. Then estimated quality is ln(q̂f hct ) = ǫ̂f hct .20 Consequently,
quality-adjusted prices are the observed log prices less estimated effective quality, i.e., ln(pf hct ) −
ln(q̂f hct ), denoted by ln(e
                            pf hct ). The intuition behind this approach is that conditional on price, a
variety with a higher quantity is assigned higher quality. Given the value of the elasticity of substitution
σ, we are able to estimate quality from equation (17). Note that this approach to measuring quality
is similar to the measurement of “TFP”, i.e. it is a residual.

      The literature yields and employs various estimates of σ. For example, Anderson and van Wincoop
(2004) survey gravity-based estimates of the Armington substitution elasticity, such as Head and Ries
(2001), and conclude that a reasonable range is σ ∈ [5, 10]. In our estimation, we use different values
at σ = 5 and σ = 10. We also allow the elasticity of substitution to vary across industries (σi ) using
 20
      Here q̂f hct ≡ qfηhct . In other words, the estimated quality q̂ is corresponding to q η in our model.




                                                               15
the estimates of Broda and Weinstein (2006).21

       As a robustness check, we inferred quality by estimating σi using Chinese data and an IV strategy.
As the estimation results based on the quality estimates using this method were highly similar to
those based on Broda and Weinstein’s estimates, we report the estimation details of this method and
the related results in Appendix D.1.


5.2      The Measurement of Tariff Reductions

As the main interest of this paper is to explore the effect of trade liberalization on export prices and
product quality, it is important to measure properly the effective tariff reductions that are actually
faced by firms. There are many ways to aggregate tariffs on intermediate inputs that have various
pros and cons. On the one hand, one can construct firm-specific measures that use information on
the exact initial bundle of intermediates imported by firms employing heterogeneous technologies.
These measures provide high resolution to the firm-specific intensive margin effects of tariff reduction,
and are indeed suggested by our theory, but they may miss extensive margin effects and they raise
issues of endogeneity. On the other hand, one can construct industry-level measures that better
capture the potential to import more intermediates and which are arguably orthogonal to firm-specific
characteristics, but which may miss much of the action on the intensive margin. Given these concerns,
we consider a wide range of tariff measures that collectively can paint a more comprehensive picture
of the effect of trade liberalization on export upgrading. Our focus on firm-specific measures is driven
by their consistency with our theory.

       We begin by describing the construction of our firm-specific measures. We consider several different
formulations of these measures which have various different strengths and weaknesses beginning with
those that are most closely motivated by our model. According to our theoretical derivation (see
the first term in the right hand side of equation (12) in Section 4.3), we compute a firm-specific
                                      P
measure of tariff reductions, ∆ ln τ = h∈Z wh ∆ ln τh , to capture the weighted tariff reduction across
intermediates, where the weight wh is the import share of product h in the total import value by the
firm in the initial year, and the HS6 product index h is the empirical counterpart of intermediate type
z in the model.22 In computing the firm-specific tariff reduction, ∆Duty, we use an approximation
that at product level ∆ ln τh ≈ ∆Dutyh since τ > 1 is one plus the tariff rate. This firm-specific
input tariff reduction measure is theoretically justified, and can reflect the changes in effective tariffs
faced by each firm due to its responses to trade liberalization.23 Also because our main tariff measure
is firm specific, we cluster the error terms at firm level rather than firm-product level in our main
  21
     Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate the elasticity of substitution for disaggregated categories and report that the
average and median elasticity is 7.5 and 2.8, respectively. We use their estimates aggregated to HS 2-digit level and
merge with our sample.
  22
     We only use the import shares as weights because we data on domestic intermediate usage.
  23
     When we use the five-year difference, this main measure is not subject to the problem of the weight change as the
year 2001 is the only initial year. However, when we use other period differences, for instance, three-year difference and
four-year difference, the weight will change according to different import shares in different initial years.


                                                           16
econometric specifications.

       In addition to this baseline specification of ∆Duty, we adopt four alternative measures of firm-
specific tariff reductions and one industry-specific measure to shed additional light on the mechanisms
at work in the data and to assess robustness.
                                                                                           P
       The first measure is the unweighted firm-specific tariff change, ∆Duty =                h∈Z   ∆Dutyh . Estimates
generated using this measure, compared with the main measure (weighted tariff change), shed light
on the role of good-specific input weights in the pricing and quality decisions of firms.

    The second measure is the arithmetic mean of product-level tariff reductions across all imported va-
                                                                               P                        ′
rieties both before and after the trade liberalization. More formally, ∆Duty =    h∈Z∪Z ′ ∆Dutyh / |Z ∪ Z |,
where Z is the set of varieties imported before the tariff reduction (intensive margin), Z ′ is the set
of newly imported varieties after the tariff reduction (extensive margin), and |Z ∪ Z ′ | denotes the
total number of imported varieties by the firm over the whole sample period. This measure includes
tariff changes relevant to both the intensive margin and the extensive margin (see the second term
in the right hand side of equation (12)). By fixing the total number of imported varieties over the
sample period, this measure isolates pure changes in tariffs rather than the changes in input bundles
(Ge et al., 2011).

       The third measure is computed as the weighted average as in the main measure of tariffs, but
assigns positive weights to tariff reductions only to goods that are clearly intermediate inputs. The
final goods and intermediate goods are defined by the Broad Economic Categories (BEC) classification.
Note this measure of tariff reduction generates smaller sample size as it loses those firms that only
import final goods as inputs to produce exported products.24

       The fourth measure attempts to connect individual tariff reductions on intermediate inputs to
specific goods in the firm’s export portfolio of products. We follow Manova and Zhang (2012b) to
focus on foreign inputs in the same broad industry classification as the output product. For example,
if a firm buys brakes and seat belts and sells cars, both its exports and imports would be recorded
in the motor vehicles industry. If the company also manufactures cell phones, tariff reduction in SIM
cards would enter the measure of import tariff change of its cell phones but not that of its cars.
Therefore, for each exported product by a particular firm, we construct the weighted average tariff
change across all the inputs imported by the firm (e.g. brakes, seat belts) in a given HS2 category
(e.g. motor vehicle) and assign this average tariff change to all products exported by this firm in
the same HS2 category. Using this method we eventually compute the firm-product specific tariff
change ∆Dutyf h for each product h exported by firm f .25 Among all the firm-specific tariff reduction
measures, this one generates the smallest sample size as it loses those exported products that have
  24
     Using this measure loses approximately 10% observations in our sample.
  25
     When we use this firm-product specific tariff measure, we cluster standard errors at firm-product level instead of
firm level. We also compute this tariff measure at HS4 level by assigning the average tariff across all the imported inputs
in a given HS4 category to all products exported by the same firm within the same HS4 category and it yields the similar
results. Those results are available upon request.


                                                            17
no imported inputs in the same HS2 category. Summary statistics of those various measures of tariff
cuts are presented in Table 3.

                         Table 3: Summary Statistics of Tariff Cuts (from 2001 to 2006):


                                                                    Average Tariff Changes   Maximum Tariff Changes
             Tariff Cuts for All HS Products in Customs Data:
                                        By HS6 product                     -5.89%                   -112.60%
                                        By HS4 product                     -5.43%                   -112.60%
                                        By HS4 product                     -5.77%                    -29.06%
             Firm-Specific Tariff Cuts in Our Sample:
                                         Main Measure                      -5.98%                   -110.88%
                                         Alternative Measure   1           -6.05%                    -70.00%
                                         Alternative Measure   2           -5.94%                    -70.00%
                                         Alternative Measure   3           -5.44%                   -110.88%
                                         Alternative Measure   4           -6.06%                    -70.00%



       Finally, we also compute changes in industry input and output tariffs using input-output tables
to create weights on the tariff reductions. This industry-level input-output table based measure of
tariff cuts would be more comprehensive in capturing the effect of imported inputs if firms obtain
some of the foreign intermediates from other Chinese importing firms which is possible but cannot be
reflected in the current data using firm-specific measure of tariff reductions. In addition to the benefits
discussed earlier of using industry rather than firm-specific measure, including specifications that use
industry tariffs has the benefit of making our results comparable to the literature. Nevertheless, using
all alternative measures of tariff cuts (including both firm-specific and industry-level measures) does
not alter our main results.


5.3      Productivity

To control for the change in firm productivity in some of our regressions, we estimate both total factor
productivity (TFP) and labor productivity (measured by value added per worker). Our primary TFP
measure is based on the augmented Olley-Pakes (hereafter OP) method (Olley and Pakes, 1996).26
The augmentation takes into account a number of additional firm level decisions. For instance, we
allow a firm’s trade status in the TFP realization, as in Amiti and Konings (2007), by including two
trade-status dummy variables-an export dummy (equal to one for exports and zero otherwise) and an
import dummy (equal to one for imports and zero otherwise). Finally, we include a WTO dummy (i.e.,
one for a year since 2002 and zero for before) in the Olley-Pakes estimation as the accession to WTO
represents a positive demand shock for China’s exports. We use value-added to measure production
output, and deflate firms’ inputs (e.g., capital) and value added, using the input price deflators and
  26
    Our results are robust to different approaches in estimating TFP, including the OLS method, the Levinsohn-
Petrin method (Levinsohn and Petrin, 2003), and the Ackerberg-Caves-Frazer augmented O-P and L-P methods
(Ackerberg et al., 2006). These results are available upon request.



                                                                   18
output price deflators from Brandt et al. (2012).27 Then we construct the real investment variable
by adopting the perpetual inventory method to investigate the law of motion for real capital and real
investment. To measure the depreciation rate, we use each firm’s real depreciation rate provided by
the NBSC firm-production database.


6         Main Results

In this section, we present the results of estimating variants of equations (14) and (17) using a sample
of ordinary Chinese manufacturing exporters, i.e. those that are not part of the export processing
regime that allows firms to import intermediates tariff-free.28 We begin by considering a pooled sample
of all industries to find the average effect of falling tariffs on firms’ export prices and on their quality
choices. We then consider two subsamples defined by the scope for quality differentiation and show
that the response of export prices to falling tariffs differs substantially across these types of industries
as predicted by Proposition 2. In all specifications, we present results at different levels of aggregation
within the firm so as to shed light on compositional effects associated with tariff reductions. Lastly, we
present evidence at extensive margins to supplement our discussion of quality upgrading and export
price increase.


6.1         Import Tariffs and Export Prices

Table 4 reports the results of our baseline regression, equation (14). We first discuss the results
associated with long differences at the firm-product-destination level shown in columns 1-3. In column
1, we report the coefficient estimate of simple bivariate regression of log changes in export prices on log
changes in the intensive margin measure of tariff reductions. The negative, and statistically significant
coefficient, indicates that tariff reductions on imported inputs are associated with higher export prices.
This result is consistent with Proposition 2 where the average industry has a large scope for quality
differentiation: a fall in firm-specific import tariffs of 10 percentage points increases unit value export
prices at firm-product-destination level by 4.8 percent.

         A concern with respect to the bivariate regression is that it does not control for firm characteristics,
such as changes in firm TFP, and that the coefficient on intensive margin tariff reductions might be
picking up extensive margin effects. In columns 2 and 3 we add firm controls and the Herfindahl
index (HHI) at industry level, respectively. While the individual coefficients shown in these columns
need to be interpreted with care due to the fact that some of these controls are likely endogenous,
the most important feature of the coefficients reported in columns 2 and 3 is that the coefficient on
    27
     The output deflators are constructed using “reference price”information from China’s Statistical Yearbooks, and the
input deflators are constructed based on output deflators and China’s national input-output table (2002). The data can
be accessed via http://www.econ.kuleuven.be/public/N07057/CHINA/appendix/.
  28
     We show in section 8, that export processing firms are not affected by falling tariffs.




                                                          19
                              Table 4: Basic Results (Long-difference Estimation, 2006-2001)


                                                                             Dependent Variable
                                   ∆ ln(Export Pricef hc )                ∆ ln(Export Pricef h )                ∆Export Price Indexf
  Regressor:                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)
  ∆Duty                       -0.481**     -0.484**    -0.517**     -0.659**     -0.661**    -0.704**     -0.642**    -0.632**      -0.643**
                               (0.222)      (0.216)     (0.223)      (0.289)      (0.277)     (0.279)      (0.305)     (0.306)       (0.307)
  ∆ln(TFP)                                0.042***     0.042***                  0.041**      0.041**                 0.046***      0.045***
                                           (0.012)      (0.012)                  (0.017)      (0.017)                  (0.017)       (0.017)
  ∆ln(Capital/Labor)                        0.023        0.023                     0.036       0.036                  -0.00002        0.001
                                           (0.016)      (0.016)                   (0.026)     (0.025)                  (0.021)       (0.021)
  ∆ln(Labor)                                0.001        0.002                     0.003       0.006                    -0.003        -0.003
                                           (0.018)      (0.017)                   (0.027)     (0.027)                  (0.026)       (0.026)
  ∆ln(Wage)                                 0.020        0.019                     0.024       0.023                   0.046*        0.046*
                                           (0.022)      (0.022)                   (0.027)     (0.026)                  (0.025)       (0.025)
  ∆ln(Import Varieties)                     0.012        0.012                     0.021       0.020                    0.009         0.009
                                           (0.013)      (0.013)                   (0.015)     (0.015)                  (0.018)       (0.018)
  HHI                                                    -0.442                               -0.781*                                 -0.241
                                                        (0.306)                               (0.406)                                (0.233)
  Observations                 14439        14439        14439        7595         7595        7595         2368        2368           2368
  R-squared                     .001         .003         .004        .001         .004         .005        .002        .007           .007
  Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm level
  in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Herfindahl index (HHI) is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC
  industry in China.



∆Duty is highly robust in both its magnitude and in terms of its statistical significance compared to
the coefficient in column 1. Omitted variable bias does not appear to be a problem with respect to the
simple regression results shown in column 1.29 Two other observations are worthy of comment. First,
firms that displayed large increases in measured TFP (second row) were observed to increase their
export prices, which is consistent with some of that TFP increase being the result of producing higher
quality. Second, the coefficient on ∆ ln(Import Varieties) is positive but is not statistically significant.
The lack of statistical significance may be due to the high correlation between this variable and ∆Duty.

       Columns 4-6 report the results with the price change at firm-product level as dependent variable.
Not surprisingly, all coefficients on tariff reductions are significantly negative, confirming that tariff
reductions increase export prices at various aggregation levels. The fact that the coefficient estimates
tend to be larger in the more aggregated measures of export prices, suggests a modest compositional
effect: lower tariffs induce Chinese firms to redirect their exports to countries where higher prices can
be charged. Lastly, columns 7-9 report the results based on the firm-level price change as dependent
variable, and coefficients on tariff reductions are also significantly negative.

       We also conducted estimations on specifications with various period differences, such as four-,
three-, and two-year differences and results remain substantially similar (see Table A.2 in Appendix).
  29
   Table A.4, columns 1-3, in the appendix presents results where only the change in ln(T F P ) is included as a control.
The coefficients and their standard errors in these specifications are virtually unchanged.



                                                                       20
These significantly negative coefficients on tariff reductions support the prediction of Proposition 2
that a tariff reduction induces an incumbent importer/exporter to raise its export price in industries
where the scope for quality differentiation is large. As to the opposite prediction where the scope for
quality differentiation is small, we leave to the later discussion.
                           Table 5: Effect of Tariff Reductions on Quality Upgrading

                                                                Dependent Variable: ∆ ln(q̂f hc )
                                                 σ=5                      σ = 10                        σ = σi
                                                                                             Broda and Weinstein (2006)

                                          (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)               (6)
            ∆Duty                      -3.093**     -3.125**     -6.351***    -6.623***     -3.339***        -3.304***
                                        (1.262)      (1.253)      (2.331)      (2.340)       (1.063)          (1.054)
            ∆ln(TFP)                                0.301***                   0.496***                       0.236***
                                                     (0.063)                    (0.118)                        (0.056)
            ∆ln(Capital/Labor)                       0.159*                     0.230                          0.0948
                                                     (0.088)                   (0.160)                         (0.071)
            ∆ln(Labor)                              0.263***                    0.210                         0.278***
                                                     (0.092)                   (0.163)                         (0.091)
            ∆ln(Wage)                                 0.150                     0.251                           0.110
                                                     (0.111)                   (0.209)                         (0.090)
            ∆ln(Import Varieties)                    0.118*                     0.181                         0.118**
                                                     (0.064)                   (0.125)                        (0.051)
            HHI                                       -1.690                    -4.386                          -1.227
                                                     (1.501)                   (2.903)                         (1.209)
            Observations                 14439        14439        14439        14439         14439             14439
            R-squared                     .001         .007         .001         .006          .002              .008
            Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for
            clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Herfindahl index (HHI) is
            computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China.




6.2   Import Tariffs and Export Quality

The key mechanism of our model is the choice of quality. The results in Table 4 support the prediction
from Proposition 2 that tariff reduction induces an incumbent firm to raise its export price when quality
differentiation is large. However, whether the increase in unit value export prices essentially reflects
the quality improvement remains to be answered. Therefore, we regress estimated product quality on
tariff reductions to test Proposition 1.

   Table 5 reports the estimation results of equation (14) with the change in estimated effective
quality as the dependent variable. Different columns correspond to using different values of elasticity
of substitution in estimating quality. Note that all coefficients on tariff reductions are significantly
negative, supporting the prediction of Proposition 1 that a reduction in import tariff induces an
incumbent importer/exporter to raise the quality of its exports. Again, all coefficients on control
variables are consistent with our expectation as in the baseline regressions in Table 4. Given that the
primary variables, quality estimates, are generated from regressions, we also bootstrap standard errors

                                                                 21
for all specifications in Table 5 and the main results remain robust (see Table A.3 in the Appendix).
As one may be concerned that the key effect is perhaps biased by many firm-level controls, we present
all the baseline regressions on prices and quality (as in Tables 4 and 5) with only ∆ ln(T F P ) as firm
control, and present consistent results in Table A.4 in the Appendix. We also add 2-digit CIC industry
fixed effects into the baseline regressions and report similar results in Table A.5.

   Finally, we explored the estimation of equation (14) when the price has been quality adjusted, i.e.
ln(pf hct )−ln(q̂f hct ) as the dependent variable. To save space, we report these results in Table A.6 in the
Appendix. We find that reductions in import tariffs indeed induce an incumbent importer/exporter
to lower their quality-adjusted prices.


6.3    The Role of Quality Differentiation

According to Proposition 2, the effect of tariff reduction on export prices depends on the scope
for quality differentiation within an industry. Firms increase export prices with tariff reductions in
industries where the scope for quality differentiation is large and decrease export prices in industries
where the scope for quality differentiation is small. From Stylized fact 2, we know that over the period
2001-2006 export prices are essentially unchanged for homogeneous goods.

   To test whether the scope for quality differentiation indeed matters, first, we use Rauch’s (1999) to
create two separate samples, one composed of differentiated goods and the other composed of homo-
geneous goods (see the Appendix for details). It is natural to believe that differentiated goods present
greater scope for quality differentiation than do homogeneous goods. We also allow for heterogeneity
in the response of export prices to tariff reductions in two ways. First, we estimate our econometric
model on the two subsamples separately and compare the two coefficients on ∆Dutyf . Second, we
interact ∆Dutyf with a dummy variable for whether the product is in a homogeneous goods industry.
In particular, we used the pooled sample to estimate

 ∆ ln(pf hc ) = βτ ∆Dutyf + βH ∆Dutyf × HOM OGEN EOU Sh + β f ∆χf + βi HHIi(2001) + ǫf hc , (18)

where HOM OGEN EOU Sh is a dummy variable which is equal to one for homogeneous goods and
zero for differentiated goods. We expect a positive βH and a negative βτ . We also estimate the quality
equation with the change in estimated effective quality ∆ ln(q̂f hc ) as the dependent variable in (18).

   Table 6 (Panel A) reports the estimation results of the above approaches. Columns 1-3 report
estimation results when we regress the change in (log) price for HS6-country product on tariff reduc-
tions; columns 4-6 report regression results with the change in (log) estimated quality for HS6-country
product as dependent variable; columns 7-9 report the results with the change in (log) price for HS6
product as dependent variable. In each of the three columns, the first column uses the subsample of
differentiated products and therefore presents the significantly negative coefficient on tariff reductions
(see columns 1, 4, and 7) according to Propositions 1 and 2; the second uses the subsample of homoge-

                                                     22
                              Table 6: Effect of Tariff Reductions and Quality Differentiation

                                                                                       Dependent Variable
                                                       ∆ ln(pf hc )                           ∆ ln(q̂f hc )                           ∆ ln(pf h )
                                              (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)         (8)           (9)
 Panel A: Differentiated Goods vs. Homogeneous Goods
 ∆Duty                                     -0.653***     0.527        -0.695***   -4.326***     3.397*        -4.031***   -1.021***    0.832*       -1.005***
                                            (0.248)     (0.392)        (0.231)     (1.150)      (1.960)        (1.092)     (0.318)     (0.475)       (0.290)
 ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                                1.466***                                5.974***                              1.841***
                                                                       (0.316)                                 (1.695)                               (0.379)
 Observations                                12805        1634         14439       12805         1634          14439        6620         975          7595
 R-squared                                    .005        .003          .005        .009         .006           .009        .007         .005         .008
 Panel B: quality heterogeneity based on dispersion of quality
 ∆Duty                                     -0.901***    -0.0773       -0.707***   -4.340***      -1.260       -5.315***   -1.264***     -0.172      -1.176***
                                            (0.317)     (0.277)        (0.263)     (1.566)      (1.176)        (1.308)     (0.462)     (0.270)       (0.342)
 ∆Duty ×QU ALIT Y Dispersion                                           0.462*                                 4.875***                              0.934***
                                                                       (0.269)                                 (1.304)                               (0.305)
 Observations                              7207      7232    14439                  7207         7232          14439        3785        3810          7595
 R-squared                                 .004      .005     .004                  .009         .009           .010        .007        .005          .007
 Panel C: quality differentiation based on G-M (Gollop-Monahan) Index
 ∆Duty                                     -0.626**      -0.045       -0.750***   -4.924***      0.978        -4.296***   -1.188***     0.247       -1.352***
                                            (0.263)     (0.414)        (0.247)     (1.351)      (1.735)        (1.117)     (0.398)     (0.409)       (0.336)
 ∆Duty ×QU ALIT Y Dif f                                               1.011***                                4.175***                              1.774***
                                                                       (0.313)                                 (1.501)                               (0.380)
 Observations                                6679         6284         12963        6679         6284          12963        3252        3505          6757
 R-squared                                   .004         .006          .006        .014         .006           .010        .008        .008          .010
 Panels A, B, and C:
 Firm-level Controls                          yes          yes           yes         yes          yes            yes         yes         yes           yes
 Industry-level Competition Control           yes          yes           yes         yes          yes            yes         yes         yes           yes
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm level in
 parentheses. All regressions include a constant term, firm-level controls, and industry-level competition control. Industry-level competition control
 refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level
 competition control does not alter the main results. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP,
 the number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment). Quality estimates are based on
 elasticities of substitution from Broda and Weinstein (2006).




neous goods and thus yields positive but less significant coefficients on tariff reductions (see columns
2 and 8) according to Proposition 2;30 the third presents the estimation results of equation (18) or its
variants with different dependent variables (see columns 3, 6, and 9). All coefficients on interaction
terms are significantly positive at the (at least) 1 percent level. The results are consistent with our
expectation and further substantiates Propositions 1 and 2.31

       Panel B of Table 6 reports the estimation results of a similar equation using quality heterogeneity
  30
      Proposition 1 does not directly differentiate between the two cases with scope for large and for small quality dif-
ferentiation, respectively. However, it could be derived that when the scope for quality differentiation is small, the rise
in quality would be smaller and less significant than the quality upgrading when the scope for quality differentiation
is large. Therefore, we expect a nonsignificant coefficient on ∆Duty when the regressand is the change in quality for
homogeneous goods. The result in column 5 is consistent with this expectation.
   31
      Our results also remain robust when we use Rauch index, computed as a fractional value at industry level. The
results of using Rauch index are not reported here for the sake of saving space, but available upon request.




                                                                           23
(measured by quality dispersion) instead of product differentiation (measured by Rauch classification):

 ∆ ln(pf hc ) = βτ ∆Dutyf + βH ∆Dutyf × QU ALIT YhDispersion + β f ∆χf + βi HHIi(2001) + ǫf hc , (19)

where QU ALIT YhDispersion is a dummy variable which is equal to one for goods with highly dispersed
quality and zero otherwise; the dependent variable could be either price (at different aggregation levels)
or estimated quality. We compute quality dispersion by using the estimated quality (at f hc level) to
compute a quality variance for each HS6 product. Then we use the median of quality variances of
all goods to distinguish products with highly-dispersed quality and less-dispersed quality. Again we
expect a positive βH and a negative βτ . The result is consistent with our expectation (see columns
3, 6, and 9). The results in panel B using the subsample of goods with highly-dispersed quality also
show significantly negative coefficients on tariff reductions (see columns 1, 4, and 7), while those using
the subsample of goods with less-dispersed quality present similar patterns as homogeneous goods
(see columns 2, 5, and 8). Note that the coefficient on ∆Dutyf in column 1 doubles relatively to the
coefficient obtained by estimating the model on the pooled sample (see Table 4).

       We now check the robustness of our results to using the Gollop-Monahan index to measure the
scope for quality differentiation within an industry. This index measures the dissimilarity of input
mixes across firms in an industry and is defined for the relevant intermediate-input sector. Higher
value of Gollop-Monahan index indicates larger scope for product quality differentiation.32 Panel
C of Table 6 reports estimation results of the following equation based on G-M index and presents
analogous specifications as well as similar results:

  ∆ ln(pf h(c) ) = βτ ∆Dutyf + βH ∆Dutyf × QU ALIT YhDif f + β f ∆χf + βi HHIi(2001) + ǫf h(c) ,                 (20)

where QU ALIT YhDif f is a dummy variable which is equal to one for goods with highly differentiated
quality (if that product h’s G-M index value is above the median of G-M indices for all goods) and
zero otherwise.


6.4      Extension: Evidence at Extensive Margin

To keep our model simple, we abstracted from the decision of a firm to enter export markets. A
natural extension would have fixed costs to entering foreign market that were increasing in the quality
of the good that would be sold there. In such a model, a tariff reduction that induced an upgrade in
output quality would also induce an upgrade in the types of markets entered: lower tariffs on imported
intermediates ought to steer exporters to markets that demand higher quality goods. We refer to such
  32
    The idea is that products become more differentiated if the underlying inputs are more different, which is consis-
tent with our mechanism that firms adjust their product quality as response to tariff reductions through both inten-
sive and extensive margins of their intermediates. The G-M index has been used by some previous studies, including
Kugler and Verhoogen (2012), Tang and Zhang (2012), among others. We obtain the data of the G-M index from
Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) and the detailed description is contained in Appendix B.



                                                         24
a compositional shift as a change in the extensive margin.33 We now show that tariff reductions on
intermediate inputs induce exactly such a shift.34

       To address shifts in the extensive margin of export markets, we distinguish different types of
firm-product-country and firm-product (hereafter f hc and f h, respectively, for short) combinations,
according to their status in the pre-liberalization period (2001) and post-liberalization period (2006).
We then define three types of f hc and f h combinations: “entry”, “continuing”, and “exit”. If a f hc
or f h combination is present in both 2001 and 2006, it is defined as “continuing” type; if it appears
in 2006 but not in 2001, it is characterized as “entry” type; if it appears in 2001 but not in 2006, it is
characterized as “exit” type.

       Next we compare the (log) price level for an average f hc or f h combination by type (see Table 7).
The average price for “entry” type is always higher than that for “continuing” type (see column 1 vs.
column 2), and the average price for “continuing” type is in general higher than that for “exit” type
(see column 3 vs. column 4). This suggests that we observe the exit of relatively lower priced goods
and entry of relatively higher priced goods. This also implies that the tariff liberalization had the
effect of shifting Chinese exports geographically from countries where demand for high quality goods
is relatively weak to markets where demand for high quality goods is strong and thus higher export
prices could be charged.

                 Table 7: (log) price for different types of firm-product(-country) combinations

                                                                        2006                2001
                                                                 (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)
                                                                entry    continuing   continuing   exit
                            Per Firm-product-country, median    1.52        1.29         1.16      1.12
                            Per Firm-product-country, mean      1.87        1.48         1.35      1.37
                            Per Firm-product, median            1.36        1.29         1.16      1.10
                            Per Firm-product, mean              1.66        1.48         1.35      1.33



       Now we focus on the price change within firm-product across different types of destination coun-
tries. We compute two measures of changes in export prices within firm-product: (1) the price change
for continuing markets, and (2) the price change for markets of “entry” versus markets of “exit”.
Within each firm-product, the price change for “entry-exit” is computed by the average price of each
firm-product across all its newly added markets (markets of entry) in 2006 minus the average price
  33
     In addition to the extensive margin effect described here, there are other potential channels of quality upgrading
that could supplement the quality adjustment mechanism in our model. For example, high-quality output may require
high-quality inputs. This has been theoretically derived (see, e.g., Kugler and Verhoogen, 2012, among others) and
empirically tested by the previous studies, for example, Manova and Zhang (2012a) show that firms that charge higher
export prices import more expensive inputs.
  34
     As our primary focus in this paper is to address the quality upgrading at the intensive margin for existing products,
we acknowledge that here we only present indirect evidence of extensive margin effect but we do not test how tariff
reductions affect the probabilities of firm entry/exit and product (or product-country) adding/dropping as well as their
connection with quality upgrading. A more through analysis of quality upgrading along different types of extensive
margins would be fruitful for future research.



                                                           25
across all its dropped markets (markets of exit) in 2001. We regress the change in price on the change
in import tariff and report results in Table 8.35

           Table 8: Effect of Tariff Reductions for Continuing Markets and Markets of Entry vs. Exit

                                                                              Dependent Variable: ∆ ln(pf h )
                                                       all goods                   differentiated goods            homogeneous goods
                                                 (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
                                             continuing    entry vs. exit      continuing    entry vs. exit     continuing   entry vs. exit
   ∆Duty                                      -0.562**        -0.844**          -0.818***      -1.160***          0.491         2.898**
                                               (0.259)         (0.405)           (0.293)        (0.427)          (0.443)        (1.352)
   Firm-level controls                           yes             yes               yes            yes               yes            yes
   Industry-level competition controls           yes             yes               yes            yes               yes            yes
   Observations                                 5945            3846              5193           3363               752            483
   R-squared                                    .004            .009              .006           .012              .007           .020
   Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm
   level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI),
   which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control
   does not alter the main results. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the
   number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).



       Table 8 shows that for all goods and differentiated goods, the tariff reductions significantly induce
firms to increase export prices in continuing markets (see columns 1 and 3) and to enter higher-priced
markets and to exit lower-priced markets (see columns 2 and 4). It is worth noting that the effect
of tariff reduction is stronger for “entry-versus-exit” markets than for continuing markets. Therefore,
compared with our baseline results in column 6 of Table 4 for all goods, it is obvious that the effect of
tariff reduction on price change at firm-product level is in general a combined effect of both continuing
markets and entry-versus-exit markets, i.e., the magnitude of the coefficient on tariff reduction for the
aggregate price change at firm-product level is smaller than that for entry-versus-exit market while
larger than that for continuing market.36 For differentiated goods, the effect of tariff reduction is
stronger than its counterparts for all goods; while for homogenous goods, the effect of tariff reduction
is weaker or even reversed (see columns 5 and 6). This corresponds to the previous proposition on
quality differentiation. Again, the tariff effect is stronger in entry-versus-exit markets than that in
continuing markets for both differentiated goods and homogenous goods.37

       We further decompose the “continuing” type into two sub-types: “growing” and “shrinking”. Given
that a f hc or f h combination is present in both 2001 and 2006, if its total export value increases from
2001 to 2006, it is characterized as “growing” type; if its total export value decreases, it is defined as
“shrinking” type. We report estimation results for growing-versus-shrinking types in Table A.8 in the
Appendix. The effect of tariff reductions is more significant for “growing” type than for “shrinking”
type and all results are consistent with Propositions 1 and 2.
  35
     The data presented in Table 8 define “entry” and “exit” only at f hc level so we could compare entry versus exit for
the same f h combination. This way allows the price for the same HS6 product to be compared across markets.
  36
     See the coefficient on tariff reduction in column 6 in Table 4 and compare with those in columns 1 and 2 in Table 8.
  37
     For differentiated goods, compare columns 3 and 4 in Table 8 with column 7 in panel A of Table 6; for homogeneous
goods, compare columns 5 and 6 in Table 8 with column 8 in panel A of Table 6.


                                                                         26
7      Robustness I – Statistical

We conduct four exercises to show the statistical robustness of our results. First, we present the
results based on alternative measures of firm-specific tariff reductions. Second, we show that our
results remain robust when we use conventional measures of industry input/output tariffs. Third, we
use instrumental variable estimation to address the potential issue of endogenous tariff reductions.
Last, but not least, we confirm that our results are not biased towards big firms using the whole
customs data without matching to the manufacturing firm survey.


7.1      Alternative Measures of Firm-Specific Tariff Cuts

In Section 5 we proposed a number of ways to measure the impact of tariff cuts on the cost to Chinese
firms of procuring foreign made intermediates. Our main measure, which we have used exclusively so
far, has the benefit of being consistent with the intensive margin impact across firms. We now show
how well the alternative tariff reduction measures predict price changes across firms.

                               Table 9: Alternative Firm-Specific Tariff Reduction Measures

                                                                          Firm-specific Tariff Reduction Measures
                                                     Measure 1                Measure 2                 Measure 3                 Measure 4
                                                  (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)
    Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf h )
    ∆Duty                                       -0.658*     -0.778**    -1.131**      -1.090*      -0.619**     -0.884***      -0.197     -0.227
                                                (0.350)      (0.349)     (0.574)      (0.563)       (0.276)      (0.286)      (0.304)    (0.320)
    ∆Duty × HOMOGENEOUS                                    1.880***                  2.003***                   1.884***                  0.198
                                                            (0.494)                   (0.552)                    (0.440)                 (0.507)
    Industry-level Competition Control         yes             yes         yes          yes           yes           yes         yes         yes
    Firm-level Controls                        yes             yes         yes          yes           yes           yes         yes         yes
    Observations                             7595             7595        7595         7595          6830          6830        4302        4302
    R-squared                                 .005            .006        .005         .006          .003          .005        .007        .007
    Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
    ∆Duty                                        -0.213      -0.273      -0.808*      -0.798*     -0.581***     -0.770***      -0.103     -0.161
                                                (0.273)     (0.272)      (0.452)      (0.450)      (0.221)       (0.233)      (0.271)    (0.283)
    ∆Duty × HOMOGENEOUS                                    1.480***                  1.649***                   1.668***                  0.611
                                                            (0.415)                   (0.479)                    (0.366)                 (0.446)
    Industry-level Competition Controls            yes         yes          yes          yes          yes           yes         yes         yes
    Firm-level Controls                            yes         yes          yes          yes          yes           yes         yes         yes
    Observations                                 14439       14439        14439        14439        12947         12947        8859        8859
    R-squared                                     .003        .004         .004         .005         .004          .006        .006        .006

    Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm level
    in parentheses, except that in regressions using measure 4 (firm-product specific tariff reduction) we cluster standard errors at firm-product
    level instead of firm level. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI),
    which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control does
    not alter the main results. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the number of
    imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment). By construction, tariff measure 3 yields
    fewer observations in the sample; tariff measure 4 provides fewest observations and thus presents the smallest sample size.



     In Table 9 different columns correspond to different measures of the tariff (see detailed description

                                                                        27
in Section 5.2). Specifications 1 and 2 use unweighted firm-specific tariff reductions; specifications 3
and 4 adopt the tariff reduction measure as in Ge et al. (2011) by fixing the total number of imported
varieties during the whole sample period; specifications 5 and 6 employ the weighted firm-specific
import tariff reductions of only intermediate goods; specifications 7 and 8 use the tariff reduction
measure constructed by following the mapping between inputs and outputs as in Manova and Zhang
(2012b). Panel A reports the results with average prices of HS6 products across destinations and
Panel B presents the results with prices of HS6-country products.

       In most specifications, the coefficients on the change in import tariff are significantly negative,
indicating that import tariff reduction leads to higher export prices. Also, the coefficients on the
interaction terms are all significantly positive, except for using measure 4, implying that the effect of
import tariff reduction on export price increase is more significant for products in industries where
the scope for quality differentiation is large.

       Comparing measure 1 (unweighted tariff reductions) with the main measure (weighted tariff reduc-
tions as in Table 4) the results are far stronger for measures of tariff reduction that allow different input
tariffs to receive different weights. This indicates that allowing for more important inputs to receive
a higher weight is important: large tariff reductions have a bigger impact the more that intermediate
is used in production.

       By construction, measure 2 (tariff cuts measured based on the entire set of imported inputs from
2001 as well as 2006) captures both the intensive and extensive margin impact on Chinese importers.
As our main measure and measure 1 capture only the intensive margin, we would expect the coefficient
estimate based on measure 2 to be substantially larger in these specifications. This is indeed the case
as the coefficients in columns 3 and 4 are substantially larger in absolute value than those in Tables
4 and 6.38

       Limiting the set of imported intermediates to those clearly classified as such has little impact on the
coefficient estimates as can be seen in columns 5 and 6. Finally, attempting to directly connect import
industries to export industries as is the case in the final two columns delivers weaker results. This is
perhaps not surprising as the mapping is highly imperfect and the sample size falls substantially.


7.2       Using Industry Input/Output Tariff Cuts

One might worry that the reduction in import tariffs on intermediate inputs might be correlated with
cuts in tariffs on firms’ outputs and that our results might be supriously picking up the competition
effects that are the focus of Amiti and Khandelwal (2013). Further, one might wonder as to whether
a broader measure of tariff cuts on intermediate inputs that included all likely relevant tariffs delivers
similar results. We now address these two potential concerns by including output tariffs per exported
  38
    The only other difference between the main measure and measure 1 is that the former is weighted while the latter
is unweighted. See Table 4 for the results based on the main measure of tariff reductions.



                                                        28
                                      Table 10: Industry Input and Output Tariff Cuts

                                                                                Industry Input/Output Tariff
                                                     Dependent variable: ∆ ln(pf hc )                    Dependent variable: ∆ ln(pf h )
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)      (5)           (6)          (7)            (8)
          output
  ∆Duty                                      -0.377                    0.508                    -0.256                    0.442
                                            (0.343)                   (0.410)                  (0.313)                   (0.411)
  ∆Dutyinput                                            -1.749***    -2.237***     -1.802***                -1.191***   -1.584***    -1.219***
                                                         (0.419)      (0.530)       (0.417)                  (0.450)     (0.567)      (0.447)
  ∆Dutyinput × HOMOGENEOUS                                                         1.583***                                           1.567**
                                                                                    (0.481)                                           (0.797)
  Industry-level Competition Control           yes          yes          yes           yes        yes          yes          yes          yes
  Firm-level Controls                          yes          yes          yes           yes        yes          yes          yes          yes
  Observations                               14439        14439        14439         14439       7595         7595         7595         7595
  R-squared                                   .003         .005         .005          .006       .004         .005         .005         .006

  Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the HS6 product
  level in parentheses, because we use the concordance between HS6 products and Chinese input-output sector to compute industry input/output
  tariffs. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed
  in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control does not alter the main
  results. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the number of imported varieties,
  capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).



product and input tariffs constructed using input-output matrixes.

    Table 10 reports the results based on industry input and output tariffs. Columns 1-4 present the
results using the price change for HS6-country product as the dependent variable, and columns 5-8
report the results with the price change for HS6 product. When we regress the price change on the
industry output tariff change (see columns 1 and 5), the coefficients on output tariff are negative yet
insignificant. When we regress the price change on industry input tariffs using the broadest measure
of input tariff relevance (see columns 2 and 6), the coefficients on input tariff are significantly negative
and very large in terms of their magnitude, implying that lower input tariffs can raise export prices
through the quality effect that is the focus of our paper. The large magnitude of the coefficient
suggests that the extensive margin is important as is the potential impact of tariff cuts on the price
of competing domestic inputs.

    When we include both input and output tariff as explanatory variables, the effect of input tariff, the
key variable of our interest, is still significantly negative (see columns 3 and 7), which further confirms
that input tariff reductions raise export prices. Lastly, we estimate equation (18) with industry input
tariff in columns 4 and 8. As expected, the coefficients on input tariff are significantly negative, while
the coefficients on the interaction terms are significantly positive, confirming Proposition 2 that prices
significantly increase with tariff reductions in industries with large scope for quality differentiation
while in industries with small scope for quality differentiation the price increase is significantly smaller.
Thus, adopting industry-level tariffs does not alter our results.39
  39
     To provide more evidence on the relationship between tariffs and export prices, we also conduct the baseline regression
in levels (see equation (13)) with industry input/output tariffs in Table A.9 in the Appendix. We present the results
of level regressions with industry- instead of firm-specific tariffs because we do not have theoretical justification of firm-


                                                                      29
7.3     Instrumental Variable Estimation

Now, we address the issue of the potential endogeneity of tariff changes. It is common in literature
to use the past levels of tariffs as instruments for changes in tariffs (e.g., Goldberg and Pavcnik, 2005;
Amiti and Konings, 2007). The idea is that the past tariffs are usually strongly correlated with the
current changes in tariffs, but the past tariffs are uncorrelated with the error term or any other
determinants of the dependent variable in the baseline regressions (i.e., the exclusion restriction).
Therefore, we also employ past levels of tariffs as instruments and report the results in Table 11. In
specifications 1 and 2, we employ the 1997 tariff level as the fixed past level to instrument the change
in tariffs between 2001 and 2006; in specifications 3 and 4, we use the initial level to instrument the
change, i.e., we use the 2001 tariff level to instrument ∆Duty2006−2001 . Again, we report results for
both firm-product-country prices in Panel A and firm-product prices in Panel B.

    We conduct two tests to verify the quality of the instruments. The first diagnostic statistic for
assessing the strength of identification is based on a Langrange-Multiplier (LM) test for underiden-
tification using the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) rk statistic, because in our econometric model, the
error term is assumed to be heteroskedastic and thus the usual canonical correlation likelihood ratio
test (Anderson, 1984) is invalid.40 The Kleibergen and Paap (2006) rk statistic is to test whether an
instrument is relevant to an endogenous variable (i.e., the change in tariffs). The null hypothesis that
the model is underidentified is rejected at the 0.1 percent significance level. The second diagnostic
test we perform is the Kleibergen and Paap (2006) Wald statistic to check whether the instrument is
weakly correlated with the endogenous variable. The Kleibergen and Paap (2006) Wald F-statistics
provide strong evidence to reject the null hypothesis that the first stage is weakly identified at a highly
significant level. That is to say, in all specifications, the instruments provide a good fit in the first
stage, and perform as valid instruments.

    Table 11 clearly illustrates that in all specifications, the coefficients on the interaction terms (∆Duty
× HOM OGEN EOU S) are significantly positive, and the coefficients on tariff change are all signif-
icantly negative, at 1 percent significance level. This is consistent with the main predictions of our
model that tariff reductions lead to higher export prices while this effect increases in product differ-
entiation and thus, the goods with small scope for quality differentiation have a smaller increase, or
even a reduction, in their export prices.

    The fact that coefficients in the IV regressions are considerably larger than the OLS coefficients
could have multiple explanations. On the one hand, this could simply be an issue of measurement error
as relating tariff reductions to marginal costs of individual products within the firm is by necessity
indirect. On the other hand, it could be that the firms that faced the highest average tariffs on their
specific tariffs in levels. Our theoretically derived firm-specific measures refer to tariff reductions at the firm level. The
results of level regressions show that higher export prices are also associated with lower input tariffs.
  40
     In all of the specifications, the Cragg-Donald F statistic is also well above the critical values listed in Stock and Yogo
(2005). However, we do not report them since critical values are for i.i.d. errors while in our econometric model the
error term is assumed to be heteroskedastic.


                                                              30
                                     Table 11: Instrumental Variable Estimation

                                                             instrumented by Duty1997        instrumented by Duty2001
                                                                (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
              Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
              ∆Duty                                          -1.339***       -1.542***       -1.000***        -1.237***
                                                              (0.405)         (0.402)         (0.299)          (0.306)
              ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                           2.066***                        1.941***
                                                                               (0.381)                         (0.356)
              Industry-level Competition Control                yes              yes             yes             yes
              Firm-level Controls                               yes              yes             yes             yes
              Kleibergen-Paap rk LM χ2 (1) statistic         107.266†         111.730†        33.513†          33.977†
              Weak Instrument (F statistic)                  239.197†         124.807†        317.716†        150.973†
              Observations                                    14439            14439           14439            14439
              R-squared                                        .002             .004            .003             .005
              Prob > F                                         .000             .000            .000             .000
              Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf h )
              ∆Duty                                          -1.539***       -1.821***       -1.026***        -1.383***
                                                              (0.509)         (0.498)         (0.381)          (0.375)
              ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                           2.246***                        2.108***
                                                                               (0.457)                         (0.419)
              Industry-level Competition Control                yes              yes             yes             yes
              Firm-level Controls                               yes              yes             yes             yes
              Kleibergen-Paap rk LM χ2 (1) statistic          94.272†          99.725†        35.359†          39.634†
              Weak Instrument (F statistic)                  200.338†         110.314†        630.419†        382.221†
              Observations                                     7595             7595            7595            7595
              R-squared                                        .004             .006            .005            .007
              Prob > F                                         .001             .000            .002            .000

              Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. † indicates significance at the
              0.01 percent level (p-value < 0.0001). Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm level
              in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to
              Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in
              China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control does not alter the main results. Firm-level
              controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the number of
              imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).



imported intermediates were those with the greatest potential for increasing their product quality once
tariffs came down.


7.4   Large Sample Test Using Whole Customs Data

So far our empirical results are based on the merged data built upon the NBSC manufacturing survey
database and the Customs database. However, the NBSC manufacturing survey only includes above-
scale firms, which may lead to sample selection bias. Therefore, to further verify that our results are
not biased towards big firms, we replicate baseline regressions with both firm-specific tariff reductions
and industry input tariff reductions in Table 12. The results show that all coefficients on the interaction
terms (∆Duty× HOM OGEN EOU S) are significantly positive and most coefficients on ∆Duty are
significantly negative. This fully supports the main predictions of our model that firms increase


                                                                  31
                    Table 12: Long-Difference Estimation Based on Whole Customs Data

                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
            Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
            ∆Duty                                -0.477***        -0.161      -0.691**     -0.427***       -0.069      -0.925***
                                                  (0.156)        (0.191)       (0.295)      (0.155)       (0.148)       (0.338)


            ∆Duty × HOMOGENEOUS                   1.166***      1.572***     1.949***      1.080***      1.069***       1.724***
                                                   (0.287)       (0.274)      (0.297)       (0.301)       (0.307)        (0.313)
            Observations                            48095         48095        48095         44232         27923         48095
            R-squared                                .001          .001         .002          .001          .001          .002
            Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf h )
            ∆Duty                                   -0.321      -0.546**      -0.906**      -0.407*       -0.281*       -0.784**
                                                   (0.211)       (0.236)       (0.386)      (0.225)       (0.168)        (0.318)
            ∆Duty × HOMOGENEOUS                   1.317***      1.524***     1.714***      1.392***      0.837***       1.565***
                                                   (0.256)       (0.286)      (0.311)       (0.293)       (0.290)        (0.302)
            Observations                            31245         31245        31245         29229         16315         31245
            R-squared                                .001          .001         .001          .001         .0005          .001

            Notes: The first five columns correspond to firm-specific measures of tariff reductions and the last one corresponds
            to industry input tariff reduction measure. Among the five columns of using firm-specific measures of tariff
            reductions, the first one adopts our main tariff reduction measure, and the rest four employ the four alternative
            measures of tariff reductions as described in order in Section 5.2.
            ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors are corrected for

            clustering at firm level for firm-specific tariff reductions (see columns 1-4), at firm-product level for firm-product-
            specific tariff reductions (see column 5) and at HS6 product level for industry input tariff reductions (see column
            6) in parentheses.



export prices with tariff reductions when the scope for quality differentiation is large but may decrease
prices when the scope for quality differentiation is small. We also plot the price distribution based
on the whole customs data in Figure 3 to confirm the different patterns of price change by product
differentiation. Similar as in Figure 2 based on the merged data in stylized facts, the price distribution
apparently shifts to the right for differentiated goods, while this price shifting pattern is nonsignificant
or even reversed for homogeneous goods.


8    Robustness II – Alternative Explanations

We now assess the robustness of our interpretation of the results relative to alternate explanations.
First, we show that our results do not seem to be due to firms’ adjustment of markups in the wake
of the tariff reduction. Second, our main results do not appear to be driven by other potential
mechanisms, including policy uncertainty regarding market access, currency appreciation, and changes
in the degree of product market competition (competition effect). Lastly, we use processing exporters
as comparison group to show that our quality upgrading mechanism is specific to ordinary exporters
because processing trade firms do not pay tariffs.




                                                                     32
           Panel (a): Differentiated Goods


                  1.5




                                                                      1.5
                     1
               Density




                                                                   Density
                                                                         1
              .5




                                                                  .5
                  0




                                                                      0
                             −1    −.5   0       .5   1                      −1   −.5       0        .5          1
                                     Export Price                                       Export Price

                                    2001              2006                              2001              2006
           Panel (b): Homogeneous Goods
                  1.5




                                                                      2
                                                                    1 1.5
                     1
               Density




                                                                  Density
              .5




                                                                      .5
                  0




                                                                      0

                             −1    −.5   0       .5   1                      −1   −.5       0        .5          1
                                     Export Price                                       Export Price

                                    2001              2006                              2001              2006




           Figure 3: Distribution of Export Prices Based on Whole Customs Data (2001 vs. 2006)
       Note: The graphs in the left and the right columns refer to HS6 and HS6-country product, respectively.


8.1    Markup Adjustments

A natural concern is whether results reflect heterogeneous responses across firms in adjusting their
markups that happen to be correlated with the size of the tariff reductions that they experience (see,
for example, Halpern and Koren (2007)). According to Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Amiti et al.
(forthcoming), in markets where the firm has a small market share, it has a small markup and so it
is hard for the firm to adjust its markup in those markets.41 The change in prices in those markets
is mainly driven by the change in marginal costs. Therefore, we rank all firms based on their market
share in each destination market and keep the firms with small market shares by picking up the bottom
10, 30, and 50 percentiles. This exercise would alleviate the concern that our results reflect markup
variation rather than quality adjustments. The price and quality estimation results are reported in
Table 13. All coefficients on tariff reduction are significantly negative, and the interaction term with
homogeneous goods are always significantly positive. Further note the stability of the coefficients
across different samples, suggesting that potential market power plays a relatively unimportant role in
export markets. Finally, we note before leaving the subject of markup adjustments that our extensive
margin results shown in Table 8 support our underlying mechanism in a manner that is free of markup
  41
     Amiti et al. (AER, forthcoming) prove that market share of the firm is a sufficient statistic for its markup; markup
variability is monotonically increasing in the market share (see Proposition 1 in their model). Although this prediction
is also model-specific, their empirical analysis provides support for this monotonic relationship.



                                                             33
adjustment concerns. We conclude that our results are not primarily driven by changes in markups.

                                    Table 13: Results for Firms with Small Markups

                                                        ≤10 percentile              ≤30 percentile              ≤50 percentile
                                                        (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
         Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
         ∆Duty                                       -0.580**     -0.725***     -0.657***     -0.798***      -0.597**     -0.732***
                                                      (0.241)      (0.246)       (0.239)       (0.243)        (0.232)      (0.234)
         ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                     1.574***                    1.620***                   1.601***
                                                                    (0.393)                     (0.380)                    (0.365)
         Observations                                  9394          9394         10126         10126         11029         11029
         R-squared                                     .005          .007          .005          .007          .005          .006
         Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(q̂f hc )
         ∆Duty                                      -4.368***     -4.968***     -4.718***     -5.326***     -4.240***     -4.830***
                                                     (1.183)       (1.260)       (1.185)       (1.252)       (1.112)       (1.159)
         ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                     6.520***                    6.947***                   7.023***
                                                                    (2.218)                     (2.167)                    (2.061)
         Observations                                  9394          9394         10126         10126         11029         11029
         R-squared                                     .007          .008          .008          .009          .008          .010
         Panels A and B:
         Firm-level Controls                            yes           yes           yes           yes           yes           yes
         Industry-level Competition Control             yes           yes           yes           yes           yes           yes

         Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering
         at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term, firm-level controls, and industry-level competi-
         tion control. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the number
         of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment). Industry-level
         Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC
         industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control does not alter the main results. Quality estimates
         are based on elasticities of substitution from Broda and Weinstein (2006).




8.2   Other Potential Mechanisms

There may exist other mechanisms through which tariff changes could potentially affect quality choice.
These include reduced uncertainty about the ability to export to high-income markets (the policy
uncertainty effect), currency appreciation (exchange rate effect), and fending off stronger competition
from abroad (the product market competition effect). We conduct the sensitivity tests for these
potential mechanisms and discuss each in turn.

   Policy Uncertainty

   Prior to its accession to the WTO, China was vulnerable to the sudden loss of MFN status in
its trade relations with the United States, where such status required annual congressional action to
maintain. Pierce and Schott (2013) have shown that this vulnerability depressed Chinese exports to
the U.S., particularly in industries where non-MFN tariffs were very high. To remove the potential for
this mechanism to drive our results, we remove the U.S. from our sample and reestimated our main
equations. The resulting estimates are shown in Columns 1 and 2 in Table 14. All coefficients on tariff


                                                                    34
                                Table 14: Sensitivity to Other Potential Mechanisms

                                                      policy uncertainty       currency appreciation         competition effect
                                                       (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
         Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
         ∆Duty                                      -0.487**     -0.658***       -0.114       -0.157       -0.480**     -0.661***
                                                     (0.235)      (0.246)       (0.118)      (0.124)        (0.225)      (0.234)
         ∆Dutyoutput                                                                                         -0.256       -0.238
                                                                                                            (0.304)      (0.301)
         ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                   1.308***                    0.483*                     1.460***
                                                                  (0.326)                    (0.279)                     (0.315)
         Observations                            12911             12911        18809         18809         14439         14439
         R-squared                                 .005             .006         .001          .001          .004          .005
         Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf h )
         ∆Duty                                      -0.689**     -1.004***     -0.422**     -0.511***      -0.692**     -0.991***
                                                     (0.285)      (0.298)       (0.179)      (0.192)        (0.278)      (0.289)
         ∆Dutyoutput                                                                                         -0.097       -0.118
                                                                                                            (0.353)      (0.350)
         ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                   1.841***                    0.660**                    1.844***
                                                                  (0.395)                    (0.293)                     (0.378)
         Observations                                 6883         6883          9253          9253          7595          7595
         R-squared                                    .005          .007         .001          .001          .005          .008
         Panels A and B:
         Firm-level Controls                           yes          yes           yes           yes           yes           yes
         Industry-level Competition Control            yes          yes           yes           yes           yes           yes

         Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering
         at the firm level in parentheses. We use the concordance between HS6 products and Chinese input-output sector
         to compute industry output tariffs. All regressions include a constant term, firm-level controls, and industry-level
         competition controls. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP,
         the number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).
         Industry-level competition control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the
         4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition control does not alter the main results.



reductions are virtually unchanged.

   Currency Appreciation

   Note that our export price is denominated in US dollars. One may be concerned that the price
increase is partially due to the appreciation of Renminbi (Chinese currency, hereafter RMB). It is
possible that a stronger RMB reduces firms’ costs to purchase imported inputs with local currency,
and thus provides firms more incentive to switch to better inputs.

   To test the sensitivity of our results to RMB appreciation, we use the data during the period before
the appreciation to test whether export prices indeed increase without currency appreciation. As the
RMB appreciated in late 2005, we dropped data of 2005 and 2006, and conduct the long-difference es-
timation for the period 2004-2001 in columns 3 and 4 in Table 14. At firm-product level, all coefficients
on ∆Duty are significantly negative at the (at least) 5 percent level. At firm-product-country level,
the effect of tariff reduction is less significant, but remains its negative signs. The insignificance at
firm-product-country level is perhaps due to two reasons: First, the difference estimation for currency
appreciation is based on a 3-year difference which is shorter than our main estimation period (5-year


                                                                    35
difference) and thus the quality adjustment may not be sufficient. Second, a compositional effect may
play a role here such that the effect of tariff reduction at more aggregated levels is more significant,
which is also consistent with our previous discussion of a modest compositional effect in the baseline
results in Table 4. The coefficients on the interaction term are also significantly positive, consistent
with previous discussion. The test confirms that export prices indeed increase even without currency
appreciation.

         Competition Effect

         Increased competition from imports has been linked in existing studies to quality upgrading (Amiti
and Khandelwal, 2013). If reduction in tariffs on Chinese firms’ output are correlated with reductions
in tariffs of inputs, then we might misattribute the mechanism that drives quality upgrading. Here, we
add industry-level output tariffs to our main specification in order to dispel any concerns about this
possibility.42 Columns 5 and 6 in Table 14 report results of sensitivity tests for competition effect. The
coefficients on output tariff reduction are in general negative, but including output tariff to control
for competition effect does not alter our main results.43


8.3        Comparison Group: Processing Exporters

We use processing exporters as comparison group to show that processing firms do not significantly
increase export prices, probably because they never pay tariffs to begin with. As some firms are
“hybrid” exporters, i.e., they do both ordinary trade and processing trade transactions, we only select
those pure processing exporters as comparison. Table 15 reports the results of equation (14) for those
pure processing firms, which can be compared with the baseline regressions for ordinary exporters in
Table 4. There is no evidence that pure processing exporters increase their export prices in response
to tariff reductions. Nevertheless, one may be concerned that import tariffs have potential impacts
on the export processing margin for firms. We conduct further tests for shifting processors (i.e., firms
that switched trade regimes) in Table A.10 in the Appendix and all our main results remain robust
to the changes in the margins of trade regimes.


9         Conclusion

In this paper, we uncover patterns of price and quantity adjustments in the wake of trade liberalization
that strongly suggest that access to imported intermediate inputs can substantially increase the ability
of firms to deliver high quality goods to foreign markets. We first uncover interesting price adjustments
across firms that can clearly be documented in a series of figures. We then devised an econometric
    42
     Note that in section 7.2 we presented a similar specification. The difference here is that we are using our main
measure of tariff reductions rather than a measure based on IO tables.
  43
     Another control variable related with competition effect is the industry-level competition control based on either the
initial HHI or the change in HHI. Using either one does not alter the robustness of our main results.



                                                            36
                                   Table 15: Comparison Group: Processing Exporters

                                                                        Dependent Variable
                                                            ∆ ln(Export Pricef hc )                       ∆ ln(Export Pricef h )
       Regressor:                                   (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)          (8)
       ∆Duty                                       0.265       0.264        0.256      0.259     0.420      0.427*     0.357        0.363
                                                  (0.261)     (0.261)      (0.233)    (0.234)   (0.258)     (0.259)   (0.224)      (0.224)
       ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                  1.137**                  0.722                 0.537                  0.403
                                                              (0.530)                 (0.684)               (0.847)                (0.913)
       Industry-level Competition Control                                    yes        yes                             yes          yes
       Firm-level Controls                                                   yes        yes                             yes          yes
       Observations                                1771        1771         1771       1771      1036        1036      1036         1036
       R-squared                                   .002        .003         .010       .011      .003        .003      .009         .010
       Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the
       firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index
       (HHI), which is computed in the initial year at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Using ∆HHI as industry-level competition
       control does not alter the main results. Firm-level controls include the changes in the following variables: TFP, the number of
       imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).



model from a simple analytical framework of quality choice and access to imported intermediates.
Estimating this model on Chinese data in the post WTO accession period, we find strong and robust
evidence that those firms in industries where quality heterogeneity is substantial that experienced the
largest tariff reductions on their imported inputs increase the price and quality of their outputs.

   Our study has imposed relatively little structure on the data. While this allows us to take a diverse
set of cuts of the data to establish the existence and robustness of our results, it does come at the cost
of limiting a complete assessment of magnitudes that a more structural approach would allow. Such
a structural approach would incorporate a number of important elements. First, formally modeling
the decisions to export would allow us to more thoroughly trace out the complementarities between
imported intermediates and exports. Second, while we argued that our results are not primarily
driven by markup adjustments, a more structural approach would allow the actual contributions of
our mechanism and markup adjustments to be quantified. Finally, a more structural model would
allow the relative contributions of the extensive and intensive margins to be separately identified. We
hope that our paper will provide the impetus for an expansion in research along these lines.




                                                                      37
References
Ackerberg, Daniel, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, “Structural identification of production functions,”
  MPRA Paper 38349, University Library of Munich, Germany December 2006.

Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei, “The role of intermediaries in facilitating
  trade,” Journal of International Economics, May 2011, 84 (1), 73–85.

Amiti, Mary and Amit K. Khandelwal, “Import Competition and Quality Upgrading,” The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, May 2013, 95 (2), 476–490.

   and Jozef Konings, “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence from
  Indonesia,” American Economic Review, December 2007, 97 (5), 1611–1638.

  , Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, “Importers, Exporters, and Exchange Rate Disconnect,” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, forthcoming.

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, September
  2004, 42 (3), 691–751.

Anderson, T. W., An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis Wiley series in probability and
  mathematical statistics, 2 ed., New York: Wiley, 1984. T.W. Anderson; ;25 cm; Includes index;
  Bibliography: p. 643-665.

Bernard, Andrew B and J. Bradford Jensen, “Firm Structure, Multinationals, and Manufacturing
  Plant Deaths,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2007, 89 (2), 193–204.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang, “Creative Accounting or Creative De-
  struction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing,” Journal of Development
  Economics, 2012, 97 (2), 339–351.

Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, “Globalization and the Gains From Variety,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2006, 121 (2), 541–585.

Cai, Hongbin and Qiao Liu, “Competition and Corporate Tax Avoidance: Evidence from Chinese
  Industrial Firms,” Economic Journal, 04 2009, 119 (537), 764–795.

Fan, Haichao, Edwin L.-C. Lai, and Yao Amber Li, “Credit Constraints, Quality, and Export Prices:
  Theory and Evidence from China,” MPRA Paper 40857, University Library of Munich, Germany
  August 2012.

Feenstra, Robert C. and John Romalis, “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, forthcoming.



                                                  38
Ge, Ying, Huiwen Lai, and Susan Zhu, “Intermediates Import and Gains from Trade Liberalization,”
  Technical Report, mimeo, University of International Business and Economics 2011.

Goldberg, Pinelopi Koujianou, Amit Kumar Khandelwal, Nina Pavcnik, and Petia Topalova, “Im-
  ported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth: Evidence from India,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, November 2010, 125 (4), 1727–1767.

      and Nina Pavcnik, “Trade, wages, and the political economy of trade protection: evidence from
  the Colombian trade reforms,” Journal of International Economics, May 2005, 66 (1), 75–105.

Gopinath, Gita and Brent Neiman, “Trade Adjustment and Productivity in Large Crises,” NBER
  Working Papers 16958, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc April 2011.

Halpern, László and Miklós Koren, “Pricing to Firm: an Analysis of Firm- and Product-level Import
  Prices,” Review of International Economics, 08 2007, 15 (3), 574–591.

  ,     , and Adam Szeidl, “Imported Inputs and Productivity,” CeFiG Working Papers 8, Center for
  Firms in the Global Economy September 2011.

Head, Keith and John Ries, “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an Ex-
  planation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review, September 2001, 91
  (4), 858–876.

Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Joel Rodrigue, “Does the use of imported intermediates increase productivity?
  Plant-level evidence,” Journal of Development Economics, August 2008, 87 (1), 106–118.

Khandelwal, Amit, “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic Studies, 2010,
  77 (4), 1450–1476.

Khandelwal, Amit K., Peter K. Schott, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Trade Liberalization and Embedded
  Institutional Reform: Evidence from Chinese Exporters,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Kleibergen, Frank and Richard Paap, “Generalized reduced rank tests using the singular value de-
  composition,” Journal of Econometrics, July 2006, 133 (1), 97–126.

Kugler, Maurice and Eric Verhoogen, “Plants and Imported Inputs: New Facts and an Interpretation,”
  The American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (2), pp. 501–507.

      and   , “Prices, Plant Size, and Product Quality,” Review of Economic Studies, 2012, 79 (1),
  307–339.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
  Unobservables,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), pp. 317–341.



                                                 39
Manova, Kalina and Zhiwei Zhang, “Export Prices Across Firms and Destinations,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2012, 127, 379–436.

   and    , “Multi-Product Firms and Product Quality,” NBER Working Papers 18637, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc December 2012.

Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I. P. Ottaviano, “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (1), 295–316.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equip-
  ment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), pp. 1263–1297.

Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott, “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment,”
  Working Papers 13-59, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau December 2013.

Rauch, James E., “Networks versus markets in international trade,” Journal of International Eco-
  nomics, June 1999, 48 (1), 7–35.

Schott, Peter K., “Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in International Trade,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2004, 119 (2), 646–677.

Smeets, Valerie and Frederic Warzynski, “Estimating productivity with multi-product firms, pricing
  heterogeneity and the role of international trade,” Journal of International Economics, 2013, 90
  (2), 237 – 244.

Stock, James H. and Motohiro Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression,” in
  Donald W. K. Andrews and James H. Stock, eds., Identification and Inference for Econometric
  Models: Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg, New York: Cambridge University Press., 2005,
  pp. 80–108.

Tang, Heiwai and Yifan Zhang, “Quality Differentiation and Trade Intermediation,” Technical Report
  2012.

Trefler, Daniel, “The Long and Short of the Canada-U. S. Free Trade Agreement,” American Economic
  Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 870–895.

Verhoogen, Eric A., “Trade, Quality Upgrading, and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing
  Sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2008, 123 (2), 489–530.




                                                40
Appendix

A      Data Description

The process of our sample construction can be summarized by five steps:

    1. We organize the export data from the Chinese Customs Database by the following procedure:
       1.1 We delete all trade intermediaries from exporting firms. Similar to Ahn et al. (2011) and
       Tang and Zhang (2012), we identify trade intermediaries by finding the presence of phrases
       (such as “trading”, “exporting”, and “importing”) in their company names.44 We further drop
       all exports under processing trade regime and only keep ordinary trade in our sample.45
       1.2 We drop all observations with no destination information or destination country reported as
       PRC China. We further drop all observations with zero or missing quantity or value.
       1.3 We use the conversion table from the UN Comtrade to convert the HS 2002 codes into the
       HS 1996 codes at HS 6-digit level. Then we aggregate the export value and export quantity for
       each product at either HS6 or HS6-destination.
       1.4 We deflate the export value using output deflators from Brandt et al. (2012).46 Note that
       the deflators in Brandt et al. (2012) are by 4-digit CIC industry in China, while there is no
       information about CIC industry code in the Customs Data. Therefore, we use the concordance
       between the Input-Output (I-O) sectors and the HS codes and the concordance between the
       I-O sectors and the CIC industries by the NBSC to merge each HS code with a CIC industry.
       Eventually, we are able to compute the deflated value at HS6 level.
       1.5 We estimate product quality and quality-adjusted price by following Khandelwal et al. (forthcoming).
       See Section 6.2 for details.
       1.6 We merge the above sample with Rauch’s product classification (Rauch, 1999) to divide
       sample into differentiated goods and homogeneous goods.

    2. We organize the import data from the Chinese Customs Database by the following procedure:
       2.1-2.3 are similar with 1.1-1.3.
       2.4 We deflate the import value using input deflators from Brandt et al. (2012). The process is
       similar to Step 1.4.
       2.5 We merge import data with import tariff at HS6 level and compute different measures of
       the effective import tariff reduction faced by each firm. See Section 5.2 for more details of each
       tariff measure.
  44
      As company names in the Customs Database are written in Chinese, we search for “mao yi”, “wai mao”, “wai jing”,
“jin chu kou”, “jing mao”, “gong mao”, and “ke mao” in firm names.
   45
      Move 1.1 after 1.5 does not alter our estimation results.
   46
      The deflator data are downloaded from http://www.econ.kuleuven.be/public/N07057/China/.


                                                          I
    3. We merge the export data (based on Step 1) and the import data (based on Step 2) together to
       obtain a large sample based on the Customs Database solely. This sample serves as the basis
       for the robustness check when we use the whole customs data.

    4. To obtain firm-level characteristics and industry-level competition control, we merge the above
       sample based on customs data with the NBSC manufacturing firm survey data. Our matching
       procedure is done in three steps: (1) by company name, (2) by telephone number and zip code,
       and (3) by telephone number and contact person name together (see detailed description of the
       matching process in Fan et al., 2012). The matching rates are reported in Section 2.

    5. We further delete some unsatisfactory observations and outliers according to the following criteria
       in Cai and Liu (2009) and the General Accepted Accounting Principles, due to mis-reporting by
       some firms in the NBSC database: (i) the total assets must be higher than the liquid assets; (ii)
       the total assets must be larger than the total fixed assets; (iii) the total assets must be larger
       than the net value of the fixed assets; (iv) a firm’s identification number cannot be missing and
       must be unique; and (v) the established time must be valid.


B      Measures of Quality Differentiation

    • Rauch’s (1999) homogeneous-good dummy. Source: Rauch (1999).
       At the 4-digit SITC Revision 2 level, Rauch (1999) categorizes industries into three categories:
       (1) “homogeneous” goods that are mainly traded on organized exchanges; (2) “reference-priced”
       goods; (3) goods that neither have reference prices nor are traded on organized exchanges. The
       dummy variable HOM OGEN EOU S equals one if the product falls into category (1) or (2) and
       zero otherwise. We concord the data into HS 6-digit level (2002 version) from SITC Rev.2. The
       concordance table is from the United Nations Statistics Division.

    • Gallop-Monahan Index (based on US firms). Source: Kugler and Verhoogen (2012).
       The index is defined as follows:
                                                                                      !1/2
                                              X                  X |sijkt − s̄ikt |
                                      GMk =           wjt
                                                                           2
                                              j,k,t               i


       where i, j, k, and t stand for inputs, plants, industries and years; sijkt is the expenditure share
       on input i of plant j in industry k in year t; s̄ikt is the average expenditure share on input i by
       all plants in industry k in year t; wjt is the share of revenues of plant j in year t in total revenues
       of all plants in all years in industry k. The term inside the brackets measures how dissimilar
       input mix of plant j is from other plants in its industry in the corresponding year. The measure
       then averages those plant-specific measures over plants and years, using revenues as weights.
       We adopt this measure already constructed by Kugler and Verhoogen (2012) since we do not

                                                            II
    have complete information on input mix at the firm level in our Chinese data. Their method is
    building upon Bernard and Jensen (2007). Their original data are available at the ISIC Rev.2.
    4-digit level, and we concord to HS6 using the concordance from the UN Comtrade.


C   More Figures and Tables
                                   .5
               change in tariffs (5−year difference)
                         −.5       −1       0




                                                       0   .5                    1         1.5
                                                                initial tariff



        Figure A.1: Change in Tariffs for HS6 Products, 2001-2006, Relative to Initial Levels
             Note: Some products experienced an increase in their tariff over the sample period.




                                                                III
Table A.1: Change in Export Prices year by year: Differentiated vs. Homogeneous Products

                                                (1)               (2)                (3)
                                          Whole Sample Differentiated Goods   Homogeneous Goods
                                       Panel A: 1-year difference
   Change in Export Prices (HS6):
        Per Firm-product, median                0.94%                1.31%         -0.46%
        Per Firm-product, mean                  2.64%                2.91%         0.89%
   Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
        Per Firm-product-country, median        0.24%                0.55%         -1.10%
        Per Firm-product-country, mean          1.93%                2.22%         -0.34%
                                        Panel B: 2-year difference
   Change in Export Prices (HS6):
        Per Firm-product, median                3.58%                4.41%         -0.44%
        Per Firm-product, mean                  5.98%                6.70%         1.20%
   Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
        Per Firm-product-country, median        2.11%                2.74%         -1.54%
        Per Firm-product-country, mean          4.65%                5.25%         -0.04%
                                        Panel C: 3-year difference
   Change in Export Prices (HS6):
        Per Firm-product, median                6.41%                7.61%         -0.44%
        Per Firm-product, mean                  9.50%                10.58%        2.38%
   Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
        Per Firm-product-country, median        4.62%                5.68%         -1.93%
        Per Firm-product-country, mean          7.95%                8.84%         1.11%
                                       Panel D: 4-year difference
   Change in Export Prices (HS6):
        Per Firm-product, median                9.74%                11.18%         0.12%
        Per Firm-product, mean                 12.60%                14.18%         2.10%
   Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
        Per Firm-product-country, median        6.82%                8.27%         -1.97%
        Per Firm-product-country, mean         10.26%                11.64%        -0.58%
                                        Panel E: 5-year difference
   Change in Export Prices (HS6):
        Per Firm-product, median               11.80%                14.10%        -1.19%
        Per Firm-product, mean                 15.72%                17.35%        3.43%
   Change in Export Prices (HS6-country):
        Per Firm-product-country, median        9.14%                10.36%        -0.02%
        Per Firm-product-country, mean         13.30%                14.68%        0.90%




                                                   IV
                           Table A.2: Results with Different-period Difference

                                                                           Dependent Variable
                                                      ∆ ln(ExportP rice)f hct              ∆ ln(ExportP rice)f ht
                                                     (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)
       In 2 period difference: ∆Dutyt−(t−2)        -0.180*                              -0.255*
                                                   (0.108)                              (0.137)

       In 3 period difference: ∆Dutyt−(t−3)                    -0.196*                                -0.397**
                                                               (0.119)                                 (0.173)

       In 4 period difference: ∆Dutyt−(t−4)                                -0.271**                               -0.468**
                                                                            (0.153)                                (0.200)
       Year fixed effects                            yes         yes          yes        yes           yes           yes
       Industry-level Competition Control            yes         yes          yes        yes           yes           yes
       Firm-level Controls                           yes         yes          yes        yes           yes           yes
       Observations                                158,616      79,777      37,427      69,040        37,203       18,483
       R-squared                                    0.002       0.002        0.001      0.001         0.002         0.001
       Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for
       clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition
       Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year of the difference period at the
       4-digit CIC industry in China. Firm-level controls include the changes in the following variables: TFP, the
       number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).




Table A.3: Effect of Tariff Reductions on Quality Upgrading with Bootstrapped Standard Errors

                                                             Dependent Variable: ∆ ln(q̂f hc )
                                             σ=5                        σ = 10                          σ = σi
                                                                                          Broda and Weinstein (2006)

                                       (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)              (6)
        ∆Duty                       -3.093**     -3.125**     -6.351***     -6.623***     -3.339***           -3.304***
                                     (1.262)      (1.253)      (2.331)       (2.340)       (1.063)             (1.054)
        ∆ln(TFP)                                0.301***                    0.496***                          0.236***
                                                 (0.063)                     (0.118)                           (0.056)
        ∆ln(Capital/Labor)                       0.159*                       0.230                            0.0948
                                                 (0.088)                     (0.160)                           (0.071)
        ∆ln(Labor)                              0.263***                      0.210                           0.278***
                                                 (0.092)                     (0.163)                           (0.091)
        ∆ln(Wage)                                 0.150                       0.251                             0.110
                                                 (0.111)                     (0.209)                           (0.090)
        ∆ln(Import Varieties)                    0.118*                       0.181                            0.118**
                                                 (0.064)                     (0.125)                           (0.051)
        HHI                                       -1.690                      -4.386                            -1.227
                                                 (1.501)                     (2.903)                           (1.209)
        Observations                 14439        14439         14439         14439         14439               14439
        R-squared                     .001         .007          .001          .006          .002                .008
        Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Bootstrapped standard errors
        are in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Herfindahl index (HHI) is computed in the
        initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China.




                                                              V
              Table A.4: Baseline Regressions with Only ∆ ln(T F P ) as Firm Control

                                      Dependent Variable: ∆price                  Dependent Variable: ∆ ln(q̂f hc )
                                     (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
                                 ∆ ln(pf hc )     ∆ ln(pf h )      ∆(pf )          σ=5          σ=10         σ = σi
               ∆Duty              -0.487**         -0.669**       -0.638**       -3.133**    -6.419***      -3.370***
                                   (0.218)          (0.282)        (0.302)        (1.233)      (2.283)        (1.040)
               ∆ ln(TFP)         0.0448***        0.0449***      0.0507***       0.314***     0.526***       0.243***
                                   (0.011)          (0.016)        (0.017)        (0.062)      (0.116)        (0.055)
               Observations         14439            7595           2368           14439        14439          14439
               R-squared             .003            .003           .006            .005         .004           .005
               Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors
               corrected for clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term.




Table A.5: Effect of Tariff Reductions on Export Prices and Quality with Industry Fixed Effects

                                                                      Dependent Variable
                               ∆ ln(Pricef hc )           ∆ ln(Qualityf hc )             ∆ ln(Pricef h )         ∆Price Indexf
                               (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)         (7)        (8)
 ∆Duty                      -0.467**     -0.531**       -6.602**      -6.997***     -0.666**     -0.728***     -0.701**   -0.694**
                             (0.223)      (0.229)        (2.656)       (2.684)       (0.275)      (0.279)       (0.312)    (0.317)
 ∆ln(TFP)                                0.035***                     0.320**                     0.034**                 0.043**
                                          (0.012)                     (0.133)                     (0.016)                 (0.017)
 ∆ln(Capital/Labor)                        0.024                        0.173                      0.037                   0.002
                                          (0.016)                      (0.166)                    (0.024)                 (0.022)
 ∆ln(Labor)                                0.003                        0.223                      0.017                   -0.006
                                          (0.017)                      (0.175)                    (0.025)                 (0.027)
 ∆ln(Wage)                                 0.016                        0.073                      0.029                  0.045*
                                          (0.020)                      (0.215)                    (0.024)                 (0.025)
 ∆ln(Import Varieties)                     0.005                        0.151                      0.013                   0.004
                                          (0.013)                      (0.135)                    (0.015)                 (0.018)
 HHI                                      -0.548*                      -5.517*                    -0.699*                  -0.159
                                          (0.284)                      (3.157)                    (0.390)                 (0.274)
 Industry fixed effects         yes          yes           yes            yes          yes           yes         yes         yes
 Observations                 14439        14439         14439          14439         7595         7595         2368        2368
 R-squared                     .013         .016          .012           .014         .015          .018        .026        .031
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering
 at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Herfindahl index (HHI) is computed in the
 initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Quality estimates are based on elasticities of substitution from
 Broda and Weinstein (2006).




                                                                 VI
                Table A.6: Effect of Tariff Reductions on the Change in Quality-Adjusted Prices

                                                Dependent Variable: the change in effective quality-adjusted price
                                                            ∆ ln(epf hct ) ≡ ∆ [ln(pf hct ) − ln(q̂f hct )]
                                                       σ=5                          σ = 10                   σ = σi
                                                 (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)       (5)            (6)
                  ∆Duty                       2.611**      2.608**      5.870***        6.106***    2.858***      2.787***
                                              (1.086)      (1.075)       (2.128)         (2.136)     (0.926)       (0.912)
                  ∆ln(TFP)                                -0.260***                    -0.454***                  -0.194***
                                                           (0.054)                      (0.107)                    (0.049)
                  ∆ln(Capital/Labor)                        -0.136*                       -0.208                   -0.0720
                                                            (0.075)                      (0.145)                   (0.061)
                  ∆ln(Labor)                              -0.261***                       -0.208                  -0.276***
                                                           (0.081)                       (0.148)                   (0.085)
                  ∆ln(Wage)                                  -0.131                       -0.232                   -0.0906
                                                            (0.094)                      (0.189)                   (0.078)
                  ∆ln(Import Varieties)                    -0.106**                       -0.169                  -0.106**
                                                            (0.053)                      (0.112)                   (0.044)
                  HHI                                        1.249                        3.945                     0.785
                                                            (1.234)                      (2.607)                   (0.992)
                  Observations                 14439         14439          14439         14439      14439          14439
                  R-squared                     .001          .008           .001          .006       .001           .008
                  Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected
                  for clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Herfindahl index
                  (HHI) is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China.




D       Supplementary Discussions

D.1       Estimating Quality Using IV Estimation

To avoid parameterizing σi based on the values given in the existing literature, we also estimate quality
using IV estimation. The method is as follows.

      We first estimate σi sector by sector using Chinese data by transforming equation (17) to the
following:
                                      ln(xf hct ) = −σi(h) ln(pf hct ) + ϕh + ϕct + ǫf hct                                       (21)

where i(.) refers to the industry that product h belongs to; σi(h) , industry-specific elasticity of substi-
tution, can be estimated by regressing export quantity ln(xf hct ) on unit value price ln(pf hct ), product
fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects for each industry i. Since ǫf hct is potentially correlated
with the product price ln(pf hct ), instrumental variable estimation is needed to identify the parame-
ters. We use local average wages as instruments for prices in the first stage of instrumental variable
estimation of equation (21). The local average wage is computed as average wage per worker across all
firms producing at the same location in China, which mainly captures common cost shocks at supply
side.47 Although the local wages obviously affect production costs of firms and, therefore, product
 47
      We use average local wage in each province.


                                                                      VII
prices, one may be concerned that local wages may be correlated with product quality, if, for example,
higher-wage workers produce better products. However, the exclusion restrictions remain valid as long
as local wages do not affect deviations from average quality.48 In other words, if a firm chooses to
export higher quality products to a destination market because of shocks to local wages (which is less
likely), the instruments remain valid as long as shocks to local average wages do not affect deviations
from the firm’s average quality choice. Hence, we are not concerned about the potential correlation
between local average wages and quality. The instrumental variable estimations are conducted indus-
try by industry. Here we define industry i by 2-digit HS2 sector. There are in total 91 HS2 industries,
after dropping one industry with less than 10 observations.

       Next, as in the approach described in Section 5.1.2 (Quality Equation) in the main text, we use an
estimate of the residual ǫ̂f hct from equation (21) to infer quality and then to infer quality-adjusted price.
We report estimation results when regressing quality and quality-adjusted price on tariff reductions
based on σi recovered from Chinese data in Table A.7. All results here are consistent with the results
reported in the main text, i.e. a reduction in import tariff induces an incumbent importer/exporter
to raise the quality of its exports but to lower its quality-adjusted prices.

                 Table A.7: Changes in Quality and Quality-Adjusted Prices vs. Tariff Reductions

                                              (Based on σi Recovered from Chinese Data)
                                                                                   Dependent Variables
                                                                  changes in quality           changes in quality-adjusted price
                                                                     ∆ ln(q̂f hc )                        ∆ ln(e
                                                                                                               pf hc )
                                                            (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)
                ∆Duty                                    -2.747**     -2.756**     -2.531**    2.082*     2.089*          1.833
                                                          (1.253)      (1.239)      (1.243)    (1.166)    (1.159)        (1.161)
                Firm-level controls                          no           yes         yes         no         yes           yes
                Industry-level competition control           no           no          yes         no         no            yes
                Observations                               12083        12083       12083       12083      12083         12083
                R-squared                                   .001         .003        .005        .001       .002          .004
                Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for
                clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition
                Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry
                in China. Firm-level controls include the changes between 2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the
                number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).
                The number of observations in this table is smaller than that in Tables 5 and A.6 because we dropped a few
                sectors due to the estimated σi for those sectors were out of range when we estimated σi using Chinese data.
                The deleted observations in this process account for only 4.2% of the original sample.




  48
       Here, our argument about the validity of instruments shares the similar spirit of Khandelwal (2010).


                                                                      VIII
D.2    Effect of Tariff Reductions for Growing and Shrinking Product and Product-
       Country

We further present regression results for the effect of tariff reduction for growing and shrinking product
or product-country categories in Table A.8. Panels A and B in Table A.8 report the change in price
and quality, respectively, as the dependent variable, for growing and shrinking using all goods (see
columns 1 and 2), differentiate goods (see columns 3 and 4), and homogeneous goods (see columns 5
and 6). For example, in column 1 we use the subsample of growing type only and regress the change in
price on tariff reduction. The coefficients on tariff reduction for growing type are always significantly
negative for all goods and differentiated goods (see columns 1 and 3), and the coefficients for shrinking
type are also negative but less significant (see columns 2 and 4). The effect for homogeneous goods is
less significant and sometimes ambiguous (see columns 5 and 6). This is consistent with Propositions
1 and 2.

   Panel C of Table A.8 reports the results at the firm-product level. The effects of tariff reduction on
the price change for continuing products (either growing or shrinking) are all significantly negative in
the sample of all goods (see columns 1 and 2) and differentiated goods (see columns 3 and 4), indicating
that firms improve quality and thus increase price for their continuing products, including both growing
products and shrinking products. It is also worth noting that the effect of tariff reduction on shrinking
type at f hc level in panel A is insignificant while becomes significant at f h level in panel C. This
is due to a modest compositional effect: firms may redirect their exports to countries where higher
prices can be charged for a continuing product, even though the total export sales for that product
may be shrinking. This is also consistent with our previous discussion of the baseline results that the
estimated effects of tariff reductions tend to be larger in the more aggregated measures of export prices
(see Table 4). Lastly, in panel C the effect of tariff reduction on price change for homogeneous goods
is, again, positive or less significant (see columns 5 and 6). This further corroborates our previous
discussion of the role of quality differentiation.




                                                     IX
Table A.8: Effect of Tariff Reductions for Different Types at Firm-Product-Country or Firm-Product Level

                                                                 all goods           differentiate goods        homogeneous goods
                                                           (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
                                            sample       growing       shrinking    growing       shrinking    growing      shrinking
            Panel A: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf hc )
            ∆Duty                                       -0.669***        -0.390     -0.816***       -0.486      1.046*       -0.0492
                                                         (0.259)        (0.329)      (0.278)       (0.386)      (0.633)      (0.425)
            Observations                                  8807           5632         7823          4982          984          650
            R-squared                                     .005           .007         .005          .007          .009         .020
            Panel B: dependent variable = ∆ ln(q̂f hc )
            ∆Duty                                       -5.950***        -1.436     -6.706***      -2.383*       0.966        2.274
                                                         (1.146)        (1.278)      (1.278)       (1.407)      (2.738)      (2.489)
            Observations                                  8807           5632         7823          4982          984          650
            R-squared                                     .009           .010         .009          .012          .018         .026
            Panel C: dependent variable = ∆ ln(pf h )
            ∆Duty                                       -0.760**        -0.792*     -1.055***     -1.146**      1.660**       -0.002
                                                         (0.316)        (0.429)      (0.342)       (0.555)      (0.756)      (0.419)
            Observations                                  4846           2749         4237          2383          609          366
            R-squared                                     .004           .016         .005          .019          .011         .030
            Panels A, B and C:
            Firm-level Controls                            yes               yes       yes           yes          yes          yes
            Industry-level Competition Control             yes               yes       yes           yes          yes          yes
            Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for
            clustering at the firm level in parentheses. All regressions include a constant term, firm-level controls, and industry-
            level competition control. Industry-level competition control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed
            in the initial year (2001) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Firm-level controls include the changes between
            2006 and 2001 in the following variables: TFP, the number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage,
            and firm size (measured by total employment). Quality estimates are based on elasticities of substitution from
            Broda and Weinstein (2006).




                                                                        X
D.3       Level Regressions with Industry Tariffs

To provide more evidence on the relationship between tariffs and export prices, we also conduct the
baseline regression in levels (see equation (13)) with industry input/output tariffs in Table A.9.49
Columns 1-3 and 4-6 present the results with export prices for HS6-country product and HS6 product,
respectively. In separate regressions, the coefficients on output tariffs and on input tariffs are both
significantly negative (see columns 1-2 and 4-5); in combined regressions, the effect of input tariffs
are still significantly negative (see columns 3 and 6). This further provides evidence on the negative
relationship between the levels of export prices and the levels of input tariffs, i.e., higher export prices
are also associated with lower input tariffs.

                        Table A.9: Regressions in Levels with Industry Input/Output Tariffs

                                                                      Industry Input/Output Tariff
                                                  Dependent variable: ln(pf hct )         Dependent variable: ln(pf ht )
                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
       Duty output                              -0.409***                  0.344***    -0.738***                   0.0457
                                                 (0.087)                    (0.115)     (0.145)                    (0.196)
       Duty input                                            -1.457***    -1.814***                 -1.633***     -1.678***
                                                              (0.137)      (0.182)                   (0.209)       (0.283)
       Year fixed effects                          yes          yes          yes           yes          yes          yes
       Firm-product-country fixed effects          yes          yes          yes
       Firm-product fixed effects                                                          yes          yes          yes
       Industry-level Competition Control           yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes
       Firm-level Controls                          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes
       Observations                              1161028      1161028      1161028       420034       420034       420034
       R-squared                                   .981         .981         .981         .969         .969         .969

       Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. All regressions include a constant term.
       Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI) at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Firm-level
       controls include TFP, the number of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by
       total employment).




  49
     We present the level regressions with industry- instead of firm-specific tariffs because we do not have theoretical
justification of firm-specific tariffs in levels. Our theoretically derived firm-specific measures refer to tariff reductions at
the firm level.


                                                               XI
D.4      Shifting Processors

Though we use processing exporters to conduct a Placebo test in the main text and confirm the quality
upgrading mechanism for ordinary exporters, one may concern that import tariffs have potential
impacts on the export processing margin for firms. If in general ordinary exporters charge higher
export prices, could changes in prices we observe be related to changes in which goods firms are
exporting through processing arrangements? Our previous main results are based on the sample of all
ordinary trade transactions, but it is possible that some firms in the sample switch their trade regimes.
To show the robustness of our main results to the changes in the margins of trade regimes, we deleted
firms that switched from hybrid to ordinary regime from the main sample and report results in Table
A.10. Note that the firms who switch from ordinary trade to hybrid is not our concern, because they
could only attenuate the effect of tariff reductions on price increase if any effect existed. All results
here are consistent with our main results.
                      Table A.10: Robustness: Excluding Firms that Switched Trade Regimes

                                                                      Dependent Variable
                                                        ∆ ln(Export Pricef hc )                             ∆ ln(Export Pricef h )
 Regressor:                                   (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
 ∆Duty                                     -0.472**     -0.638***     -0.513**    -0.677***     -0.600**    -0.889***     -0.640**    -0.922***
                                            (0.234)      (0.244)       (0.233)     (0.242)       (0.300)     (0.316)       (0.288)     (0.301)
 ∆Duty ×HOM OGEN EOU S                                  1.375***                  1.343***                  1.730***                  1.681***
                                                         (0.331)                   (0.326)                   (0.398)                   (0.384)
 Industry-level Competition Control                                      yes          yes                                    yes          yes
 Firm-level Controls                                                     yes          yes                                    yes          yes
 Observations                                12825        12825        12825        12825         6795         6795         6795         6795
 R-squared                                    .001         .002         .004         .005         .001         .003         .006         .008
 Notes: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level. Robust standard errors corrected for clustering at the firm level in
 parentheses. All regressions include a constant term. Industry-level Competition Control refers to Herfindahl index (HHI), which is computed
 in the initial year at the 4-digit CIC industry in China. Firm-level controls include the changes in the following variables: TFP, the number
 of imported varieties, capital intensity, average wage, and firm size (measured by total employment).




                                                                     XII
