                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




SHOULD STUDENT EMPLOYMENT BE SUBSIDIZED? CONDITIONAL COUNTERFACTUALS
            AND THE OUTCOMES OF WORK-STUDY PARTICIPATION

                                         Judith Scott-Clayton
                                           Veronica Minaya

                                         Working Paper 20329
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20329


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




 The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department
 of Education, through Grant R305C110011 to Teachers College, Columbia University. The opinions
 expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department
 of Education. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
 views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2014 by Judith Scott-Clayton and Veronica Minaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
 to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Should Student Employment Be Subsidized? Conditional Counterfactuals and the Outcomes
of Work-Study Participation
Judith Scott-Clayton and Veronica Minaya
NBER Working Paper No. 20329
July 2014
JEL No. I22,I28,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Student employment subsidies are one of the largest types of federal employment subsidies, and one
of the oldest forms of student aid. Yet it is unclear whether they help or harm students’ long term outcomes.
We present a framework that decomposes overall effects into a weighted average of effects for marginal
and inframarginal workers. We then develop an application of propensity scores, which we call conditional-
counterfactual matching, in which we estimate the overall impact, and the impact under two distinct
counterfactuals: working at an unsubsidized job, or not working at all. Finally, we estimate the effects
of the largest student employment subsidy program—Federal Work-Study (FWS)—for a broad range
of participants and outcomes. Our results suggest that about half of FWS participants are inframarginal
workers, for whom FWS reduces hours worked and improves academic outcomes, but has little impact
on future employment. For students who would not have worked otherwise, the pattern of effects reverses.
With the exception of first-year GPA, we find scant evidence of negative effects of FWS for any outcome
or subgroup. However, positive effects are largest for lower-income and lower-SAT subgroups, suggesting
there may be gains to improved targeting of funds.


Judith Scott-Clayton
Teachers College
Columbia University
525 W.120th Street, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
scott-clayton@tc.columbia.edu

Veronica Minaya
Teachers College, Columbia University
525 W. 120th St, Box 174
New York, NY 10027
vmm2122@tc.columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20329
      I.       Introduction

           Student employment subsidies—also known as work-study programs—are one of the

largest types of targeted employment subsidies funded by the federal government, and are also

one of the oldest policy mechanisms intended to promote college access and persistence for low-

income students. Since 1964, the Federal Work-Study program has provided approximately $1

billion annually to cover up to 75 percent of the wages of student employees, who typically work

on-campus for 10 to 15 hours per week (The College Board, 2012; U.S. Department of

Education, 2009). Federal Work-Study has an extensive reach, serving nearly 700,000 students

per year in recent decades (for a total of 30 million student-years since its inception), including

one out of every ten full-time first-year undergraduates (and three out of ten at private nonprofit

four-year colleges).2 Some states and institutions also subsidize student employment.

           Despite the durability of student employment subsidies in student aid policy, their

economic justification has never been fully articulated, and the presumed impacts of such

subsidies are sometimes conflated with the impacts of student employment itself. Prior literature

on student employment at both the college and high school level suggests that combining work

and school reduces students’ academic performance (Tyler, 2003; Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner,

2003), even while it may improve later labor market outcomes (Ruhm, 1997; Light, 2001). But

knowing whether or not student employment is beneficial is insufficient to infer the effectiveness

of student employment subsidies as a policy tool. Indeed, student employment subsidies may be

most effective when students’ unsubsidized employment options are harmful, because they may

enable working students to access jobs with better amenities (or fewer disamentities).
2
    Online computation by NCES QuickStats on 8/29/2013 using BPS: 2009 Beginning Postsecondary Students.

                                                       1
       As in other wage subsidy contexts, the employment and (hedonic) wage effects of a

student employment subsidy will depend upon the elasticities of labor supply and demand, as

well as on design features of the program (Katz, 1996). In the absence of underlying market

imperfections, wage subsidies can generate windfalls to employers (in this case, colleges) and

deadweight loss to society, and are thus an inefficient means of transferring money to students.

However, market imperfections that could justify student employment subsidies include

students’ information constraints regarding the value of work experience, structural barriers to

employment for low-income and/or minority students, or statutory barriers (e.g., minimum wage

laws) constraining employers’ ability to offer the types of part-time, flexible positions most

complementary with college enrollment. Whatever the underlying rationale, policymakers may

want to know to what extent a student employment subsidy actually increases students’ access to

productive employment, to what extent it raises their wages or improves the non-wage aspects of

employment, and to what extent it simply subsidizes institutional employers to hire students that

would have been working in similar jobs anyway.

       Despite the scale and longevity of the Federal Work-Study program, scant research has

been conducted regarding its impacts. This is particularly surprising given the dramatically

increasing prevalence of college student employment over the past 40 years: average weekly

hours of work (including zeros) rose from 6 hours per week in 1970 to 10 hours per week just

before the Great Recession (Perna, Cooper, & Li, 2007; Scott-Clayton, 2012). The available

rigorous research examining effects of work-study has been limited to single-institution or

single-small-state data, and the findings have been inconsistent across studies and across

subgroups within studies (DesJardins, Ahlburg, & McCall, 2002; Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner,

                                                 2
2003; Scott-Clayton, 2011). Prior findings have been limited to academic outcomes, despite the

fact that potential returns in the labor market are an important motivation for the policy.

       We extend the literature in several ways. First, we present a conceptual framework

linking work-study programs to the broader wage-subsidy literature, and illustrating how the

impact of student employment subsidies operates through two distinct mechanisms. Just as any

subsidy may affect both quantity and price, we show how a work-study program may influence

both students’ likelihood of working, as well as the types of jobs students hold conditional on

working (wage and non-wage aspects including hours, location, job content). Some work-study

participants who would not have worked may do so because of the program, but other students

will replace outside work with a work-study job and may even reduce their overall hours worked

as a result. The impacts of work-study participation in these two cases could plausibly go in

opposite directions. As a result, not only are program effects likely to be heterogeneous across

individuals, but the average effect is unlikely to apply to any individual.

       Second, our conceptual framework leads us to develop a novel application of propensity

scores, which we call conditional-counterfactual matching. In this approach, we utilize

propensity score matching to estimate not only the overall impact of participating in work-study,

but also to estimate the impact under two highly distinct conditional counterfactuals: what would

have happened if the participant had worked at a non-work-study job, and what would have

happened if the participant had not worked at all. In all three analyses, we perform extensive

diagnostics and sensitivity analyses to help us evaluate the plausibility of the selection-on-

observables assumption, the quality of matches, and the robustness of our findings to alternative

specifications. Moreover, our conditional counterfactual analysis provides multiple opportunities

                                                  3
to test implications from the theoretical framework. While unobservable selection cannot be

ruled out in this non-experimental context, our key findings are reasonably robust to analyses

that place bounds on unobservable bias (Becker & Caliendo, 2007; Oster, 2014).

       Finally, this study provides estimates of the effect of Federal Work-Study participation

for a much broader range of participants and outcomes than have been considered by the prior

literature. We utilize two waves of the nationally-representative Beginning Postsecondary

Student (BPS) survey to look at the effects of work-study participation not only on first-year

GPA, but also on number of months enrolled, bachelor’s degree completion, employment, and

earnings six years after college entry. This breadth of analysis is particularly valuable because

our theoretical framework implies heterogeneous impacts depending upon the context, the

counterfactual and the type of outcome (academic versus labor market). We view our results as

complementing the more causally rigorous, but highly localized estimates from prior studies.

       We find that six years after entering college, Federal Work-Study participants are 3.2

percentage points more likely to earn a BA and 2.4 percentage points more likely to be employed

after finishing school than similar non-participants (p<0.05 in both cases). But these overall

impacts mask important patterns of heterogeneity. Less than half of work-study participants are

induced into employment; a slight majority are students who would have worked in their first

year anyway. For these students, participation appears to have positive academic impacts, but no

future employment impacts. In contrast, compared against not working at all, participation

appears to have null or negative effects on academics but a positive effect on post-college

employment. With the exception of first-year GPA, we find little evidence of negative effects for



                                                 4
any outcome or subgroup. However, positive effects appear substantially larger for lower-income

and lower-SAT students versus their higher-income, higher-SAT counterparts.

          In the following section, we present our conceptual framework. In Section III, we

describe the Federal Work-Study program in more detail and summarize the relevant literature.

Section IV presents our methodology, Section V presents our main results, Section VI presents

results from subgroup analyses, and Section VII provides a discussion with implications for

policy and future research.

    II.      Conceptual framework

          A. Wage subsidies in partial equilibrium analysis

          Katz (1996) provides a useful overview of the economics of wage subsidies. If labor

supply were infinitely elastic, proportional wage subsidies would have no effect on wages but

employers would hire more individuals. Figure 1 illustrates two more general partial-

equilibrium cases in which labor supply is less than infinitely elastic, with Panel A showing a

case of more elastic labor demand and Panel B showing a case of less elastic labor demand. In

both cases, the wage subsidy increases both employment and wages, but the effects on both

margins are larger when demand is more elastic. Though not shown in Figure 1, one can also

imagine a case of very inelastic labor supply (for example, if credit constrained students must

work a certain amount to fund their studies), which would imply smaller employment effects but

larger wage effects.3


3
  Katz notes that while in theory it should not matter whether the subsidy nominally goes to employers or workers,
in practice this and other design features may affect a program’s impact. For example, a relevant feature in the case
of Federal Work-Study is that if funds go unused by a college in one year, their funds for the next award year will be
reduced.

                                                          5
       In the absence of underlying market imperfections, any shifts in equilibrium employment

induced by a wage subsidy generate deadweight loss. However, if the underlying market is

flawed, such subsidies may increase total social surplus. For example, government subsidies

could be justified if students undervalue the returns to work experience, and thus either work less

than they optimally should or over-prioritize wages rather than experience when choosing among

job options. Alternatively, low-income and/or minority students may face structural barriers to

employment that limit their options. Finally, minimum wage laws and other statutory constraints

may limit employers’ ability to offer the types of part-time, flexible positions that are less

convenient for employers but most complementary with college enrollment.

       One basic implication from Figure 1 is that there are two important margins of possible

impact for a wage subsidy: employment and wages (or rather, hedonic wages which include the

value of non-monetary job amenities such as scheduling flexibility, intensity, and connection to

interests). A second basic implication is that the magnitude of effects on either margin will

depend upon the elasticities of labor supply and demand, which may well vary from context to

context, subgroup to subgroup.

       Unlike a typical wage subsidy, however, in the case of work-study programs, student

employment and wages are not the outcomes of ultimate interest. They are only means to other

ends, including improved academic and future labor market outcomes. Importantly, the effect on

these later outcomes may be very different—potentially even opposite sign—depending upon

whether the recipient is one of the “new” workers induced into employment by the subsidy, or

whether the recipient is an “inframarginal” worker who would have worked anyway, but now

receives a higher hedonic wage.

                                                  6
        B. Estimating the impact of a student employment subsidy

        Econometrically, the simplest way to estimate the impact of an employment subsidy on

future academic and labor market outcomes would be to randomly assign students access to the

subsidy. Then one could estimate the equation:

(1)

where yij is a student outcome (indexed for the ith individual in the jth institution) such as first-

year GPA, bachelor’s degree completion, or later-life employment or earnings; Subsidyi is an

indicator of a subsidy offer, Xi is a vector of individual-level controls; Zj is a vector of

institution-level controls, and vij is an error term (possibly clustered within institutions). Because

of random assignment, β can be interpreted as the causal impact of a subsidy offer (Xi and Zj here

serve only to increase the precision of the estimates). If every student offered the subsidy

actually takes it up, β can be further interpreted as the causal effect of subsidy receipt.

        Even in the random-assignment with full take-up scenario, however, simply knowing β

may be unsatisfying, because it represents a combination of effects on two margins: the

employment margin and the job characteristic (or hedonic wage) margin. The subsidy may

induce changes in the likelihood that students work while in school, or in the types of jobs they

hold conditional on employment, or both. If we make the assumption that work-study operates

only through these two channels, we can model student outcomes as:

(2)

where Empi is an indicator of any type of student employment, and SubsJobi is an indicator of

subsidized employment, such that β2 represents the differential effect of a subsidized job over

and above any employment, due to potential differences in job characteristics such as location,
                                                   7
wage, relationship to major, weekly hours, flexibility of scheduling, and so on. Allowing the

impact of work-study to vary across individuals, and using Rubin’s (1974) potential outcomes

notation, we can decompose the individual treatment effect as:4


(3)                          1        0
                                                    0

where y(1)i represents an individual’s potential outcome if assigned to the subsidized group and

y(0)i represents an individual’s potential outcome if assigned to the control group. Always-

workers are those who would work regardless of treatment assignment, and never workers are

those who would not work, regardless of treatment assignment. The average treatment effect for

the treated group can then be expressed as:

(4)                      1       Pr          ∗                 Pr             ∗

         This equation illustrates how impacts on the employment margin (the first term in the

above equation) combine with impacts on the job characteristics margin (the second term) to

generate the overall impact. It is possible that β1 (the effect of working at a typical job) and β2

(the additional effects of working at a subsidized job) may have opposite signs, so an overall null

result may mask important underlying impacts. Moreover, different samples may generate wildly

different estimates of the impact of work-study if there is heterogeneity in control group

employment rates or job characteristics. Finally, the equations above indicate that if the impact

of work-study operates primarily via changes in employment status, β may be informative about

the effects of student employment more broadly (and vice versa); but if it operates primarily by

4
  In this framework y(1) represents an individual’s potential outcome if assigned to the treatment group and y(0) is
the same individual’s potential outcome if assigned to the control group.

                                                          8
changing the types of jobs students hold, it would be inappropriate to generalize to other types of

student work.

          How then might this important heterogeneity be explored in the context of a randomized

experiment? Even in an RCT, it would not be straightforward to identify β1 and β2, since we

cannot identify who was induced into employment, and who would have worked anyway. One

option might be to stratify the sample prior to randomization into groups with higher and lower

predicted propensities of employment. As we will show, however, students’ employment

decisions can be hard to predict based upon background characteristics, making it difficult to

create highly distinct subgroups.

          Ultimately, to obtain estimates of β, β1, and β2, three distinct experiments would be

needed: one in which the control group was unrestricted, one in which the control group was

expected to work at a non-FWS job, and one in which the control group was expected not to

work at all. We use this “ideal experiment” to guide our empirical approach in Section IV. We

will not have the benefit of randomization, meaning that we will need to confront issues of

selection bias in addition to these general conceptual issues.


   III.      Program details and prior literature

   A. The Federal Work-Study program

          Student eligibility for Federal Work-Study (FWS) assistance is based on financial need

(U.S. Department of Education, 2009). In order to establish FWS eligibility, a student must file

a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). Using a complex formula based primarily

on family income, but also on assets, family size, and number of family members in college, an

“expected family contribution” (EFC) is computed. If the student’s total cost of attendance
                                                   9
(including living expenses, for full-time students) exceeds the EFC, the student is deemed to

have financial need. Students are eligible for, but not necessarily offered nor guaranteed, FWS

funds to fill this need as long as the gap has not already been filled by other sources of aid.

        Unlike Pell Grants or Stafford Loans, the FWS program is a “campus-based” federal

program, meaning that program funds are allocated as a lump sum to institutions, which then

have great discretion on how funds may be distributed among eligible students. The formula that

determines institutional allocations is based primarily upon prior-year allocations rather than

upon any measure of students’ financial need, so longstanding institutional participants receive

significantly more per student than do recent entrants (Smole, 2005). Selective four-year

institutions receive highly disproportionate awards relative to the size of their student bodies.5 At

schools with any FWS funds, only 16 percent of institutions award FWS to every eligible

student.6

        Schools may use work-study funds to cover up to 75 percent of an eligible student’s

wages, or they may choose to cover a lower fraction of wages for a greater number of students.

Despite the large wage subsidy, FWS jobs appear to provide lower hourly wages than other jobs,

which may indicate that FWS jobs have attractive compensating characteristics.7 Approximately


5
  For example, in 2009-10 Columbia University received an allocation of $6.75 million while the University of
Florida, despite having more than four times as many undergraduates, received just $2.97 million (U.S. Department
of Education, 2010).
6
  Of the remainder, 82 percent give preference to students with exceptional financial need, and 78 percent give
preference to students who actively request FWS or indicate their interest on the FAFSA (U.S. Department of
Education, 2000, p. 58). The timing of the FWS request, the student’s year in school, attendance status, and
previous academic performance are other factors that institutions report using to determine FWS offers (U.S.
Department of Education, 2000b, p. C9). While awards may go to graduate students, in practice 93 percent of
participants are undergraduates (U.S. Department of Education, 2010).
7
  The BPS does not ask about wages, only about typical hours per week and total earnings from jobs during the
school year. Assuming that on average working students work 28 weeks during the school year, the hourly wage of

                                                       10
one-third of recipients are paid at the minimum wage; the average wage is about 18% above

minimum wage (U.S. Department of Education, 2000). Work-study funds can be used at most

on-campus jobs as well as some types of off-campus community-service jobs.

        Table 1 describes the types of jobs held by working first-year students inside and outside

of the FWS program, as measured in two waves of the nationally representative Beginning

Postsecondary Students (BPS) dataset (National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2003;

2011). More than 80 percent of FWS participants work on-campus, compared to only 8 percent

of working non-participants. Among students who held only one job, FWS participants averaged

11 hours of work per week compared with 18 hours per week for working non-participants.

Although the majority of jobs are unrelated to students’ majors, FWS jobs are 6 percentage

points more likely to be related than non-FWS jobs. Compared to other working first-year

students, FWS participants are much more likely to work in clerical occupations, and less likely

to work in sales, labor or service. Finally, while the majority of all working students report their

job has no effect on their academic performance, FWS participants are somewhat more likely to

report that their job has a positive effect and somewhat less likely to report negative effects.

    B. Prior research relating to Federal Work-Study

        Despite having as long a history as Pell Grants, empirical research on the consequences

of the FWS program is limited, and it has never been evaluated using a randomized study. In

fact, causal evidence on college student employment of any kind is limited, due to the difficulty

of identifying plausibly exogenous variation in work decisions. Recent reviews of the non-

FWS participants was approximately $6.30 in 2003-04, while working non-participants earn a higher hourly wage
(approximately $7.30). The FWS estimate is in line with a survey from 2000 which found average wages of $6.10
for FWS recipients (U.S. Department of Education, 2000).

                                                      11
experimental student employment research have highlighted the distinction between on- and off-

campus jobs, concluding that while off-campus employment appears to have negative effects,

on-campus jobs may positively influence persistence and completion (Pascarella & Terenzini,

2005; Hossler, Ziskin, Kim, Cekic, & Gross, 2008; Perna, 2010).

        A handful of studies have attempted to identify sources of plausibly exogenous variation

in student employment from which a truly causal effect may be estimated, although none of these

studies separately estimates the effect of on-campus employment. Darolia (2014) uses a student

fixed-effects approach with data from the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, and

finds no evidence that students have lower GPAs in terms when they work more intensively, but

full-time students accumulate fewer credits. DeSimone (2008), Kalenkoski & Pabilonia (2010),

and Dadgar (2012) instrument for student employment (using parental schooling and religion,

and parental transfers and net schooling costs, and sector-season of employment, respectively)

and find small negative effects on students’ grades (a reduction of 0.011 to 0.03 in GPA per hour

of work, though Dadgar’s estimates are not statistically significant).8

        Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2003) provide the one of the most compelling causal

analyses to date of the effect of on-campus student employment. The authors analyze a small

private college in Kentucky at which all students are required to work at a campus job for 10

hours per week, but some jobs offer students the possibility to work more. Although the study

does not separate out federal work-study employment, it is likely that many of these jobs are at

least partially funded by FWS. Students at the college are randomly assigned by administrators

8
 Although Kalenkoski & Pabilonia (2010) tried to use variation in state work-study assistance as an instrument for
employment, they found that no statistically significant effect of the state programs on hours of work could be
detected in their data.

                                                        12
to on-campus jobs, and those who are assigned to a job with additional hours available end up

working more than those for whom this is not an option. The authors find that students who

work more because they were assigned to a high-availability job earn significantly lower first-

year GPAs, a decline of about 0.162 points per additional hour of work.

         Only two prior studies examine FWS specifically. Scott-Clayton (2011) uses an

instrumental-variables difference-in-difference (IV-DID) approach with administrative data on

public two- and four-year college enrollees in West Virginia.9 She uses institution-level federal

FWS allocations (which are determined by an historical federal formula) to instrument for actual

FWS participation, with ineligible students serving as a control group to account for unobserved

fixed differences between high- and low-allocation institutions. Scott-Clayton finds strong

impacts of FWS participation on the likelihood of school-year employment. However, she finds

no statistically significant effects of FWS participation on academic outcomes for the full sample

(though point estimates are generally negative). She also finds heterogeneity by gender, with

strong negative academic effects for women, and some significant positive effects for men. Soliz

and Long (2014) replicate this approach using data on public four-year enrollees in Ohio, and

find a small but statistically significant negative effect of FWS on first and second semester

GPAs, but a statistically significant positive effect on first year cumulative credits earned (they

find no significant gender differences).



9
  We attempted to implement a similar approach using the BPS data; unfortunately, the first stage estimate was
extremely small in magnitude after controlling for institutional characteristics known to correlate with FWS
allocations, and the subsequent IV estimates were too noisy to detect any consistent pattern of findings. The failure
of the IV-DID strategy in the national data could be due to the highly skewed distribution of FWS funds nationally;
noise in the national FWS-by-institution allocation data; or due to the very small number of FWS recipients per
institution in the sample (1 or 2 on average).

                                                         13
         This body of non-experimental and quasi-experimental evidence remains inconclusive

regarding the impact of FWS. Those studies with stronger causal identification strategies

(Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner, 2003; Scott-Clayton, 2011) have tended to find more negative

results. But given the likelihood of heterogeneous effects depending upon the counterfactual and

the outcome of interest, the highly localized nature of quasi-experimental estimates is a non-

trivial limitation. The propensity score approach we describe below complements prior quasi-

experimental work with nationally-representative estimates from propensity score estimation,

and allows for a deeper exploration of heterogeneity.

   IV.      Empirical Methodology

   A. Propensity scores and conditional counterfactual matching

         We propose a new application of propensity score matching (PSM) that we term

conditional counterfactual matching. In this approach, we first estimate the average effect of

FWS for all participants using standard PSM methods. Then, we repeat the analysis but condition

the control group on the distinct counterfactuals of interest, as indicated by our conceptual

framework: first, we re-estimate the PSM model comparing FWS participants to the most similar

students who also worked during their first year, but at a non-FWS job; then we re-estimate the

model comparing FWS participants to the most similar students who did not work at all.

         Like the concept of mechanism experiments in RCTs, the goal of conditional

counterfactual matching is to help uncover the mechanisms driving the observed treatment

effects. Understanding mechanisms can help explain patterns of heterogeneity across different

populations and contexts, and makes it easier to interpret disparate findings in prior literature. It

can also help suggest implications for policy beyond the particular program under study

                                                 14
(Ludwig, Kling, & Mullainathan, 2011). Finally, in non-experimental research, exploring

mechanisms is a particularly important way of building a credible causal argument because true

causal effects should operate through the predicted channels, while spurious correlations may or

may not.

       Incorporating PSM in this approach confers several advantages above simple ordinary

least squares (OLS) regression. First, PSM can potentially control much more effectively for

observable differences between participants and non-participants (Rubin, 1973; Rosenbaum &

Rubin, 1983). In our context, FWS participants are a relatively small fraction of college

enrollees, and the PSM approach ensures that they are compared only to those non-participants

who are most observably similar. OLS regression, in contrast, could compare FWS participants

to very different non-participants and thus might excessively rely on linear extrapolation to

estimate treatment effects by (in other words, OLS can hide situations in which there is a lack of

common support between the treatment and control group).

       A second benefit of PSM is that it focuses attention on the selection process: who are the

students who participate in FWS and how different are they from non-participants? To what

extent is there overlap in the types of students that do and do not participate? The diagnostic

value of PSM analysis can illuminate whether causal interpretations of the resulting estimates are

justified, and can indicate in which direction any remaining biases are likely to go.

Of course, illuminating the problem of selection bias is not the same as solving it. To identify the

causal effect of FWS, PSM is similar to OLS in that it relies on a selection-on-observables

assumption. Specifically, any factors that jointly affect both FWS participation and subsequent

outcomes must be included in the propensity score model.

                                                 15
           While it is impossible to rule out unobservable biases, our analysis is well-suited to PSM

for several reasons. First, the survey data we use includes a very rich set of background

characteristics—much richer than is available in the administrative datasets often used in quasi-

experimental analyses. Second, several important factors in the selection process are explicitly

known (e.g. the role of family income, institution type, and unmet need) and can be included.

Third, the fact that so many more students qualify for FWS than receive it creates a large pool of

potential control observations for matching. Finally and perhaps most crucially, the idiosyncratic

nature of the FWS offer and take-up process mean that we can compare individuals with similar

propensity scores and argue that the remaining variation in FWS status is plausibly random.

       B. Implementation

           To implement the PSM, we first model student participation in FWS using a probit

regression:

(5)        Pr            1

in which Φ is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution, and X is a

vector of individual and institutional characteristics including gender, age, race/ethnicity,

distance from home, parental education, high school GPA, SAT score (or equivalent), the

student’s EFC, a flag for Pell receipt, college selectivity, tuition, an interaction between EFC and

tuition, the amount of institutional grants received by the student (a proxy of unobservable

need/merit), enrollment size, and urbanicity.10 For a complete list of variables included, see

Table 3 in the results section. We follow Stuart (2010) in our liberal inclusion of predictor

variables, given that there is little cost to including something that is not truly relevant, while the
10
     If a student did not file a FAFSA, the BPS estimates the EFC based on student and parent survey responses.

                                                          16
omission of an important factor could cause bias. Also note that by controlling for Pell grant

receipt and institutional grants, we are holding these aspects of the aid package constant based on

the understanding that FWS is packaged after these other components; we do not control for

student loans in our main specification, as this is potentially endogenous to FWS receipt.

       The resulting parameters are used to construct each individual’s propensity score. We

then utilize the PSMATCH2 command in Stata, with a radius caliper of 0.01, with replacement

and excluding observations with no common support, to evaluate the quality of the matching and

estimate average treatment effects for the treated (ATT). Using a radius caliper of 0.01 allows us

to match each FWS participant with any control observations within +/- 0.01 of the participant’s

propensity score. This avoids the idiosyncratic matches that might result from simple one-to-one

nearest neighbor matching. The outcomes we examine include first-year employment and hours,

GPA, and student loan debt; persistence into the second year; on-time (4-year) BA completion;

and graduate school enrollment, employment, earnings, and student loan debt measured at the six

year follow-up.

       We implement the PSM process first comparing FWS participants to all similar non-

participants (we will refer to this as Model 1). We then estimate two separate conditional

counterfactual models. In Model 2, we limit the sample to working students and re-run the FWS

participation equation as well as the subsequent diagnostic, matching and outcomes analyses.

Model 2 thus matches each FWS participant to the most similar working students. In Model 3,

we limit the sample to FWS participants and non-working non-participants and repeat all steps of

the PSM. Model 3 thus matches each FWS participant to the most similar non-working students.

   C. Data and sample

                                                17
       We use the two most recent cohorts of the Beginning Postsecondary Student (BPS)

longitudinal study, BPS: 96/01 and BPS: 04/09, which together follow a nationally-

representative sample of 30,545 U.S. college entrants who first began their post-secondary

education in 1995-96 or 2003-04. These students were followed for six years after they first

enrolled (through 2001 and 2009, respectively).

       We limit the sample to 14,064 full-time dependent students who began at four-year

baccalaureate-granting institutions, including 6,668 students from the BPS: 96/01 and 7,396

students from the BPS 04/09. We focus on these students because they represent the majority of

FWS recipients (results including part-time, independent, and two-year attendees are similar and

are included in an Appendix). We further excluded 257 individuals missing information on first-

year employment, 1,466 records with missing data on BA attainment after 6 years, and 146

records with missing institutional data. These filters yield a final sample (rounded to the nearest

10, per NCES requirements) of 12,200 individual student cases, 5,030 from the BPS: 96/01 and

7,170 from the BPS: 04/09. Roughly 2,070 students in this sample (17 percent) received FWS

during their first year of enrollment.

       Descriptive statistics on background characteristics and academic and labor market

outcomes for this sample of 12,200 students are provided in Table 2. The first column represents

the overall sample, while the subsequent columns provide the same statistics separately for FWS

recipients, working non-recipients, and non-working students respectively. The table indicates

that FWS recipients are quite different from other students. They have substantially lower

incomes, and higher rates of financial aid receipt than non-recipients. Academically, they have

higher high school grade point averages (GPAs) and SAT scores than other working students,

                                                 18
but about the same GPAs and somewhat lower SATs than non-working students. They are nearly

twice as likely as other students (working or non-working) to attend private institutions.

Academic and labor market outcomes also differ across the three groups, with FWS students

generally outperforming both other groups of students. These differences will be explored more

systematically in our propensity score model below.


         V. Results

         A. Modeling the propensity score: Who participates in FWS?


         Table 3 displays the marginal effects from a probit regression of FWS participation

(equation [5] above).11 To highlight how the selection process into FWS may differ from the

selection process into student employment more broadly, we also show results from a probit

regression of any student employment on the same set of independent variables. Being male,

having higher family income (as measured by the EFC) and attending a public institution all

significantly reduce the likelihood of both FWS participation and any student employment.

However, selection into FWS and any employment significantly vary across many other

dimensions. For example, minority students are less likely to work in general, but no more or

less likely to receive FWS.12 Students at very selective institutions are less likely to work in

general, but more likely to receive FWS. Students who receive Pell grants or institutional

grants—which we interpret as a proxy for unobservable need and merit—are no more or less

likely to work in general, but are more likely to receive FWS. Interestingly, when we run

11
  OLS regression produced very similar results.
12
  This is consistent with the hypothesis that minority students face structural barriers to employment, though it is
not the only possible explanation.

                                                          19
equivalent OLS regressions we find that it is much easier to predict FWS employment than it is

to predict student employment generally: the r-squared statistics on the equivalent OLS

regressions were 0.21 and 0.08, respectively.13


     B. Common support and match quality


        Figures 2.1 through 2.3 provide evidence of common support. We first show the

distributions of treated (FWS) and control group observations across the range of estimated

propensity scores for our main model (matching FWS participants to all non-participants), and

then for models 2 and 3 (matching FWS participants against other working students or non-

working students, respectively). For each model, only a few observations with high propensity

scores lie outside the range of common support. Because the control group is roughly five times

larger than the treatment group (for our main model), even at the high range of propensity scores

we still have numerous control observations available for matching (e.g. we have 32 control

observations with p-scores of 0.75 or higher). Thus, the common support condition appears to

pose no barrier to the analysis.


        Figures 3.1 through 3.3 provide evidence that after matching, our treated and control

group observations are well-balanced on a range of observable characteristics. Each line in the

graph represents one of the background characteristics from Table 3. The circles indicate the

standardized bias on that characteristic that exists in the unmatched sample (i.e. the difference in

means between treated and untreated observations, expressed in terms of standard deviations).

13
  With binary dependent variables, the R-squared from OLS regression can be interpreted as the difference in
average predicted FWS participation (or employment) rates between those who actually participated (or worked)
and those who actually did not (Gronau, 1998).

                                                       20
The x’s indicate the standardized bias in the matched sample. For all three models, standardized

bias for virtually all characteristics is reduced to below 5%, and in most cases below 3%, levels

that are considered acceptable in the matching literature (Caliendo & Kopeinig, 2008). The sole

exception is that in model 3, financial need after all grants remains about 6% bigger among FWS

participants than among working students (the difference was 67% prior to matching). Given the

large number of characteristics evaluated and the dramatic reductions in bias for key

characteristics, we consider all models to be very well balanced. Full results of these balance

tests are provided in Appendix Tables A1.1-A1.3.


   C. Main results: estimated effects of FWS participation


       Our main results are presented in Table 4.The first notable result is that overall, FWS

participants are “only” 48 percentage points more likely to be employed during the school year

than non-participants. While this is a large and statistically significant impact, it also indicates

that a slight majority of participants would have worked at another job even if they had not

received FWS. Overall, recipients work 6 hours more per week than non-recipients; but this is a

combination of a 1.5-hour reduction in weekly hours for those participants who would have

worked at another job anyway (Model 2), and a 15-hour increase in hours for those who would

not have worked at all in the absence of FWS (Model 3).


       The second intriguing pattern is that for the full sample, there are no significant negative

effects, and several significant positive effects on academic and labor market outcomes.

However, there is a clear pattern of the positive academic effects being most concentrated among

those who would have worked at another job in the absence of FWS (Model 2), while the labor
                                                  21
market effects are more pronounced among those who would not have worked otherwise (Model

3). For example, FWS participants were 5.2 percentage points more likely than similar working

students to earn a BA within 6 years, but the difference was only 1.4 percentage points and not

significant when FWS students were compared against non-working students. FWS participants

were 3.7 percentage points more likely than similar non-working students to be employed after 6

years, but the difference was an insignificant 1.4 percentage points when FWS students were

compared against similar working students.14 Interestingly, the effects of FWS participation on

first-year GPA—one of the only outcomes examined by prior research—do appear to be

significantly negative when compared against not working at all (-0.055 GPA points). But this

does not carry over into negative effects on longer-term academic outcomes such as persistence

and graduation. Earnings effects are not significant in any of the models, though these are still

measured very early in the career trajectory.


        It seems unlikely that the large effects on BA completion in Model 2 could be driven

solely by the 1.5-hour reduction in weekly hours. Thus, we ran additional regressions using

Model 2 to examine impacts on available job characteristics for FWS versus non-FWS working

students (not shown in Table 4). First, we find a significant negative impact on estimated hourly

wages (of -$0.61)—an unusual finding for a wage subsidy. For a 75-percent wage subsidy to

result in students receiving lower wages strongly suggests that FWS jobs must offer significant

compensatory amenities. As could be predicted from the descriptive differences in Table 1, we

find large impacts on the probability that a student works on-campus (a 52 percentage point

14
  We focus here on the employment effects for students who were not enrolled in school in Year 6 (there is no
impact on enrollment in Year 6). Unconditional estimates are also provided in Table 4.

                                                        22
increase) as well as a 7.4 percentage point impact on the likelihood that the job is related to the

student’s major. Both impacts are highly significant.


         One persistent and unexpected finding is that FWS recipients appear to accumulate

substantially higher debt burdens than either comparison group of students. Focusing on Model

1, FWS participants are 21 percentage points more likely to borrow in their first year and this

persists as a 16 percentage point increase in the likelihood of having borrowed after 6 years.

Cumulative undergraduate debt is $6,263 higher (including zeros) for FWS participants than

similar non-participants. These patterns do not vary much depending upon whether we compare

participants to other working or non-working students. Note that the impact on first year total aid

is approximately equal to the sum of the impacts on first year FWS and loan aid.


         It is striking that such strong debt effects remain even after matching students on

individual characteristics including EFC (the primary determinant of eligibility for student aid

including loans) and financial need after grants, as well as on institutional characteristics such as

selectivity, tuition, and tuition squared. To ensure that these differences are not simply a flag for

unobservable bias, we perform a robustness check in which we add a first-year borrowing

dummy and first-year loan amounts to our matching model.15 The results of this check, shown in

Table 5, indicate that it makes little difference. The overall pattern of results is qualitatively

similar to that shown in Table 4. By construction there is no longer any effect on first-year loan

amounts, but the impacts on longer-term debt accumulation remain statistically significant

15
  First year loan amounts are properly considered as an outcome variable and thus generally should not be included
in the matching model; however, if this variable is also a proxy for unobservable bias it may be preferable to control
for it.

                                                         23
(though they are smaller). The magnitude and persistence of these results suggest that student

loans, rather than being a substitute for student employment, may be packaged with FWS funds

by aid officers in a formulaic way. This can be partly, but not fully explained by the fact that

students must file a FAFSA to access either program. When we limit the analysis to students

who file a FAFSA, the magnitude of the loan impacts is cut approximately in half, but still

remain large and highly significant (the pattern of academic and labor market results remain

unchanged; see Appendix Table A8).


    D. Robustness to alternative specifications


        One concern with propensity score estimation is that if two individuals have such similar

propensities to participate, what explains why some do and some don’t? Among students with

low propensity scores, factors exogenous to students’ own potential outcomes may plausibly

determine who gets access and who does not (e.g. idiosyncratic variation in institutional funding

or disbursement policies). We may worry more about why some of those with high propensity

scores do not participate; in this case the difference is more likely to be the student’s own choice.

For this reason, we run a robustness check limiting the sample to the “thick support” region,

including only observations with p-scores less than 0.60. The results are presented in Table 6.

The pattern of findings is similar to the main results in Table 4, but generally more positive and

more statistically significant.


        Results from additional robustness checks can be found in an Appendix. Propensity score

estimation requires numerous decisions to be made, often without much clear guidance from the



                                                  24
literature. Reassuringly, our results were highly consistent across a range of alternative

specifications, including:


      Using a 0.2 caliper instead of 0.01, using nearest neighbor and five-nearest-neighbors

       with replacement (Appendix Tables A2.1-2.3)

      Including independent, part-time, and two-year enrollees (Appendix Table A3)

      Discarding observations with missing data (Appendix Table A4)

      Clustering standard errors by institution after matching (Appendix Table A5)

      Abadie and Imbens (2012) standard error adjustments (Appendix Tables A6.1-A6.2)

      Using OLS instead of PSM (Appendix Table A7)


This is not to say that the choice of specification makes no difference; indeed there are small

differences in the magnitudes of given effects in some cases (for example, FWS impacts appear

somewhat more positive when estimated using OLS). Overall, however, the big picture remains

the same across these specifications. This should give readers confidence that our findings are

not the result of cherry-picking results or massaging the data.

   E. Sensitivity to unobservable selection

       As with any non-experimental analysis, it is impossible to rule out the possibility that

students who select into FWS differ in unobservable ways from those that do not, even after

accounting for the extensive controls in our model. Prior work has proposed several ways to

nonetheless quantify how “big” this unobservable selection would have to be in order to

completely explain the observed pattern of effects. For example, using Rosenbaum’s (2002)

approach to quantify the potential for hidden bias (as described in Becker & Caliendo (2007)),

                                                 25
we estimate that the overall effect on BA completion after 6 years could lose significance if those

who were going to earn a BA anyway are 50% more likely to participate in FWS than those who

were not, after controlling for observable differences. The results from our conditional

counterfactual models make this degree of hidden bias seem unlikely, because the overall BA

effect is driven by those who would have worked anyway. For this comparison (Model 2), the

difference in FWS participation would have to be 93% to reduce the effect to insignificance.

        We also implemented the bounding approach proposed by Oster (2014), which makes the

assumption than unobserved selection is proportional to observed selection. This analysis

requires r-squared statistics from OLS regression, so we ran OLS linear probability models on

our matched sample with the same set of control variables as our main propensity score model.

Oster shows that the sensitivity of coefficients to unobservables can, under certain assumptions,

be estimated using two pieces of information: 1) the difference in coefficients between an

unadjusted model and a model including observable control variables, and 2) the difference in r-

squared statistics between the adjusted and unadjusted models. The intuition is that coefficient

stability across models can be indicative of robustness when combined with information on r-

squared movements (if the r-squared moves little, then observed controls are not very

informative). We find that our overall impact on BA completion within 6 years is robust to

unobserved factors that are up to 75% as valuable as the entire set of controls actually included;

in Model 2 (FWS vs. other working students) the impact is robust to unobserved factors up to 2.1

times as important as the included set of controls.16 For employment outcomes, adding controls


16
  We assumed a maximum possible r‐squared of 2.2 times the full‐model r‐squared, or about 0.40 (=2.2*0.18) in
the case of BA completion after 6 years. Note the application of Oster’s method to a binary outcome is somewhat

                                                      26
makes the estimates more positive, so unobservable bias would have to go in the opposite

direction to explain any of the observed effects.

         VI. Subgroup Analysis

         Our conceptual framework implies that the effects of FWS participation may vary across

subgroups depending upon the counterfactual, i.e. the probability of working in the absence of

FWS, and the characteristics of counterfactual jobs. We examined results for subgroups defined

by income, SAT score, local unemployment rate, urbanicity, and gender. While in many cases

standard errors were too large to draw strong conclusions about subgroup differences, highlights

of these analyses are discussed below. Full subgroup results are available in the appendix.

    A. Parental Income and Student SAT Score

         We split our sample into subgroups by family income and SAT score, using the median

values among FWS participants. Our hypothesis is that lower-income and lower-SAT students

may be more likely to work even in the absence of FWS, and thus may experience more positive

(or less negative) academic impacts than higher-income and higher-SAT students. Our results

are supportive of this hypothesis, and the differences in subgroup estimates are in many cases

large enough to be statistically significant. Focusing on the main Model 1, Table 7 shows that

high SAT students who receive FWS experience a larger impact than low SAT students on both

the probability of working (an increase of 50.3 percentage points versus 42.9) and average

weekly hours (6.4 versus 5.6). High SAT recipients receive no academic benefit overall, while

lower-SAT recipients persist longer and have 6.8 percentage point higher rates of BA completion

speculative. In a personal communication, Oster indicated that because her procedure is defined in terms of
variances, it should be possible to apply to the binary‐variable case although the interpretation of r‐squareds in
this case is somewhat different.

                                                         27
after 6 years than low-SAT non-recipients. Lower-SAT participants also appear to have better

post-college outcomes, thought the differences here are not as large.

       Similarly, results in Table 8 for higher versus lower-income participants indicate almost

uniformly more positive effects for lower-income participants. For high-income students there is

also a significant negative impact on first-year GPA (-0.06). It is also notable that the student

debt impacts are twice as big for the high-income and high-SAT groups as for their low-income

and low-SAT counterparts; it is possible that the sole positive effect for high-income and high-

SAT students—on employment in year 6—may be related to loan debt rather than being a

productive impact of the program. (See Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2 for additional results on

Models 2 and 3.)

   B. Local unemployment rates and urbanicity

       The motivation behind this analysis is that students in weak labor markets (as defined by

unemployment rates, using the median in our sample as a cutpoint), or more rural areas might

have less access to employment opportunities outside FWS. We might thus expect to see higher

impacts on employment and hours in our main model (Model 1) for these students, and this in

turn might be associated with less positive academic impacts and more positive employment

impacts. Our results for local labor markets are broadly consistent with this hypothesis, though

the differences are not large (see Appendix Table B.3). However, there is little consistent pattern

in the urban versus rural comparison (Appendix Table B.4), with results generally being less

positive (or more negative) for students in rural areas, but with a stronger positive effect on of

BA completion.

   C. Gender (Appendix Table B.5)

                                                 28
       Gender is a relevant subgroup to examine because Scott-Clayton (2011) found the impact

of FWS to be more negative for women than for men at public institutions in West Virginia,

perhaps due to differences in job quality and/or differences in the academic opportunity cost.

However, in this analysis the consequences of FWS participation appear to be slightly better for

women than for men, although the differences are small and generally insignificant. Women

who receive FWS are less likely than men to have been induced into employment (46 versus 50

percentage points; see Model 1), but women who would not have worked otherwise appear to

derive particularly large labor market benefits from FWS participation (e.g. 6.2 percentage point

effect on employment in Year 6 for those not currently in school; see Model 3).

VII. Discussion

       In this paper, we develop a conceptual framework to illustrate the mechanisms

underlying the potential impact of subsidizing student employment. We then use this framework

to guide a novel application of propensity scores that we call conditional counterfactual

matching. This method may be useful for exploring treatment mechanisms in other non-

experimental contexts. For example, it could be used to decompose the effects of preschool

subsidies for those who would or would not have attended preschool in the absence of the

subsidy. Finally, we apply our framework and method using two waves of nationally

representative student survey data, providing the first rigorous national estimates of the effects of

the Federal Work-Study program.

       On average, our results suggest generally positive effects of Federal Work-Study

participation on long-term outcomes, including a 3.2 percentage point impact on BA completion

6 years after enrollment, and a 2.4 percentage point impact on employment after 6 years for

                                                 29
students who are not still enrolled. But our analysis of distinct conditional counterfactuals

highlights why these results do not extend to the impact of student employment more broadly.

First, only about half of FWS participants increase their labor supply as a result of the program;

the other half actually reduce hours worked. Indeed, all of the academic effects of FWS appear

driven by changes in job characteristics for students who would have worked anyway. In

contrast, FWS participants who would not have worked otherwise see some negative effects on

first-year GPA—though these do not lead to any declines in graduation, and are balanced by later

positive impacts on employment. If we use equation (4) to back out the implied effect of non-

FWS employment (β1), we find uniformly negative effects on academic outcomes, and small

positive effects on employment outcomes, consistent with prior research.

       We do not view these results as conflicting with the mixed-to-negative results on

academic outcomes reported in Scott-Clayton (2011) and the large negative first-year GPA

results reported in Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner (2003). The more positive results found here

may simply reflect the importance of effect heterogeneity. Both prior studies were set in largely

rural contexts where students may have had limited other employment opportunities; this may

have meant more students were induced into working more hours than they would have

otherwise. We also examine a broader set of outcomes. The only outcome available for direct

comparison with the most causally rigorous prior work (Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner, 2003) is

first-year GPA, and indeed, when we limit our sample to rural students we also find significant

negative effects on GPA (-0.10 GPA points in Model 1; see Appendix Table B.4).

       The substantial and persistent effects on student debt accumulation are surprising and

somewhat puzzling. This finding may indicate that institutional aid officers package loans and

                                                 30
work-study together, so that those who take up one program are much more likely to also take up

the other. To the extent these two types of aid are packaged together, some of the effects on

academic and labor market outcomes could be due to the increased loans rather than to FWS

participation, although evidence from Table 6 suggests this is not the case. Still, the relationship

between FWS and student loan accumulation is one that should be explored more deeply in

future research.

        Our subgroup results provide additional support for our conceptual model: groups that we

would expect to have a higher likelihood of employment in the absence of the subsidy

experience smaller employment impacts, and more positive subsequent impacts. These positive

impacts appear driven by reductions in weekly hours and improvements in job amenities (such as

on-campus location and relationship to major) for students who would have been working

anyway had they not received FWS. An implication is that the effectiveness of Federal Work-

Study funds might be increased by modifying the allocation formula—which currently provides

disproportionate support to students at elite private institutions—to better target lower-income

and lower-scoring students.

References

Becker, G. S. (1962). Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis. Journal of Political Economy,
        70(5 [Part 2]), 352‐365.

Becker, S. O., & Caliendo, M. (2007). Sensitivity analysis for average treatment effects. The Stata Journal,
        7(1), 71‐83.

Ben‐Porath, Y. (1967). The Production of Human Capital and the Lilfe Cycle of Earnings. Journal of
       Political Economy, 75(4 [Part 1]), 352‐365.

Caliendo, M., & Kopeinig, S. (2008). Some practical guidance for the implementation of propensity score
       matching. Journal of Economic Surveys, 22(1), 31‐72.

                                                    31
Dadgar, M. (2012). The Academic Consequences of Employment for Students Enrolled in Community
       College. CCRC Working Paper No. 46. New York: Community College Research Center (Teachers
       College, Columbia University).

Darolia, R. (2014). Working (and studying) day and night: Heterogeneous effects of working on the
        academic performance of full‐time and part‐time students. Economics of Education Review, 38,
        38‐50.

DeSimone, J. (2008). The Impact of Employment During School on College Student Academic
      Performance. NBER Working Paper No. 14006. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
      Research.

DesJardins, S. L., Ahlburg, D. A., & McCall, B. P. (2002). Simulating the Longitudinal Effects of Changes in
       Financial Aid on Student Departure from College. Journal of Human Resources, 37(3), 653‐679.

Ehrenberg, R., & Sherman, D. (1987). Employment While in College, Academic Achievement, and Post‐
       College Outcomes. Journal of Human Resources, 22(1), 1‐23.

Gronau, R. (1998). A Useful Interpretation of R‐Squared in Binary Choice Models. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
       University (Industrial Relations Section working paper no. 397).

Hossler, D., Ziskin, M., Kim, S., Cekic, O., & Gross, J. P. (2008). Student Aid and Its Role in Encouraging
        Persistence. In S. Baum, M. McPherson, & P. Steele, The Effectiveness of Student Aid Policies:
        What the Research Tells Us (pp. 101‐116). New York: The College Board.

Kalenkoski, C., & Pabilonia, S. (2010). Parental Transfers, Student Achievement, and the Labor Supply of
       College Students. Journal of Population Economics, 23(2), 469‐496.

Katz, L. (1996). Wage Subsidies for the Disadvantaged. Cambridge: National Bureau for Economic
          Research.

Light, A. (2001). In‐School Work Experience and the Returns to Schooling. Journal of Labor Economics,
         19(1), 65‐93.

Light, A. (2001). In‐School Work Experience and the Returns to Schooling. Journal of Labor Economics,
         19(1), 65‐93.

Ludwig, J., Kling, J. R., & Mullainathan, S. (2011). Mechanism Experiments and Policy Evaluations. Journal
        of Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 17‐38.

Mantel, N., & Haenszel, W. (1959). Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from restrospective studies.
       Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 22, 719‐748.


                                                      32
McCormick, A. C., Moore, J. V., & Kuh, G. D. (2010). Working During College: Its Relationship to Student
      Engagement and Education Outcomes. In L. W. Perna, Understanding the Working College
      Student (pp. 179‐212). Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.

National Center for Education Statistics [NCES]. (2003). Beginning Postsecondary Students BPS:96/01
       Restricted CD. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education
       Statistics.

National Center for Education Statistics [NCES]. (2011). 2004/2009 Beginning Postsecondary Students
       Longitudinal Study Restricted Use Data File. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
       National Center for Education Statistics.

Oster, E. (2014). Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability. Chicago: University of Chicago Booth
        School of Business.

Pascarella, E., & Terenzini, P. (2005). How College Affects Students, Volume 2: A Third Decade of
        Research. San Francisco: Jossey‐Bass.

Perna, L. W. (2010). Introduction. In L. W. Perna, Understanding the Working College Student (pp. xiii‐
        xxvi). Sterling, VA: Stylus Publishing.

Perna, L. W., Cooper, M. A., & Li, C. (2007). Improving Educational Opportunities for College Students
        Who Work. (E. P. St. John, Ed.) Readings on Equal Education, 22, 109‐160.

Rosen, S. (1976). A Theory of Life Earnings. Journal of Political Economy, 84(4 [Part 2]), S45‐S67.

Rosenbaum, P. R. (2002). Observational Studies, 2nd. ed. New York: Springer.

Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). the central role of the propensity score in observational studies
       for causal effects. Biometrika, 70, 41‐55.

Rubin, D. B. (1973). The use of matched sampling and regression adjustment to remove bias in
        observational studies. Biometrika, 29, 185‐203.

Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating the Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and Non‐Randomized
        Studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 688‐701.

Ruhm, C. J. (1997). Is High School Employment Consumption or Investment? Journal of Labor Economics,
       14(4), 735‐776.

Scott‐Clayton, J. (2011). The Causal Effect of Federal Work‐Study Participation: Quasi‐Experimental
        Evidence from West Virginia. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 33(4), 506‐527.


                                                     33
Scott‐Clayton, J. (2012). What Explains Trends in Labor Supply Among U.S. Undergraduates? National
        Tax Journal, 65(1), 181‐210.

Smole, D. P. (2005). The Campus‐Based Financial Aid Programs: A Review and Analysis of the Allocation
       of Funds to Institutions and the Distribution of Aid to Students. Washington, DC: Congressional
       Research Service.

Stinebrickner, T., & Stinebrickner, R. (2003). Working During School and Academic Performance. Journal
        of Labor Economics, 21(2), 473‐491.

Stinebrickner, T., & Stinebrickner, R. (2003). Working During School and Academic Performance. Journal
        of Labor Economics, 21(2), 473‐491.

Stuart, E. A. (2010). Matching methods for causal inference: a review and a look forward. Statistical
         Science, 25(1), 1‐21.

The College Board. (2012). Trends in Student Aid 2012. New York: The College Board.

Tinto, V. (1975). Dropout from Higher Education: A Theoretical Synthesis of Recent Research. Review of
         Educational Research, 45(1), 89‐125.

Tyler, J. H. (2003). Using State Child Labor Laws to Identify the Effect of School‐Year Work on High School
          Achievement. Journal of Labor Economics, 21(2), 381‐408.

U.S. Department of Education. (2000). The National Study of the Operation of the Federal Work‐Study
        Program: Summary Findings from the Student and Institutional Surveys. Washington, DC: U.S.
        Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation Service.

U.S. Department of Education. (2000b). National Study of the Operation of the Federal Work‐Study
        Program: Technical Appendices for the Institutional and Student Surveys. Washington, DC: U.S.
        Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation Service.

U.S. Department of Education. (2009). Federal Student Aid Handbook 2009‐2010. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
        Department of Education.

U.S. Department of Education. (2010, April 1). Federal Campus‐Based Programs Data Book 2010.
        Retrieved August 30, 2013, from www.ED.gov:
        http://www2.ed.gov/finaid/prof/resources/data/databook2010/databook2010.html

U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Federal Work‐Study Allocations by Institution, 1995‐96 to 2009‐
        10. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Postsecondary Education.



                                                    34
Figure 1




           35
Fig 2.1: Common Support-Model 1


   3500


   3000


   2500


   2000


   1500


   1000


    500


     0
          0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.85


                                        With FWS      Without FWS




Fig 2.2: Common Support-Model 2



   1000

    900

    800

    700

    600

    500

    400

    300

    200

    100

      0
          0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85


                                          With FWS      Without FWS




                                                          36
Fig 2.3: Common Support-Model 3

   800

   700

   600

   500

   400

   300

   200

   100

     0
         0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9


                                     With FWS    Without FWS




Fig 3.1: Bias Reduction Graph-Model 1




                                                                           Unmatched
                                                                           Matched

               -100             -50                0                  50          100
                                  Standardized % bias across covariates




                                                  37
Fig 3.2: Bias Reduction Graph-Model 2




                                                                        Unmatched
                                                                        Matched

            -100             -50                0                  50          100
                               Standardized % bias across covariates




Fig 3.3: Bias Reduction Graph-Model 3




                                                                        Unmatched
                                                                        Matched

            -100             -50                0                  50          100
                               Standardized % bias across covariates




                                               38
Table 1: Student Employment (BPS 96 and BPS 04 Combined)

                                                                BPS 1996-2001 & BPS 2004-2009 Sample
                                                                           Characteristics
                                                                                        Non-FWS working
                       Variable                               Total   FWS Recipients        students

Full Sample
Any employment during school year (in %)                        69.5
Working Students (BPS 96 and BPS 04 Combined)
Total hours worked per week in year 1 (zeros excluded)          26.5               17.8                    27.5
Number of jobs held during year 1                                1.4                1.7                     1.4
Total hours worked per week in year 1, of those who
only held one job                                               16.9              11.4                     18.4
Any on-campus (include on/both) employment (in %)               15.3              83.5                      8.2
Any off-campus (include off/both) employment (in %)             86.0              44.7                     90.4
Any job is related to major (in %)                              22.8              28.3                     22.3
Estimated hourly wages, 2004 dollars (2003-04 only)                              $7.30                    $6.30


Sample Size (unweighted)                                      16,420             2,640                   13,790
Working Students (BPS 96 Only)
Job has a positive effect on academic performance (in
%)                                                              11.8               15.9                    11.4
Job has a negative effect on academic performance (in
%)                                                              31.9               23.6                    32.8
Job has no effect on academic performance (in %)                56.3               60.5                    55.8
First year occupation:
       Clerical                                                 29.4               46.0                    28.0
       Manager                                                   7.7                5.1                     7.9
       Professional                                              5.3                9.3                     5.0
       Service Occupations                                      20.5               18.3                    20.7
       Technical                                                 2.3                2.9                     2.2
       Laborer                                                   6.7                3.1                     7.0
       Sales                                                     9.6                4.6                    10.0
       Other                                                    18.5               10.6                    19.2
Sample Size (unweighted)                                         5,360                880                  4,480
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Notes: The sample only includes full-time and part-time and dependent and independent students entering a 2-
year and a 4-year institution in their first academic year, 1995-96 and 2003-04. The BPS tabulations use BPS
longitudinal sampling weights (wta000). Sample sizes may vary for certain variables due to missing values.
Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10. Estimated wages are computed based on total school
year earnings and typical weekly hours of work, assuming that students work 28 weeks during the school year.




                                                         39
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Full-Time Dependent Students Entering 4-year Institutions

                                                                        BPS 1996-2001 & BPS 2004-2009 Sample Characteristics
                            Variable                                    Total         FWS        Working non- Non-working
                                                                                    Recipients     recipients      students

Student Background and Institutional Characteristics

Female (in %)                                                                  55.4            62.0              55.1              53.4
White, non-Hispanic (in %)                                                     72.6            69.4              74.6              71.6
Age at entry (in years)                                                        18.4            18.3              18.5              18.3
Parental Income (In 2003 Constant Prices)                                  $76,216         $52,513           $74,311           $86,678
High School GPA >= 3.00 (in %)                                                 81.8            85.1              78.9              83.8
Derived SAT Score                                                             1026            1033              1002              1051
Received any Pell Grant (in %)                                                 26.0            46.1              24.0              21.2
Average Pell Grant (zeros excluded)                                         $2,256          $2,315            $2,128            $2,371
Financial Need after All Grants                                             $5,874          $9,564            $5,156            $5,368
Any Student Loan through year 1 (in %)                                        53.4            85.3              52.8              42.9
Student loan amount borrowed through year 1 (zeros excluded)                $4,539          $5,085            $4,296            $4,491
First Institution: Public Institution (in %)                                   61.8            33.3              67.5              65.5
First Institution: Non/Least selective (in %)                                  33.6            29.7              40.1              27.7
First Institution: Selective (in %)                                            39.1            39.6              40.0              38.0
First Institution: Very selective (in %)                                       27.3            30.7              20.0              34.3
First Institution: Tuition and fees                                         $9,562         $14,478            $7,940            $9,621
First institution, total enrollment                                         14006            9279             14297             15338

Academic and Labor Market Outcomes

GPA in year 1                                                                  2.8             2.9               2.8               2.9
Still enrolled or attained during year 2 (in %)                               93.2            96.2              90.7              94.9
Earned a BA within 4 years (in %)                                             36.7            46.0              29.8              41.0
Earned a BA within 6 years (in %)                                             65.0            72.1              58.2              70.1
Enrollment in Graduate School in year 6                                       16.6            19.7              14.3              18.1
Any Cumulative Undergrad Student Loan through year 6 (in %)                   62.9            90.7              63.4              52.5
Cumulative total student loan amount borrowed through year 6               $20,988         $25,306           $19,448           $20,334
(zeros excluded)
Enrolled or employed in year 6 (in %)                                         92.5            93.1              92.9              91.8
Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled (in %)                              88.5            89.9              89.5              86.8
Total earnings from current job in year 6 (zeros excluded)                 $36,317         $35,247           $35,846           $37,277

Sample Size (unweighted)                                                    12,200           2,070               5,240             4,890
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Notes: The sample only includes full-time and dependent students entering a 4-year institution in their first academic year, 1995-96
and 2003-04. The BPS tabulations use BPS longitudinal sampling weights (wta000). Sample sizes may vary for certain variables due
to missing values. Financial need after grants refers to the student budget minus EFC, federal, state and institutional grants. Derived
SAT refers to either the sum of SAT verbal and math scores or the ACT composite score converted to an estimated SAT combined
score. 1995 figures are in constant 2003 prices. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10.




                                                                      40
Table 3: Selection into Federal Work Study Participation and Any Employment
                                              Dprobit: P(FWS)             Dprobit: P(Emp)
               Variable                       B          (SE)             B         (SE)

Female                                       0.009    (0.003)     **     0.031    (0.010)     ***
Age                                         -0.035    (0.056)           -0.167    (0.189)
Age Squared                                  0.001    (0.001)            0.005    (0.005)
Black, non-Hispanic                         -0.000    (0.007)           -0.109    (0.022)     ***
Hispanic                                    -0.002    (0.006)           -0.033    (0.019)     *
Other Race                                  -0.007    (0.005)           -0.065    (0.017)     ***
Distance from first institution             -0.000    (0.000)           -0.000    (0.000)     **
Mother is a HS grad only                     0.008    (0.008)            0.026    (0.025)
Mother has some college                      0.005    (0.008)            0.007    (0.025)
Mother is has a BA                           0.002    (0.008)           -0.010    (0.026)
Father is a HS grad only                     0.003    (0.006)            0.005    (0.022)
Father has some college                     -0.003    (0.007)           -0.014    (0.023)
Father has a BA                             -0.004    (0.007)           -0.040    (0.023)     *
pmomed_m                                    -0.016    (0.011)           -0.012    (0.043)
pdaded_m                                     0.007    (0.013)           -0.046    (0.042)
HS GPA (2.5-2.9)                             0.013    (0.008)            0.023    (0.023)
HS GPA (3.0-3.4)                             0.017    (0.007)     **     0.010    (0.020)
HS GPA (3.5-4.0)                             0.015    (0.008)     **     0.004    (0.021)
hsgpacat_m                                  -0.009    (0.009)           -0.029    (0.027)
SAT score                                   -0.000    (0.000)           -0.000    (0.000)
Enrollment delay                            -0.008    (0.008)            0.070    (0.025)     ***
enrdelay_m                                   0.013    (0.065)           -0.002    (0.186)
EFC/ $1000                                  -0.005    (0.001)     **    -0.008    (0.001)     ***
EFC/ $1000 Squared                          -0.000    (0.000)     **     0.000    (0.000)     ***
Financial Need after All Grants/$1000        0.000    (0.001)           -0.006    (0.002)     ***
Received any Pell Grant                      0.028    (0.006)     **     0.001    (0.014)
Institutional Grants/$1000                   0.004    (0.001)     **     0.002    (0.002)
EFC/$1000*Tuition/$1000                      0.000    (0.000)     **    -0.000    (0.000)     ***
First Institution: Selective                 0.012    (0.006)     **    -0.004    (0.017)
First Institution: Very selective            0.015    (0.008)     *     -0.094    (0.020)     ***
First Institution: Public Institution       -0.018    (0.009)     *     -0.051    (0.025)     **
First Institution: Tuition and fees/$1000    0.008    (0.001)     **     0.004    (0.003)
Tuition/$1000 Squared                       -0.000    (0.000)     **     0.000    (0.000)     **
First institution, total enrollment/$1000   -0.001    (0.001)           -0.004    (0.002)     **
Total Enrollment/$1000 Squared               0.000    (0.000)            0.000    (0.000)     *
Inst in large city                          -0.024    (0.007)     **     0.049    (0.020)     **
Inst in mid-sized city                      -0.013    (0.006)     **     0.032    (0.018)     *
Inst in urban fringe of large city          -0.017    (0.007)     **     0.087    (0.021)     ***
insturb_m                                   -0.025    (0.011)     **    -0.075    (0.048)
BPS2003                                      0.003    (0.005)           -0.027    (0.014)     **

Sample Size (Unweighted)                     12200                      12200
R-squared from OLS                           0.208                      0.074

Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: The dependent variable is if the student received any Federal Work Study (FWS) grant during his first academic
year participation. Standard errors are in parenthesis. The sample only covers full-time and dependent students
entering a 4-year institution in their first academic year, 1995-96 and 2003-04. Model 1 reports OLS coefficient estimates
with standard errors clustered by institution. Model 2 reports dprobit estimates with standard errors clustered by
institution. 1995 figures are in constant 2003 prices. Unweighted sample sizes are rounded to the nearest 10.

                                                                   41
Table 4: Impact of Federal Work Study (FWS) on Academic and Labor Market Outcomes, Overall and By
Counterfactual


                                                                                                                          Model 3: FWS vs
                                                                                                    Model 2: FWS vs.       Non-Working
Variable
                                                                             Model 1                Working Students         Students
                                                                        B              S.E.         B         S.E.         B        S.E.
Any employment during school year                                           0.478 (.01)       ***
Total hours worked per week in year 1                                       6.236 (.336)      ***   -1.539 (.375) ***     15.041 (.24)    ***
GPA in year 1                                                             -0.027   (.022)           -0.027   (.027)        -0.055   (.028) **
Still enrolled or attained during year 2                                   0.011   (.006)     *      0.012   (.008)         0.005   (.007)
Number of months enrolled through year 6                                   0.503   (.321)            0.852   (.405) **      0.003   (.387)
Earned a BA within 4 years                                                 0.011   (.014)            0.029   (.016) *      -0.005   (.018)
Earned a BA within 6 years                                                 0.032   (.013)     **     0.052   (.016) ***     0.014   (.016)

Enrolled or employed in year 6                                             0.015   (.008)     **     0.011   (.009)         0.023   (.01) **
Enrolled (graduate or undergraduate) in year 6                            -0.006   (.013)           -0.010   (.016)        -0.008   (.017)
   Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled                               0.024   (.011)     **     0.014   (.013)         0.037   (.014) **
Employed in year 6                                                         0.021   (.014)            0.021   (.016)         0.031   (.018) *
   Log of total earnings from current job in year 6                       -0.023   (.021)           -0.028   (.024)        -0.018   (.027)
Enrollment in graduate school in year 6                                    0.007   (.011)            0.007   (.013)         0.001   (.014)

Any undergraduate student loan, cumulative through year 6                  0.162 (.011)       ***    0.142 (.014) ***      0.186 (.016) ***
Undergraduate student loan amount, cumulative through year 6              $6,263 (561)        ***   $6,003 (639) ***      $6,761 (690) ***

Any student loan in year 1                                                   0.209 (.012)    ***     0.180 (.015) ***       0.240 (.016) ***
First year student loan amount                                              $1,270 (118)     ***    $1,047 (138) ***       $1,501 (145) ***
First year FWS amount                                                       $1,521 (18)      ***    $1,521 (18) ***        $1,521 (18)    ***
First year Pell grant amount                                                    $16 (38)               $28 (43)              -$24 (46)
First year total aid amount                                                 $2,814 (227)     ***    $2,687 (259) ***       $2,896 (277) ***
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: This table shows results for our baseline model as well as the first two alterative specifications, Model 2 and 3. Model 2 compares
FWS recipients to working students (non-recipients) while Model 3 compares them to non-working students. Uses a two-step process in
which logit command is used to estimate the propensity score and then PSMATCH2 command with radius caliper of 0.01, with replacement
and excluding observations outside of common support, is used to execute the matching and estimate ATT. No weights. Continuous
variables are imputed to the mean if missing; dummy variables are imputed to zero; missing data flags are included for all variables with
missing data. No clustering. The same covariates used in Table 3 were used for these models. ATT estimates. Propensity scores are re-
estimated separately for Model 2 and Model 3, which use restricted samples. Sample is restricted to full-time, dependent students enrolled
at four-year institutions with non-missing data on institution ID, FWS receipt (first year), first-year employment, and BA attainment within 6
years.The unweighted sample size, rounded to the nearest 10, for total hours worked per week in year 1 and for Model 1 is 11,420 for Model
2 is 6,700 and for Model 3 is 6,190. This sample size is different for the variables conditioned on employment and cumulative debt.




                                                                     42
Table 5: Impact of Federal Work Study (FWS), with Loans Included as a Control Variable




                                                                                                                       Model 3: FWS vs
                                                                                                Model 2: FWS vs.        Non-Working
Variable
                                                                             Model 1            Working Students          Students
                                                                         B             S.E.      B        S.E.          B        S.E.
Any employment during school year                                            0.458 (.011) ***
Total hours worked per week in year 1                                        5.850 (.352) ***    -1.663 (.396) ***      15.036 (.24)   ***
GPA in year 1                                                             -0.009   (.023)        0.002    (.028)        -0.024   (.029)
Still enrolled or attained during year 2                                   0.010   (.006)        0.013    (.009)         0.004   (.008)
Number of months enrolled through year 6                                   0.558   (.335) *      0.885    (.43) **       0.208   (.407)
Earned a BA within 4 years                                                 0.021   (.015)        0.042    (.017) **      0.013   (.019)
Earned a BA within 6 years                                                 0.039   (.014) ***    0.059    (.017) ***     0.032   (.017) *

Enrolled or employed in year 6                                             0.013   (.008) *       0.010   (.009)         0.028   (.01) ***
Enrolled (graduate or undergraduate) in year 6                            -0.004   (.014)         0.005   (.016)        -0.006   (.018)
   Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled                               0.021   (.012) *       0.013   (.013)         0.046   (.015) ***
Employed in year 6                                                         0.017   (.015)         0.004   (.017)         0.033   (.019) *
   Log of total earnings from current job in year 6                       -0.023   (.022)        -0.025   (.025)        -0.004   (.029)
Enrollment in graduate school in year 6                                    0.015   (.012)         0.025   (.013) *       0.013   (.015)

Any undergraduate student loan, cumulative through year 6                 0.043 (.012) ***       0.036 (.015) **         0.049 (.018) ***
Undergraduate student loan amount, cumulative through year 6             $2,307 (581) ***       $2,521 (671) ***        $2,148 (730) ***

Any student loan in year 1                                                  0.004 (.013)           0.006 (.016)             0.003 (.017)
First year FWS amount                                                     $1,522 (18) ***        $1,521 (18) ***           $1,521 (18)   ***
First year Pell grant amount                                                 -$25 (39)              -$17 (45)                 -$85 (47)  *
First year total aid amount                                               $1,610 (235) ***        $1,638 (271) ***         $1,478 (293) ***
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: These models include amount borrowed and any loan taken during the first year of enrollment in the first stage or logit model.
This table shows results for our baseline model as well as the first two alterative specifications, Model 2 and 3. Model 2 compares FWS
recipients to working students (non-recipients) while Model 3 compares them to non-working students. This analysis includes Uses a
two-step process in which logit command is used to estimate the propensity score and then PSMATCH2 command with radius caliper of
0.01, with replacement and excluding observations outside of common support, is used to execute the matching and estimate ATT. No
weights. Continuous variables are imputed to the mean if missing; dummy variables are imputed to zero; missing data flags are included
for all variables with missing data. No clustering. The same covariates used in Table 3 were used for these models. ATT estimates.
Propensity scores are re-estimated separately for Model 1 and Model 2, which use restricted samples. Sample is restricted to full-time,
dependent students enrolled at four-year institutions with non-missing data on institution ID, FWS receipt (first year), first-year
employment, and BA attainment within 6 years.The unweighted sample size, rounded to the nearest 10, for total hours worked per week
in year 1 and for Model 1 is 12,190, for Model 2 is 6,960 and for Model 3 is 6,950. This sample size is different for the variables
conditioned on employment and cumulative debt.




                                                                    43
Table 6: Impact of Federal Work Study (FWS), Restricted to “Thick Support” Sample
                                                                                                                       Model 3: FWS vs
                                                                                              Model 2: FWS vs.          Non-Working
Variable
                                                                           Model 1            Working Students            Students
                                                                       B             S.E.      B         S.E.           B        S.E.
Any employment during school year                                          0.474 (.09) ***
Total hours worked per week in year 1                                      6.067 (.342) ***    -2.410 (.397) ***       15.693 (.325) ***
GPA in year 1                                                           -0.029   (.023)        -0.034   (.028)         -0.004   (.029)
Still enrolled or attained during year 2                                 0.013   (.006) **      0.022   (.009)   ***    0.011   (.008)
Number of months enrolled through year 6                                 0.646   (.332) *       1.230   (.437)   ***    0.301   (.419)
Earned a BA within 4 years                                               0.018   (.015)         0.031   (.017)   *     -0.016   (.018)
Earned a BA within 6 years                                               0.042   (.013) ***     0.076   (.017)   ***    0.022   (.017)

Enrolled or employed in year 6                                           0.015   (.008) **      0.015   (.009) *        0.031   (.01) ***
Enrolled (graduate or undergraduate) in year 6                           0.003   (.014)        -0.002   (.016)          0.005   (.017)
   Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled                             0.025   (.011) **      0.022   (.013) *        0.049   (.015) ***
Employed in year 6                                                       0.012   (.014)         0.017   (.017)          0.026   (.018)
   Log of total earnings from current job in year 6                     -0.017   (.021)        -0.025   (.026)         -0.012   (.028)
Enrollment in graduate school in year 6                                  0.016   (.012)         0.026   (.013) *        0.012   (.015)

Any undergraduate student loan, cumulative through year 6               0.170 (.011) ***        0.151 (.014) ***        0.246 (.015) ***
Undergraduate student loan amount, cumulative through year 6           $6,124 (580) ***        $5,811 (685) ***        $7,526 (734) ***

Any student loan in year 1                                                0.207 (.012) ***       0.190 (.015) ***      0.278 (.016) ***
First year student loan amount                                           $1,141 (120) *** $1,006 (142) ***            $1,383 (150) ***
First year FWS amount                                                    $1,516 (19) *** $1,480 (24) ***              $1,499 (25)    ***
First year Pell grant amount                                                -$1 (39)              -$46 (46)             -$71 (47)
First year total aid amount                                              $3,022 (220) *** $2,958 (227) ***            $3,687 (254) ***
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: This table shows results for our baseline model as well as the first two alterative specifications, Model 2 and 3. Model 2
compares FWS recipients to working students (non-recipients) while Model 3 compares them to non-working students. Uses a two-
step process in which logit command is used to estimate the propensity score and then PSMATCH2 command with radius caliper
0.01, with replacement and excluding observations outside of common support, is used to execute the matching and estimate ATT. No
weights. Continuous variables are imputed to the mean if missing; dummy variables are imputed to zero; missing data flags are
included for all variables with missing data. No clustering. The same covariates used in Table 3 were used for these models. ATT
estimates. Propensity scores are re-estimated separately for Model 2 and Model 3, which use restricted samples. Sample is restricted
to full-time, dependent students enrolled at four-year institutions with non-missing data on institution ID, FWS receipt (first year),
first-year employment, and BA attainment within 6 years. Sample is also restricted to a thicker common support area, only
observations with pscores greater than zero and less than or equal to 0.6. The unweighted sample size, rounded to the nearest 10, for
total hours worked per week in year 1 and for Model 1 is 11,000, for Model 2 is 5,490 and for Model 3 is 4,890. This sample size is
different for the variables conditioned on employment and cumulative debt.




                                                                  44
Table 8. Impact of Federal Work-Study (FWS), by SAT Subgroup (Model 1 only)


Outcome                                                          Model 1: Higher SAT         Model 1: Lower SAT
                                                                   B           S.E.           B            S.E.
Any employment during school year                                    0.503 (.015)      ***      0.429 (.014)     ***
Total hours worked per week in year 1                                6.396 (.438)      ***      5.551 (.537)     ***
GPA in year 1                                                        -0.015   (.027)           -0.033   (.034)
Still enrolled or attained during year 2                              0.008   (.007)            0.015   (.011)
Number of months enrolled through year 6                              0.180   (.368)            1.090   (.565)   *
Earned a BA within 4 years                                            0.005   (.02)             0.022   (.02)
Earned a BA within 6 years                                            0.013   (.016)            0.068   (.021)   ***
Enrolled or employed in year 6                                        0.017   (.011)            0.023   (.011)   **
Enrolled (graduate or undergraduate) in year 6                        0.003   (.019)           -0.020   (.019)
   Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled                          0.033   (.016)   **       0.026   (.016)
Employed in year 6                                                    0.014   (.02)             0.043   (.021)   **
   Log of total earnings from current job in year 6                  -0.022   (.031)           -0.028   (.03)
Enrollment in graduate school in year 6                               0.007   (.018)            0.014   (.014)
Any undergraduate student loan, cumulative through year 6            0.189 (.017)      ***      0.102 (.017)     ***
Undergraduate student loan amount, cumulative through year 6        $7,778 (796)       ***     $4,371 (830)      ***

Any student loan in year 1                                           0.243    (.018)   ***      0.144   (.018)   ***
First year student loan amount                                      $1,455    (172)    ***      $910    (174)    ***
First year FWS amount                                               $1,594    (23)     ***     $1,457   (28)     ***
First year Pell grant amount                                         $33.3    (47)                -$7   (62)
First year total aid amount                                         $3,046    (344)    ***     $2,357   (296)    ***
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: This table shows results for our baseline model comparing FWS recipients against all matched non-recipients.
The same covariates used in Table 3 were used for these models. ATT estimates. Sample is restricted to full-time,
dependent students enrolled at four-year institutions. Higher-SAT students were identified as those who scored at or
above the median SAT for FWS students, 1030 points. The unweighted sample size, rounded to the nearest 10, for
total hours worked per week in year 1 and for Model 1 is 6,140 for higher-SAT sample and 5,680 for the lower-SAT
sample. This sample size is smaller for the variables conditioned on employment and cumulative debt.




                                                        45
Table 9. Impact of Federal Work-Study (FWS), by Income Subgroup (Model 1 only)


                                                               Model 1: High Income        Model 1: Low Income
Outcome                                                          B            S.E.          B            S.E.
Any employment during school year                                   0.502 (.013)     ***      0.447 (.015)     ***
Total hours worked per week in year 1                               5.964 (.439)     ***      6.529 (.543)     ***
GPA in year 1                                                      -0.055   (.03)    *        0.007   (.035)
Still enrolled or attained during year 2                            0.006   (.007)            0.013   (.011)
Number of months enrolled through year 6                           -0.087   (.405)            0.873   (.551)
Earned a BA within 4 years                                          0.003   (.02)             0.020   (.021)
Earned a BA within 6 years                                          0.020   (.017)            0.048   (.021)   **
Enrolled or employed in year 6                                      0.015   (.01)             0.023   (.012)   *
Enrolled (graduate or undergraduate) in year 6                     -0.019   (.019)            0.010   (.02)
   Employed in year 6, of those not enrolled                        0.018   (.015)            0.030   (.018)   *
Employed in year 6                                                  0.034   (.02)    *        0.013   (.022)
   Log of total earnings from current job in year 6                -0.033   (.03)            -0.019   (.033)
Enrollment in graduate school in year 6                            -0.014   (.017)            0.036   (.016)   **
Any undergraduate student loan, cumulative through year 6           0.198 (.016)     ***      0.100 (.017)     ***
Undergraduate student loan amount, cumulative through year 6       $7,640 (834)      ***     $3,928 (780)      ***

Any student loan in year 1                                          0.242   (.017)   ***      0.148   (.019)   ***
First year student loan amount                                     $1,347   (180)    ***     $1,004   (162)    ***
First year FWS amount                                              $1,508   (24)     ***     $1,564   (27)     ***
First year Pell grant amount                                       -$12.9   (12)                $90   (67)
First year total aid amount                                        $2,910   (329)    ***     $2,498   (327)    ***
Source: BPS: 96/01 & 04/09 Restricted-Use Data File
Note: This table shows results for our baseline model comparing FWS recipients to all matched non-recipients. The
same covariates used in Table 3 were used for these models. ATT estimates. Sample is restricted to full-time,
dependent low-income students enrolled at four-year institutions. Low-income students were identified as those
whose annual household income is at or below the median income of FWS recipients, approximately $49,000. The
unweighted sample size, rounded to the nearest 10, for total hours worked per week in year 1 is 7,740 for high-
income students and 4,060 for low-income students. This sample size is smaller for the variables conditioned on
employment and cumulative debt.




                                                        46
