                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      GROWTH, IMPORT DEPENDENCE AND WAR

                                       Roberto Bonfatti
                                   Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke

                                      Working Paper 20326
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w20326


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2014




We thank Avner Offer, Dan Seidmann, Stergios Skaperdas and Hew Strachan for useful
comments. We also thank two anonymous referees, as well as our editor, Joachim Voth, whose
criticisms and suggestions improved the paper immensely. We are grateful to seminar participants
at the University of Nottingham, University of Oxford, Syddansk Universitet, Queens University
Belfast, VU Amsterdam, ISNIE 2013, and ETSG 2013. Bonfatti received research funding from
the School of Economics at the University of Nottingham; O’Rourke received funding from the
European Research Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7/2007-2013) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2014 by Roberto Bonfatti and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Growth, Import Dependence and War
Roberto Bonfatti and Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
NBER Working Paper No. 20326
July 2014, Revised January 2017
JEL No. F51,F52,N70

                                         ABSTRACT

Existing theories of pre-emptive war typically predict that the leading country may choose to
launch a war on a follower who is catching up, since the follower cannot credibly commit to not
use their increased power in the future. But it was Japan who launched a war against the West in
1941, not the West that pre-emptively attacked Japan. Similarly, many have argued that trade
makes war less likely, yet World War I erupted at a time of unprecedented globalization. This
paper develops a theoretical model of the relationship between trade and war which can help to
explain both these observations. Dependence on strategic imports can lead follower nations to
launch pre-emptive wars when they are potentially subject to blockade.


Roberto Bonfatti
School of Economics
University of Nottingham
University Park
Nottingham NG72RD
United Kingdom
roberto.bonfatti@nottingham.ac.uk

Kevin Hjortshøj O'Rourke
All Souls College
University of Oxford
Oxford OX1 4AL, UK
and NBER
kevin.orourke@all-souls.ox.ac.uk
1     Introduction
This paper develops a model of trade and war that speaks to two distinct literatures. The first is
the literature on whether or not trade helps reduce the likelihood of warfare. The argument that it
does so sits uneasily with the observation that World War I erupted at a time of unprecedented
globalization. The second is the literature on war between established and rising powers. A
typical prediction is that the established power (or leader) may launch a pre-emptive war against
the rising power (or follower), since the latter cannot credibly commit to not use their increased
power in the future. And yet it was Japan who attacked the West in 1941, not vice versa.
    Our model can help to resolve both apparent paradoxes. We show that import dependence
can lead a follower country to lauch pre-emptive wars against the leader if two conditions hold.
First, import dependence must increase over time. Second, the country must be vulnerable to
blockade in the event of war. The model can be regarded as a formalization of arguments about
trade and war made by some realist scholars in the international relations literature.
    Ours is a model of hegemonic war, and hegemonic wars are too infrequent for our arguments
to be testable econometrically. We therefore provide a brief historical narrative in which we show
how our model can help to make sense of three historical episodes: Anglo-German rivalry prior
to World War I; Hitler’s expansionist ambitions, and his decision to attack the Soviet Union in
1941; and Japan’s decision to attack the West later in the same year. Our model formalizes some
of the arguments made about these three episodes by prominent historians: Avner O↵er’s book
on Anglo-German rivalry (O↵er 1989), Adam Tooze’s book on the Nazi German war economy
(Tooze 2006), and Michael Barnhart’s book on Japan’s “preparation for total war”(Barnhart
1987).
    We are sure that none of these historians would argue that the mechanism that we describe
here “explains”any of these three conflicts in some monocausal way. Lest there be any misunder-
standing on the subject, we do not make such a claim either: the origins of the first and second
world wars were much too complicated to be “explained”by this or any other formal model. Our
model has just two players, but there were many players involved in these conflicts (and so a
country like Germany could be a follower relative to the UK, but a leader relative to Russia).



                                                2
It assumes that conflict is motivated by just one cause (a “pie”which both players are strug-
gling to obtain), but international rivalries in the 1910s and 1930s were multi-dimensional. It
assumes that countries can be modelled as unitary actors, but internal divisions were important
in Wilhelmine Germany, Imperial Japan and elsewhere. And it assumes rationality, even though
many important actors in these three episodes were motivated by sentiments such as honour and
dignity, or by racial or religious prejudice, or were over-optimistic about their chances in a war,
or under-estimated their opponents.
   Nevertheless, we hope to convince the reader that the mechanism described by our model
was one factor among many at work during these three episodes, and that trade dependence can
sometimes make war more rather than less likely. We should not expect an economic model to
be able to explain on its own something as complicated as the outbreak of a world war, but this
does not mean that it has nothing to tell us about the past, or that it cannot provide us with
lessons that may be useful in the future.


1.1    Trade and war

The optimistic, liberal argument that international trade promotes peace is ancient but contro-
versial (see e.g. Barbieri 1996, Rowe 2005, McDonald and Sweeney 2007, Martin, Mayer and
Thoenig 2008 and Harrison and Wolf 2012). One objection is that trade can make countries
dependent on others, and therefore vulnerable, in the context of an anarchic world in which
countries have fundamentally di↵erent interests. In the words of John Mearsheimer, “states
will struggle to escape the vulnerability that interdependence creates, in order to bolster their
national security. States that depend on others for critical economic supplies will fear cuto↵ or
blackmail in time of crisis or war; they may try to extend political control to the source of supply,
giving rise to conflict with the source or with its other customers” (Mearsheimer 1990, p. 45).
There is a critical di↵erence between international and domestic trade, argues Kenneth Waltz:
regions within a country “are free to specialize because they have no reason to fear the increased
interdependence that goes with specialization”, whereas in an anarchic world, states may fear
specialization on the grounds that their potential competitors may gain more than they do, or
because trade makes them “dependent on others through cooperative endeavors and exchanges

                                                 3
of goods and services” (Waltz 2006, pp. 104, 106; see also Gilpin 1981, p. 220).
   There is also a large literature on hegemonic wars between rising challengers and dominant
powers (Gilpin 1981). Our paper develops a model of trade and hegemonic warfare, in the
tradition of recent papers on “rationalist explanations for war” (Fearon 1995, Powell 2006).
These start from the premise that wars are costly, and that rational unitary states in dispute
with each other should be able to bargain their way to compromises that leave both better o↵ (in
probabilistic terms) than they would be in the event that war breaks out. Powell (2006) argues
that wars can nevertheless arise as a result of commitment problems. He does so in the context
of models in which a pie has to be divided between countries in a setting where (1) countries
cannot pre-commit to particular divisions of the pie in the future; (2) countries have the option
to launch a war to “lock in” an expected share of future flows; (3) wars are costly, in that they
reduce the overall size of the pie; and (4) the distribution of power, which a↵ects how much of
the pie countries can lock in, exogenously changes over time (p. 181). For example, consider the
case in which a follower exogenously catches up on a leader (Fearon 1995). The follower has an
incentive to forestall a pre-emptive war by the leader, by promising the leader a sufficiently big
slice of the pie in the future. Since it cannot pre-commit to this, and has an incentive to use its
greater power in the future to secure a greater share of the pie, the leader may chose to launch
a pre-emptive war in order to lock in a higher share of the spoils while it still has the chance.
   In our model, we find that it is the follower who may declare war on the leader. International
trade, and the opportunities and vulnerabilities which it implies, are central to establishing this
otherwise counter-intuitive result. Central to our analysis is the assumption that the follower
needs to import raw materials from the rest of the world.
   We model the link between growth and changes in the distribution of power in a context in
which the follower becomes increasingly dependent on imported raw materials. We assume that
the leader, as befits the hegemon, can control the follower’s access to imported raw materials,
either because it controls the sources of supply (via formal or informal empire), or because
it controls world shipping lanes and can mount a blockade of the follower. We show that if
dependence on imported raw materials increases over time, the follower can become militarily
weaker and not stronger, even if it is growing more rapidly, and can therefore have an incentive


                                                 4
to start a pre-emptive war. International trade can thus be crucial in determining the likelihood
of war.
    While we borrow our basic theoretical mechanism from the existing literature (Powell 2006),
our application of these ideas is novel. Furthermore, in our setup both the leader and the follower
also care about consumption, allowing us to endogenise the share of their GDP that countries
wish to devote to their armed forces. The paper closest in spirit to ours is Copeland (1996),
who constructs a similar argument in which pessimistic expectations of future trade levels can
lead trade-dependent countries to declare war. Our contribution is di↵erent from his, in that we
provide a formal theoretical analysis, which he does not. This means among other things that
we can endogenously figure out where these trade expectations come from. We also tell a story
in which the processes of catch-up and structural change, and the strategic nature of trade, play
central roles.1



2     Model description
We consider a world with two industrial countries, L and F (for “Leader” and “Follower”), and
a third resource-rich country C. In each country, there is a large number of agents, allowing
markets to be competitive. There is an infinite number of periods, indexed by t = 1, ..., 1.
    Agents everywhere care about consumption of a final good, z. In addition, in L and F , agents
also care about consumption of a “pie”, p, which we may interpret as a range of contested issues
   1
     There is a growing literature on the relationship between trade and war. Glick and Taylor (2010) estimate the
impact of war on trade flows, and find that it is large. Acemoglu et al. (2012) present a dynamic model of resource
trade and war, focussing on how, in the presence of an inelastic demand for resources, progressive depletion may
increase the value of a resource-rich region, thus increasing the incentives for a resource-scarce country to invade
the country the region belongs to (and thus appropriate the resource). They study how di↵erent market structures
in the natural resource industry - perfectly competitive, or monopolistically controlled by the government of the
resource-rich country - may be associated with di↵erent probabilities of war. While the main focus of their
paper is on wars between resource-rich and resource-scarce countries, ours is on wars between resource-scarce
industrialized countries. Caselli et al. (2015) find that war between pairs of countries is more likely when at
least one country has natural resources, and when these are located near borders. Finally, a series of papers by
Stergios Skaperdas and co-authors (see Garfinkel et al. 2012 for a good overview) study the pattern and welfare
implications of trade in a context in which two countries may fight over a contested region. The focus of these
papers is di↵erent from our own: they present static models of the impact of trade (between the two countries
and the rest of the world) on the incentives for the two countries to arm and go to war over the contested region.
Ours is a dynamic model of trade between the two countries and the rest of the world, where the dynamics of
relative power and trade dependence determine the likelihood of war.


                                                         5
that the two countries must settle. Preferences in L and F are described by period t utility


                                                   uJt = ztJ + pJt ,


where ztJ and pJt denote, respectively, consumption of the final good and the pie by the repre-
sentative agent in country J 2 {L, F }. The present discounted value of utility in J is


                                                   UtJ = ZtJ + PtJ ,                                        (1)

                 P1                         P1
where ZtJ =         s=t
                          s t J
                             zs ,   PtJ =    s=t
                                                   s t J
                                                      ps ,   and   < 1 is the discount factor. Period t and
present discounted value utility in C are similarly equal to ztC and ZtC . However, C does not
make any strategic decisions in our model: it is L and F who compete for the pie, and whose
decisions determine whether or not there will be a war.2
       In both L and F , social planners maximise eq. (1). The essential tradeo↵ they face is that
resources can be allocated either to the production of the final consumption good, z, or to the
production of an army. Armies are not valuable per se, but are useful in securing a greater
share of the pie. The planners thus face a trade o↵ between the consumption of z and of p. In
this paper, we develop a model of the strategic interaction of the two planners over an infinite
number of discrete periods, as they attempt to maximise eq. (1). In each period, the planners
first simultaneously set the size of their armies. Next, they decide how to share the pie (by going
to war, or through peaceful negotiations). Finally, given the planners’ arming and war decisions,
production of the final good takes place, the pie is allocated, and consumption is realised.
       We begin by describing how the final good and army are produced, as well as the two
economies’ endowments (Section 2.1); the way in which the pie is divided (2.2); the exact timing
of actions (2.3); and the equilibrium concept used in the paper (2.4). The equilibrium of the
game is then characterised in Sections 3 and 4. For brevity, we use “L” and “F ” as a short-hand
for “L’s social planner” and “F ’s social planner”.
       We use the following notation. As above, a lower case latin letter, e.g. xJt , denotes the value
   2
    Allowing C to make strategic decisions could be allowed for in an extension. For example, C could be allowed
to manipulate the price of raw materials, and thus influence the likelihood of war.



                                                             6
                                                                                      P1
of a variable x in country J 2 {L, F } in period t, while XtJ =                         s=t
                                                                                                s t J
                                                                                                   xs ,   denotes the present
discounted value of that variable from period t to infinity. Sums of variables across the two
countries lose the superscript, e.g. xt = xLt + xFt . Finally, greek letters denote parameters, with
lower and upper cases having the same meanings as above.


2.1       Economic environment

The final good is competitively produced using a non-traded “industrial input” y and “raw
materials” x. The industrial input can be interpreted as all productive inputs (capital, labour,
land) that need to be combined with raw materials to produce GDP.3 Production of one unit of
z requires exactly one unit of each input. Then, if ytJ                   z
                                                                                  and xJt   z
                                                                                                units of the two inputs are
allocated to the production of z in country J in period t, national production of z is

                                                  ⇥                       ⇤
                                            min       ytJ   z
                                                              , xJt   z
                                                                              .


       The industrial input is not produced but something with which economies are endowed.
Raw material supplies are also given by endowments. Endowments evolve over time, following
an exogenous growth process described below. We choose z as the numéraire. All owners of
endowments are small enough to be price takers.
       We interpret country L as an industrial leader that, by the beginning of period 1, has com-
pleted its process of structural transformation, and whose economy grows at a constant, steady-
state rate in all sectors. In contrast, F is a follower that is still undergoing structural transfor-
mation in period 1, and only reaches steady state in period 2. By “structural transformation” we
mean that F is undergoing catch-up growth, and reallocating resources from the primary sector
to the industrial sector. Its industrial inputs, then, initially grow faster than in steady state,
while its raw materials sector (here modelled simply as an endowment of raw materials available
in every period) grows more slowly (and possibly at a negative rate). Finally, we assume that, in
all periods, F is scarce in raw materials. To capture all this, we assume the following endowments
   3
    It may also include raw materials that exist in abundant supply domestically, in which case x would represent
raw materials that need to be at least partially imported.




                                                            7
of the two inputs in L and F :


                                              y1L = 1    y2L =
                                              xL1 = ⇢    xL2 = ⇢
                                                                                                               (2)
                                              y1F = ↵ y2F = ↵
                                              xF1 =      xF2 =     ,

where           1 is steady state growth, ⇢           0 captures the availability of raw materials in L,
0 < ↵  ↵ and                   0 capture structural transformation in F , and we assume ↵                      to
make sure that F is scarce in raw materials.4 After period 2, all endowments grow at a constant
rate . Note that we have normalised the initial size of L’s economy to 1, while F ’s economy can
have any initial size (↵ unconstrained). As for C, we interpret it as a peripheral country that is
abundant in raw materials. It is a large economy, relative to both L and F . It produces both the
final consumption good and raw materials, and the world relative price of raw materials in terms
of the consumption good, ⌘ 2 [0, 1), is determined there. There are no transportation costs, and
L and F can exchange unlimited quantities of raw materials for the final consumption good, or
vice versa, in C’s markets at this fixed relative price.
       All goods are tradable internationally, except for y which is non-tradable. This implies that,
given its scarce domestic supply, F will import raw materials, and export the final good in return.
If ⇢ 2 [0, 1), L will have similar trade patterns, and both industrial countries will import raw
materials from C. If ⇢ > 1, L is abundant in raw materials, and exports these in exchange for
imports of z. F will import from either C or L (or both). Given that raw materials cost ⌘,
perfect competition in production of the final good and the fact that z is the numéraire together
imply that the equilibrium price of y will be 1             ⌘.5
       In L and F , the planner can divert resources from production of the final good to production
   4
     If we interpret this environment through the lens of the Solow model, steady state growth is driven by capital
accumulation, technological progress, and population growth, and faster growth during catching up is driven by
faster capital accumulation in this phase. As for growth in the endowment of raw materials, steady state growth
could be driven by a combination of technological progress and an exogenous process of discovery/depletion, while
slower growth during catching up could be driven by a transfer of resources into industry.
   5
     An increase in ⌘ has two e↵ects on the economy of an importing country: it increases the cost of imports,
reducing national income; and it redistributes income from owners of the industrial input to owners of raw
materials.


                                                        8
of an army, a. While the army does not increase utility directly, it may do so indirectly by
increasing the portion of the pie that a country is able to obtain. If ytJ              a
                                                                                            and xJt   a
                                                                                                          units of the
two inputs are allocated to the production of a, then an army of size

                                                   1      ⇥ J                  ⇤
                                          aJt =       min  yt      , xJt
                                                  cJt            a         a



is produced.6 We assume


                                                    cJt = 1/ytJ :                                                 (3)


a more advanced country has a lower cost of producing an army, relative to the final good,
perhaps because of a superior technology. For example, a more advanced country could have a
technology that yields a more powerful army for given military expenditure. We denote military
expenditure by mJt = cJt aJt .


2.2     Political environment

Our model follows closely the model of pre-emptive war in Powell (2006). In every period, there
is a pie that the two countries must partition. The pie has size ⇡1 > 0 in period 1, and grows at
a constant rate      in all periods after that.7 The partition of the pie can be done in two ways. On
the one hand, in every period t in which there has been no previous war (thus, at least in period
1), the two countries may try to negotiate a peaceful partition of the pie involving J getting a
share sJt . Alternatively, they may go to war. This is won by J with probability

                                                              aJt
                                                  qtJ =             ,
                                                          aLt + aFt
   6
      The planner could either appropriate the inputs directly, and produce the army by itself, or impose a lump
sum tax on final good consumption, and use it to purchase the army from the private sector. Both interpretations,
as well as a mixture of the two, are consistent with our model.
    7
      The pie may represent a range of contested issues that L and F must settle. These could be non-economic
issues, such as the division of territory that matters purely for matters of prestige, or issues that arise because of
ideological concerns. Or they could be economic issues, such as the division of territories with an economic value.




                                                           9
and by       J with reciprocal probability 1        qtJ . The war gives the winner the entire current and
all future pies. However, war also costs a share  2 [0, 1) of the present discounted value of all
pies. In summary, war implies that the present discounted value of consumption of the pie, PtJ ,
will be equal to qtJ ⇧t (1     ), while peaceful partition implies that pJt will be given by sJt ⇡t , with
  J
Pt+1 remaining to be determined in subsequent periods.
       Negotiations to reach a peaceful partition work as follows. First, L decides whether to enter
negotiations, or to immediately start a war. In the former case, it o↵ers F a share sFt of the
current pie (so that a share sLt = 1           sFt would remain for itself). Given this o↵er, F decides
whether to accept, or to reject and start a war. If it accepts, the pie is peacefully partitioned,
and the two countries move on to the next period.8
       Note that, while war allocates the entire future stream of pies, negotiatiors cannot commit to
the sharing of future pies. This lack of commitment is the key friction in the model, which may
lead to a welfare-reducing war occurring in equilibrium.9 To see why, suppose that a country
expects to become weaker over time. Then, it knows that, unless it secures the future pies by
winning a war today, it will get little of them as a result of future negotiations or conflict. Since
lack of commitment prevents today’s negotiators from alleviating this country’s concerns, it may
start a war even if, in principle, there is an overall surplus that the two parties could share. It
turns out that, in equilibrium, such an inefficient war can only occur in period 1, the period in
which structural transformation leads to a shift in relative power between L and F .
       As with the production of the final good, producing an army relies on raw materials, which
may have to be imported. This potential dependence of the army on international trade makes
it important to specify the e↵ect of war on the two countries’ capacity to trade. In this paper,
we consider two alternative cases. The first is a symmetric case in which war does not a↵ect
the capacity of either country to trade. In this case, dependence on imported raw materials
does not matter for relative military power. The second case is an asymmetric one, in which L
   8
     Note that this structure of negotiations allocates all of the bargaining power to L. We have assumed this
extreme distribution of bargaining power just for simplicity: to relax this assumption would not qualitatively
change our results.
   9
     As we will see, war can also be ”welfare-increasing” in this model since it implies that no future military
expenditures will be undertaken. Since our interest is in welfare-reducing war, we will rule this possibility out in
Section 3.5 and subsequently.



                                                        10
may blockade F in times of war, but not the other way around. This involves both F ’s trade
with L (if any), and F ’s trade with C. We refer to this second case as “L having the capacity
to blockade”. It is easy to show that, if L has the capacity to blockade, it always uses it in
times of war. Intuitively, the disruption of F ’s trade does not carry a direct economic cost for L,
since it can still trade with C. On the other hand, as clarified below, to blockade F can reduce
the latter country’s probability of winning the war. Thus, L having the capacity to blockade is
synonymous with L blockading F in times of war.10 We believe this second case is an important
one, since hegemonic countries may develop a naval superiority that allows them to control trade
routes in case of conflict. In this second case, F ’s dependence on imported raw materials may
have important consequences for relative military power.11 We define a state variable B, which
is one if and only if L has the capacity to blockade.
       An indicator variable wtJ is one if and only if country J starts a war in period t. Then,
wt ⌘ wtL + wtF is one if and only if a war occurs in period t. We also define a state variable WtJ ,
which is one if and only if J has won a war in some previous period T < t. Then, Wt ⌘ WtL + WtF
is a state variable indicating whether or not war has already occurred in period t.


2.3       Timing

Each period t can be divided into three sub-periods, during which the following events take place:

  t.1 L and F simultaneously set aLt and aFt .
  10
      We do not consider the possibility that L uses the capacity to blockade in times of peace. An obvious
justification for this assumption is that a blockade could, in itself, be regarded as an act of war.
   11
      The capacity to blockade could be thought of as arising in two ways. It could arise in the context of a world in
which C remains independent, but in which L gains control over the trade routes linking C to its industrial rival.
In this interpretation, the key determinant of the capacity to blockade is the relative size of the countries’ navies:
L will have the largest navy, and will then have the ability to blockade F (but not vice-versa). The capacity to
blockade could also arise in a world in which L gained colonial control over C. Colonial control would give L the
power to deprive its rival of the ability to import raw materials, which is what a blockade means in the context
of our model. We think that the first interpretation is more consistent with the structure of our model. Our
assumption is that the capacity to blockade is indivisible, and is therefore a↵ected by war in a way that it cannot
be by peaceful negotiations between the two countries. If L’s capacity to blockade originated from the control
of colonial empires, it would be quite hard to argue for its indivisibility, since colonial empires can be divided in
many di↵erent ways. In contrast, negotiations over naval power are much more discontinuous in nature - a navy
is either dominant, or it is not - and so it is possible that the expected impact of war on naval power cannot be
obtained through peaceful negotiations.



                                                         11
 t.2 If there has been a war at some T < t, the winner gets the entire period t pie. If there
        hasn’t been a war, L can either make an o↵er sFt on how to share the period t pie, or start a
        war (wtL = 1). If it makes an o↵er, F may either accept, in which case the pie is peacefully
        partitioned, or reject the o↵er and start a war (wtF = 1).

 t.3 Trade and production take place (if someone has started a war, i.e. wt = 1, and L has the
        capacity to blockade, i.e. B = 1, then F cannot trade). After production has taken place,
        if someone has started a war, it now occurs. Finally, consumption takes place.


2.4       Definition of equilibrium

We focus on Markov-perfect Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibra (SPNE). Then, in each period, all
relevant information about the previous history is summarised by the state variable Wt , which
specifies whether or not war has already occurred. That is to say, given Wt , equilibrium strategies
must prescribe optimal actions for each possible action played in all previous sub-periods only.
   In period t, in any node such that Wt = 0, the structure of the game is as follows

                              1:                                 ZtJ (wt = 1) + qtJ ⇧t (1   )

      aLt , aFt     wtL                                     1:

                              0:       sFt       wtF

                                                            0: ZtJ (wt = 0) + sJt ⇡t + Pt+1
                                                                                         J
                                                                                            (wt = 0)


        t.1         t.2                                          t.3

where the expressions at the end of each branch denote payo↵s, and ZtJ (wt = 1) and ZtJ (wt = 0)
are the present discounted values of consumption with and without war in period t. If there
is war, each player gets its expected share of the pie arising from war, qtJ ⇧t (1          ). If there is
no war, each player gets its peacefully negotiated share of the pie this period, plus the present
discounted value of its share of the pie in the following period (which will depend among other
things on whether there is a war in the following or subsequent periods). Equilibrium strategies




                                                  12
must prescribe actions

        ⇤    ⇥                ⇤⇤ ⇥               ⇤⇤           ⇥                           ⇤
 aLt        , wtL (aLt , aFt ) , sFt (aLt , aFt ) = arg max wt ZtL (wt = 1) + qtL ⇧t (1 ) +
                                                                       ⇥                                        ⇤
                                                            + (1 wt ) ZtL (wt = 0) + (1 sFt )⇡t + Pt+1
                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                       (wt = 0)
                                                                                                             (4)
                        ⇤    ⇥                      ⇤⇤           ⇥                           ⇤
                  aFt       , wtF (aLt , aFt , sFt ) = arg max wt ZtF (wt = 1) + qtF Pt (1 ) +
                                                                          ⇥                                   ⇤
                                                               + (1 wt ) ZtF (wt = 0) + sFt ⇡t + Pt+1
                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                      (wt = 0) .
                                                                                                             (5)

       The di↵erence between these two expressions reflects the fact that only L can o↵er a peaceful
partition of the pie, sFt ; F has to take this as given. In any node such that Wt = 1, equilibrium
strategies must prescribe actions

                                              ⇤
                                        aJt       = arg max ZtJ + WtJ ⇧t (1   ) .                           (6)


It is easy to anticipate that, in this second case, in which the allocation of all the pies has already
been determined (it is given by the second expression on the right hand side of (6)), and the sole
concern is to maximise ZtJ , arming will always be set equal to zero in equilibrium.
       To simplify the identification of a unique SPNE, we focus on a subset of equilibria which we
call “balanced growth path SPNEs”. These are defined by

Definition 1. A balanced growth path SPNE is a SPNE in which, in t                         2 where war has not
yet occurred, if war does not occur, then mJt+1 = mJt for J 2 {L, F }.

       By focusing on balanced-growth path SPNEs, we impose the requirement that, from period
2 onwards and until there is a war (if ever), military expenditures grow at rate . This is a
reasonable restriction given that, from period 2 onwards, all relevant parameters for the arming
decisions are scaled up by a factor                in every period. Our strategy is consistent with the standard
approach in the growth literature, which is to focus on balanced growth paths only.




                                                              13
3       Preliminary results
In every period in which war has not yet occurred, the planners first allocate resources between
producing the consumption good and the army (these decisions we will henceforth refer to as
arming decisions). These decisions determine their bargaining power in negotiations, and whether
or not they decide to go to war. Given arming decisions (taken in sub-period t.1) and given the
occurrence or non-occurrence of war (decided in sub-period t.2), agents optimally trade, produce,
and consume (in sub-period t.3). To solve the game, we need to derive optimal arming and war
decisions in every period. This is complicated, since it depends on dynamic calculations about
future behaviour in both countries. We therefore proceed in steps, as follows.
      In Section 3.1, we begin by deriving equilibrium consumption, determined in sub-period t.3,
given arming decisions and given the occurrence or non-occurrence of war (determined in the
previous two sub-periods). Next, we turn to optimal war decisions, given arming decisions in the
previous sub-period. Finally, we consider optimal arming decisions.
      In order to decide whether to go to war or not, planners need to compare payo↵s with and
without war. These payo↵s depend both on consumption and on the share of the pie. Payo↵s with
war are relatively easy to find, since: the war determines who will get the pie in all subsequent
periods; the war means that there will be no future wars, and that optimal arming will be zero
in subsequent periods; and we have already determined optimal consumption given arming and
war decisions in Section 3.1. We present these payo↵s, for given arming decisions in the previous
sub-period, in Section 3.2. Payo↵s without war are harder to calculate, as they depend on
future arming and war decisions, which are themselves part of the equilibrium to be determined.
We proceed in several steps: the remainder of Section 3 establishes some essential preliminary
findings, before our main results are established in Section 4.12
      In a first step, in Section 3.3, we derive optimal arming in a period when there is war. This
arming decision is important for two reasons. First, it allows us to completely specify payo↵s
if there is a war, given the results in Section 3.2. Second, it turns out that arming decisions
with peace from period 2 onwards are the same as if there were war.13 Having derived this
 12
      A formal proof of our results is contained in Online Appendix B.
 13
      This will be established in Section 3.6.


                                                       14
optimal arming decision, we can now track the evolution of relative power over time (Section
3.4). In a third step, in Section 3.5, we impose restrictions on the parameter space to rule out
an uninteresting case in which war must always occur. This case arises because of the channel
identified by Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2000): by going to war now, countries can save on future
military expenditure. This channel implies that, if the cost of war  is low enough, the e↵ective
cost of war may be negative (that is, war may be welfare increasing), in which case war must
occur. In order to focus on our own channel, this possibility will be ruled out by assuming     ̂,
where ̂ is a threshold cost of war between zero and one. In a fourth step, in Section 3.6, we
present a lemma (Lemma 3) showing that, in the remaining parameter space, if there is no war
in period 1, war will never occur, but that (as previously mentioned) countries will continue to
arm in every period as if there were war.
   Lemma 3 gives us everything we need to calculate payo↵s without war in period 1, given period
1 arming decisions, while Sections 3.1-3.3 give us everything we need to calculate payo↵s with
war in period 1, again taking that period’s arming decisions as given. In Section 4, therefore, we
can finally turn to optimal war decisions in period 1, by comparing the payo↵s with and without
war (taking arming decisions in period 1 as given). Finally, we complete the derivation of the
equilibrium by calculating optimal arming decisions in period 1. Because our goal is to show
that war may occur, to simplify the analysis we focus on the case in which the e↵ective cost of
war is close to zero ( is close to ̂).


3.1    Equilibrium consumption given arming and war decisions

The payo↵s of both L and F depend in part on their consumption of the final good. It is
therefore useful to begin by showing how equilibrium consumption in t.3 depends on war and
arming decisions, taken in t.2 and t.1 respectively.
   Suppose that, at time t, war has not yet occurred (Wt = 0). If no war is started in t.2
(wt = 0), international trade is not disrupted. Given abundance of x in the world as a whole,
endowments of y must be fully utilised in equilibrium. Then, in F , ytF   xFt units of raw materials
must be imported at a price of ⌘. Balanced trade requires that F export iFt units of the final



                                                15
good, where iFt , the net consumption cost of imports, is given by


                                            iFt = ⌘ ytF      xFt .


       At least iFt of the final good must be produced, and arming decisions, aFt , must have taken
this into account: it must be the case that cFt aFt  ytF              iFt .14 Given arming decisions, resource
utilisation by the army is


                                              (ytF )a = cFt aFt

                                              (xFt )a = cFt aFt ,


and resource utilisation in the production of the final good,


                                           (ytF )z = ytF     cFt aFt

                                           (xFt )z = ytF     cFt aFt .


It follows that consumption of the final good is


                                          ztF = ytF    iFt    cFt aFt .


       Turning now to L, there are two cases. If ytL > xLt , then ytL          xLt units of raw materials must
be imported, at a cost ⌘ ytL        xLt . If ytL  xLt , instead, L is abundant in raw materials, and
will export xLt      ytL units to either F or C. This raises L’s consumption of the final good by
⌘ xLt      ytL . It follows that the net consumption cost to L of its trade in raw materials is


                                            iLt = ⌘ ytL      xLt ,                                         (7)
  14
   Any attempt to produce ✏ more units of army than ytF iF t would reduce the overall size of the army, as it
would reduce by ✏/⌘ ✏ 0 the units of raw materials available to the army.




                                                      16
and that L’s consumption of the final good is


                                              ztL = ytL    iLt      cLt aLt .                                     (8)


Suppose next that a war has been started in t.2 (wt = 1). If B = 0 (L does not have the
capacity to blockade), the war does not lead to any trade disruption. Then, consumption by
both countries is still as above. If B = 1, F ’s imports are constrained to be zero. Given arming
decisions, resource utilisation by the army is as above, while in the production of the final good
we have


                                               (ytF )z = xFt       cFt aFt

                                              (xFt )z = xFt        cFt aFt .


    Note that, if B = 1, the maximum amount of raw materials available to F ’s army in times of
war is xFt . But since the army is only actually used in times of war, arming decisions must have
taken this constraint into account: it must be the case that cFt aFt  xFt . This implies that, in
this simple model, the loss of trade associated with a blockade only hits production of the final
good. In other words, the blockade only constrains the planned size of the army, rather than
the extent to which this plan is implemented.15 Because blockades therefore hit production and
consumption of the final good, it is easy to derive an expression for the gains from trade for F ,
which are the same as F ’s consumption loss in case of a blockade:16 they are


                                            gtF = (1      ⌘) ytF        xFt .                                     (9)
  15
     If cF  F     F
         t at  xt , there is always enough domestic raw materials to implement the planned size of the army.
Note that the army may still rely on imports if there is no war (the model does not pin down the allocation of
imported products), in which case war would result in a reallocation of domestic raw materials to military use.
  16
     Gains from trade are easy to derive in this case, because the planned size of the army can be implemented
even if imports are forced to be zero. It is then easy to quantify the loss of welfare associated with the suppression
of foreign trade: it is simply equal to the loss of consumption of the final good. If instead the planned size of the
army relied on imports, as might for example be the case if raw materials and industrial inputs were substitutes
in the production of armies, their loss would result not only in a lower consumption of the final good, but also in
a smaller army. The e↵ect of the latter would depend on the political equilibrium, making the gains from trade
much harder to calculate.




                                                          17
    Putting together the various cases considered so far, F ’s consumption of the final good can
be written as


                                     ztF = ytF   iFt    Bwt gtF       cFt aFt .                                         (10)


    Turning now to L, even if there is a blockade it can still trade with C. It follows that the net
consumption cost of L’s trade in raw materials is still iLt , and L’s consumption of z can still be
written as in (8).
    Finally, consider the case in which war has already occurred (Wt = 1). Because war and
blockades cannot occur anymore, endowments of y must be fully utilised in period t. Consump-
tion of the final good can still be written as in eq. (8) and (10), with wt = 0. Thus, these two
expressions denote equilibrium consumption in all cases.


3.2        Payo↵s with war

Suppose again that war has not yet occurred in period t. We now derive payo↵s if a country
starts a war, taking arming decisions in the previous sub-period as given. To begin with, note
that war may occur at most once. Then, if a war occurs in one period, we would expect that
arming will be set to zero in all subsequent periods. This intuition is confirmed by

                                                                                           ⇤                     ⇤
Lemma 1. In a SPNE, in any t > 1, if war has already occurred, aLs                             = 0 and aFs           = 0 for
s     t.

Proof. Take any t > 1, and suppose Wt = 1. Substituting (8) and (10) into (6), we see that, in
a SPNE, arming decisions must satisfy
                                 "                           1
                                                                                  !                    #
                    ⇤
                                                             X
                aJt     = arg max YtJ    ItJ     cJt aJt +           s t J J
                                                                        c s as        + WtJ ⇧(1      ) .
                                                             s=t+1


                                                                                                ⇤           ⇤
Since aJt only enters the maximands negatively, the solution is clearly aLt                         = aFt       = 0.

    We are now ready to derive the payo↵s if a country starts a war. Let these be denoted by



                                                       18
VtJ wt = 1|aLt , aFt . Using (8) and (10), together with Lemma 1, we can find ZtJ (wt = 1). Then,

                                                                                aLt
        VtL wt = 1|aLt , aFt = ytL   iLt   cLt aLt +        L
                                                          Yt+1      L
                                                                   It+1 +             ⇧t (1 )            (11)
                                                                            aLt + aFt
                                                                                         aF
       VtF wt = 1|aLt , aFt = ytF    iFt   BgtF        cFt aFt +     F
                                                                   Yt+1      F
                                                                            It+1    + L t F ⇧t (1   ).   (12)
                                                                                      at + at

       As discussed above, war implies destruction (the size of ⇧t is decreased by ) and possibly
trade disruption (if B = 1, F ’s consumption is decreased by gtF ). However, it also gives the
winner control of the contested resource for the rest of time (⇧t ), and creates a peaceful world
in which no further consumption is sacrificed to wasteful arming (no cJs aJs is subtracted from
payo↵s in any period s > t).
       Note that eq. (11) and (12) give payo↵s from war, taking arming decisions in the previous
sub-period as given. We still have to derive payo↵s from peace, taking arming decisions as given;
and derive optimal arming decisions. It is however convenient to first derive optimal arming
decisions in a period when there is war.


3.3       Optimal arming in a period when there is war

Consider any period t such that, in sub-period t.2, one country starts a war. If the occurrence of
war was exogenously given, then arming decisions in t.1 would be extremely simple: anticipating
the exogenous coming of war, countries would, in equilibrium, choose aLt and aFt that simulta-
neously maximise (11) and (12), subject to the relevant constraints. In reality, of course, the
occurrence of war in t.2 is endogenous to arming decisions in t.1. However, we show in Online
Appendix B that if, in a SPNE, war occurs in period t, then optimal arming levels must be
precisely those that simultaneously maximise (11) and (12). Indeed, those arming levels turn
out to be selected even in periods when there is peace.17 In what follows we therefore derive
those arming levels.
       When selecting aLt and aFt that simultaneously maximise (11) and (12), countries face the two
types of constraints discussed in Section 3.1. First, armies cannot use more than the available
  17
    Section 3.6 shows that this is the case from period 2 onwards, while Section 4 shows that, in the case that
we focus on, this is also true in period 1.


                                                          19
                                        aLt                  aFt (aLt )

                                                                 A
                                               B             •               aLt (aFt )
                                                   •




                                              xFt /cFt                     aFt


                              Figure 1: Best response functions, case cLt < cFt .


endowment of the industrial input, cJt aJt  ytJ                      iJt . Second, if B = 1, F ’s army cannot use
more than the domestic endowment of raw materials, cFt aFt  xFt . To simplify, we assume that
the former constraint is not binding.18 That allows us to consider the impact of the second
constraint.
      Suppose first that not even the second constraint is binding. We are then looking for aLt and aFt
that simultaneously maximise (11) and (12), subject to no constraint. Set @VtJ wt = 1|aLt , aFt /@aJt =
0 for J 2 {L, F }, then solve for aJt as a function of at J . This yields the best response functions

                                                                            1
                                                    ⇧t (1 ) F               2
                                       aLt (aFt )
                                                =           at                    aFt
                                                        cLt
                                                                            1

                                        F   L       ⇧t (1 ) L               2
                                       at (at ) =           at                    aLt ,
                                                        cFt

which are plotted in Figure 1 (drawn for the case cLt < cFt ). Solving them together yields the
unconstrained optimum,

                                             w,u                            cFt
                                         aLt           = ⇧t (1        ) L                                     (13)
                                                                        (ct + cFt )2
                                                w,u                         cL
                                         aFt           = ⇧t (1        ) L t F 2 ,                             (14)
                                                                        (ct + ct )
 18
      This and all other assumptions will be satisfied in the numerical examples that we consider in Online Appendix
C.



                                                                 20
which is represented by point A in the figure. Investment in arming increases in both countries if
the net pie becomes bigger, or if the cost of arming falls proportionately everywhere. In addition,
the country with the lower cost of arming (L in the case of Figure 1) invests relatively more. At
the unconstrained optimum, relative military power can be written as qtF = cLt /(cLt + cFt ), or

                                                         w,u            ytF
                                                   qtF           =             .                                        (15)
                                                                     ytL + ytF

In words, F is relatively more powerful, the larger is its economy relative to L’s.
       Next, suppose that the constraint cFt aFt  xFt is binding: in other words, B = 1, and
          w,u
cFt aFt         > xFt . Optimal arming is then

                                                                              1
                                           w,c        ⇧t (1 ) xFt             2
                                                                                          xFt
                                       aLt         =                                                                    (16)
                                                          cLt  cFt                        cFt
                                             w,c     xF
                                       aFt         = Ft ,                                                               (17)
                                                     ct

and is represented by point B in the figure.19 At the constrained optimum, relative military
                            w,c  ⇥                       ⇤1
power can be written as qtF     = cLt /⇧t (1 ) xFt /cFt 2 , or

                                                             ✓                     ◆ 12
                                             w,c                     xFt  ytF
                                         qtF         =                                    .                             (18)
                                                                 ⇧t (1 ) ytL

In words, F ’s relative power is now constrained by domestic availability of raw materials, xFt . It
is still increasing in the relative development of F ’s economy, however, as this determines how
efficient F ’s army is in using available raw materials.
       In what follows, we assume that, if L has the capacity to blockade (B = 1), F is always
                                                                                                w,u
constrained by its domestic endowment of raw materials (cFt aFt                                       > xFt ). Then, optimal
  19
    To see that B is a Nash equilibrium, note that L is on its best response function; as for F , it is at its
maximum allowed investment level, and below its unconstrained optimum: given that, as it is easy to show,
VtF wt = 1|aL      F
              t , at is strictly concave in aF
                                             t , this must be F ’s best response. A similar logic can be used in the
      L    F
case ct   ct .




                                                                  21
arming levels are
                                                       8
                                                       < aJ       w,u
                                                                          if B = 0
                                              w           t
                                          aJt        =                                   ,                                 (19)
                                                       : aJ       w,c
                                                                          if B = 1
                                                             t


             w              w
with qtJ         and mJt         similarly defined.20
       Let VtJ (wt = 1) denote payo↵s in a period where countries go to war. Putting together the
results of this and the previous section, we can write

                                                                                w            w
                                    VtL (wt = 1) ⌘ VtL wt = 1| aLt                  , aFt                                  (20)
                                                                                w            w
                                    VtF (wt = 1) ⌘ VtF wt = 1| aLt                  , aFt            .                     (21)


3.4       Evolution of relative military power
                                                       w
How does relative military power, qtF                      evolve over time? Suppose first that B = 0. The
                      w
evolution of      qtF     can be found by writing the RHS of (15) as a function of parameters in each
period, as we do in Appendix A. It is represented in the left-hand panel of Figure 2. F ’s relative
power increases between period 1 and period 2, as F catches up on L. It remains constant from
period 2 onwards, when both countries grow at steady state rate.


                                                                                                                 (↵/↵ < / )

                                                                                                                 (↵/↵ = / )

                                                                                                                 (↵/↵ > / )
             1      2        3        4      5        t               1    2         3           4       5   t

                                Case B = 0                                            Case B = 1
                                                                            w
                                     Figure 2: Evolution of qtF                 over time.

                                                 w
       If B = 1, the evolution of qtF                can be found by writing the RHS of (18) as a function
  20                                  w          w           w                                                         w
    In Appendix A, we write aJt , qtJ     and mJt     as functions of parameters. In steady state, aJt                     grows
               J w                                                              w
at a rate 2 , mt   at a rate (so that it is a constant share of GDP), and qtF      is constant.


                                                                 22
of parameters, and is represented in the figure’s right-hand side panel. There are now three
cases, depending on how F ’s speed of catching up compares with the speed with which, during
structural transformation, it becomes more dependent on imported raw materials. If F catches
up faster than it becomes more import-dependent (↵/↵ > / ), then its relative power increases
between periods 1 and 2. However, at lower speeds of catching up (↵/↵ < / ), F ’s relative
power decreases. Intuitively, even though F becomes more efficient at arming, its increased
dependence on imported raw materials that are subject to blockade has a stronger, negative
e↵ect on its capacity to arm. In the knife edge case in which ↵/↵ =                      /   F ’s relative power
remains constant between periods 1 and 2.21


3.5       Ruling out welfare-increasing war

There are two distinct reasons why war may occur in this model. The first is the one highlighted
by Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2000). As these authors pointed out, a desirable feature of war
is that, by permanently allocating the pie to the winner, it removes the need to arm in future
periods. In contrast, so long as there is peace, there is a pie that needs to be allocated in
every period, and this forces countries to arm so as to strengthen their position in negotiations.
Because arming is costly, this e↵ect makes war more attractive for both countries. Indeed, if
it is strong enough, war becomes welfare increasing, as the joint payo↵ of the two countries is
higher with war than without. When this is the case, negotiations can never succeed, since the
maximum that one country is willing to o↵er is less than the minimum that the other is willing
to accept. War must then always occur.
       In this paper, we want to focus on a second channel, in which war may occur as the result of
trade-related shifts in relative power. We therefore want to rule out the case in which, because
  21
     Allowing raw materials and the industrial input to be substitutes in production would imply that, when
blockaded, F could choose more y-intensive ways of producing both the final good and the army. As mentioned
above (footnote 16), this would make it possible for it to choose an army that in peacetime would be produced
with more raw materials than allowed for by domestic endowments alone. The possibility of substituting between
the two inputs would alleviate the e↵ect of a blockade on relative power, but would not fully eliminate it (provided
that raw materials and the industrial input are not perfect substitutes) given that F would still have to choose a
sub-optimal vector of inputs. Because, in F , raw materials become relatively scarcer between period 1 and period
2, this country would find it increasingly hard to make up for lost imports by substituting y for x: we would then
find that, for some parameter values, F would still become weaker between periods 1 and 2, which is what the
central result of this paper hinges on.


                                                        23
of a high future cost of arming, war must always occur. As it turns out, this can be done by
ruling out very low values of , the exogenous cost of war. When  is low, war is likely to be
welfare increasing for two reasons. On the one hand, a low  means that the war has limited
destructive e↵ects. On the other hand, this implies that, in negotiations, the outside option of
going to war is valuable: in turn, this induces countries to invest a lot in arming until there is
war, in order to strengthen their position in negotiations. Indeed, given

Assumption 1.         1
                          2 > B (1       ⌘) ↵         ,

(an assumption that we further comment on in footnote 22) the following lemma establishes that
war must occur immediately if  is sufficiently low, for any value of the parameters:

Lemma 2. There exists ̂ 2 (0, 1) such that, if  < ̂, in the unique balanced growth path SPNE,
war is welfare increasing, and always occurs in period 1.

Proof. In Online Appendix B.

       The threshold ̂ is such that, in period 1, the “e↵ective” cost of war - that is, the cost of war
net of savings related to the future cost of arming - is zero if  = ̂. Intuitively, the fact that
there is now a benefit from going to war pushes up the zero cost-of-war threshold, relative to a
model with no costly arming where the threshold would be at  = 0.22
       To focus on our own channel, we impose

Assumption 2.            ̂.

Given Assumption 2, the rest of the paper focuses on the case in which, in equilibrium, war is
welfare decreasing, or its e↵ective cost is positive. As we show below, war will then only occur
in the presence of shifts in relative power. Since such shifts will only occur between periods 1
and 2, this will imply that war can only occur in period 1.23
  22
      If B = 1, war has an additional cost, due to the fact that trade disruption occurs immediately, as opposed
to at some future date. If this cost is large, the e↵ective cost of war is negative for  = 0, and the threshold ̂
is negative. The role of Assumption 1 is to rule out this case, by requiring that the discount rate be high (and
that therefore the cost from anticipating trade disruption be low). It is desirable for the model to feature ̂ > 0,
since, as further explained below, this allows us to consider the case in which the e↵ective cost of war is close to
zero ( ! ̂ from above).
   23
      Assumption 2 implies that the future cost of arming will not on its own eliminate the bargaining range. On
the other hand, in period 1, when war remains possible because of shifts in relative power, the future cost of
arming will still be a determinant of the size of the bargaining range, as we will see below (see eq. 28).

                                                          24
3.6       Subgame starting in period 2

Before proceeding further, we introduce

Assumption 3.             ↵   B (1   ⌘) ↵        .

       Assumption 3 only poses a restriction on parameters if B = 1. It requires F ’s economy to be
large, relative to its gains from trade. The assumption is needed in order to ensure the existence
of a balanced growth path SPNE of the game.24
       The following lemma describes the SPNE of the subgame starting in period 2. For conciseness,
we only present the equilibrium path. The full description of the equilibrium is presented in Online
Appendix B.

Lemma 3. Suppose war does not occur in period 1. In the unique balanced growth path SPNE
of the subgame that starts in period 2, war never occurs. For all t            2,

                     w                   w
       • aLt = aLt       and aFt = aFt       .

       • Negotiators agree on an allocation of the pie that leaves F exactly as well o↵ as with war.


Proof. In Online Appendix B.

       If war is avoided in period 1, it does not occur anymore. Intuitively, negotiations can only
fail if one country expects to become relatively weaker over time: the impossibility to commit
to a future sharing of the pie can lead to a situation in which any o↵er is not good enough for
this country. However, from period 2 onwards, the economies of L and F grow at the same rate.
Then, their arming technology gets better at the same rate, and no shift in the balance of power
is expected (see Figure 2). This is enough to ensure that the minimum share F must be o↵ered
is less than the entire current pie, and that the maximum share L is willing to o↵er is greater
than zero. Negotiations must then succeed in every period.
  24
     As stated in Lemma 3 below, in the unique equilibrium, F ’s payo↵ is equal to its payo↵ from going to war,
and F arms so as to maximise this payo↵. By requiring that the trade cost of war be moderate, Assumption 3
ensures that this payo↵ be positive: if it were negative, F would choose not to arm, and the equilibrium would
collapse. Full details are provided in the proof to Lemma 7 in Online Appendix B (which is referred to by the
proof to Lemma 3)


                                                      25
       Note that arming decisions with peace are the same as if there were war. This is because,
in equilibrium, countries receive a payo↵ which is equal to their outside options, plus a share
(which is one for L, and zero for F ) of the surplus from not going to war. Since the outside
options are payo↵s with war, and neither the surplus nor the way it is shared depend on current
arming levels,25 countries arm so as to maximise their payo↵s with war. Given that equilibrium
                  w
arming is aJt         , military expenditure is in both countries a constant share of GDP.
       Also, note that F is o↵ered (and accepts) a share of the pie such that the entire surplus from
not going to war is captured by L in every period. Intuitively, by moving first, L can o↵er F the
minimum it requires for not starting a war, and keep the rest of the surplus for itself.



4        Equilibrium
We finally turn to optimal decisions in period 1. We proceed in two steps. First we determine
whether or not the two countries will go to war, taken arming decisions in period 1 as given.
Next, we determine optimal arming decisions, allowing us to solve for the full equilibrium of the
model, and to determine whether there will be war or not.
       Payo↵s with war were derived in (11)-(12) and Section 3.3. Payo↵s without war, given period
1 arming decisions, can be derived using Lemma 3. According to the lemma, if war does not
occur in period 1, it does not occur anymore. Furthermore, in period 2, F ’s payo↵ is driven down
to its payo↵ from going to war. It follows that F ’s payo↵ with no war is equal to its current
payo↵ in period 1, plus the discounted value of its payo↵ from going to war in period 2. Next,
note that, if F is driven down to its war-time payo↵, then L’s payo↵ in period 2 must be equal to
its payo↵ from going to war, plus the entire surplus from permanently avoiding war from period
  25
     As shown in the proof to Lemma 3, and to Lemma 7 in Online Appendix B, the surplus from not going to
war depends on future, not current arming levels. As for the way it is shared, provided that the bargaining range
is entirely included in the interval [0, 1] (which is ensured by Assumption 3), this only depends on the structure of
negotiations. So, we could have assumed a di↵erent structure (for example, we could have assumed that countries
bargain à la Nash), and the first point of Lemma 3 would be unchanged.




                                                         26
2 onwards. Payo↵s without war can then be written as
                                                                                    
                                                                                                                             (m3 )w
  V1L    w1 =   0|aL1 , aF1     =   y1L    iL1         cL1 aL1   +   sL1 ⇡1   +         V2L   (w2 = 1) + ⇧2                        + Bg2F       (22)
                                                                                                                            1
 V1F w1 = 0|aL1 , aF1 = y1F                iF1         cF1 aF1 + sF1 ⇡1 + V2F (w2 = 1).                                                          (23)


   The surplus from avoiding war from period 2 onwards is made up of the last three terms in eq.
(22). First, there is a positive term, ⇧2 , which captures the fact that the destruction associated
with war is permanently avoided. Second, a negative term captures the fact that, contrary to
what would happen if there was a war in period 2, countries must pay for military expenditures
not only in period 2 (which cost is included in V2F (w2 = 1)), but also in all subsequent periods.
Considering military expenditure in both countries, this carries a combined cost (m3 )w in the
next period (3), which then grows (in discounted value terms) at a constant rate                                                    in subsequent
periods. Finally, a further benefit of never going to war is that the trade disruption implied by
war is avoided. This is captured by the term Bg2F . Although such trade costs are born by F , a
higher trade cost of war actually increases L’s payo↵ in equilibrium, since it makes F ’s outside
option less attractive and thus weakens its position in negotiations.
   We can now proceed using backward induction. Suppose L’s negotiators have o↵ered F a
share sF1 of the pie. When does F accept? To answer this question, let sF1 aL1 , aF1 be the share
that leaves F indi↵erent between accepting or not. Clearly, then, sF1 aL1 , aF1 is also the minimum
share that F is willing to accept. It is given by


        sF1 aL1 , aF1 = args1F V1F w1 = 0|aL1 , aF1 = V1F w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1

                       = argsF1 y1F              iL1       cF1 aF1 + sF1 ⇡1 + V2F (w2 = 1) = V1F w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1                            .


Using (12) and re-arranging, the threshold can be re-written as
                                                                                
                                              aF                                          w           aF1          ⇧2
                     sF1      aL1 , aF1   = F 1 L (1                   )           q2F                               (1       )
                                           a1 + a1                                                aF1 + aL1        ⇡1
                                                                                              w
                                                                                    mF2                g2F        g1F
                                                                            +                     +B                    .                        (24)
                                                                                    ⇡1                       ⇡1



                                                                              27
     Eq. (24) is an important equation that we comment on in detail below. Before doing that,
however, we also derive the share that leaves L indi↵erent between making an o↵er that gets
accepted and starting a war. This is given by args1F V1L w1 = 0|aL1 , aF1 = V1L w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1                             ,
or
         ⇢                                              
                                                                                      (m3 )w
argsL1       y1L       iL1   cL1 aL1   +   sL1 ⇡1   +       V2L   (w2 = 1) + ⇧2             + Bg2F = V1L w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1       ,
                                                                                     1

which, using (11) and re-arranging, can be written as

                                                                                   ⌘K1
                                                                      z
                                                                                }|          {
                                                                    1           (m2 )w
                                             sF1 aL1 , aF1        +    ⇧1             + Bg1F .                        (25)
                                                                    ⇡1         1

This is the maximum share that L is willing to o↵er (provided it expects its o↵er to be accepted).
     The di↵erence between the minimum share that F is willing to accept and the maximum share
that L is willing to o↵er must be equal to the surplus from striking an agreement. Given that,
if countries strike an agreement in period 1, war will never occur (Lemma 3), this surplus must
be equal to the surplus from permanently avoiding war from period 1 onwards. Indeed, this is
what we see in equation (25) (note that, compared to the expression for the previously discussed
surplus from avoiding war from period 2 onwards, all subscripts are one period earlier). Again,
the surplus from permanently avoiding war is made up of the gain from avoiding destruction
and trade disruption in perpetuity, but there is also a cost due to the fact that both countries
must continue to arm in all subsequent periods. We denote this gain by K1 in what follows. As
explained in Section 3.5, the threshold ̂ is such that K1 = 0 if and only if  = ̂.
     Because K1               0 in our range of parameters, war is welfare reducing. Then, one might expect
that negotiators should be able to avoid war. This however does not need to be the case. Lack
of commitment explains this inefficiency: since negotiators cannot commit to future agreements,
they may be unable to o↵er enough to a country whose war prospects are better today than
tomorrow. To gain some intuition, consider equation (24). If F expects to become weaker over
                   w                                                                                                         w
time ( q2F             < aF1 /(aL1 + aF1 )), or if the cost of arming for one more period is very high ( mF2
is high), or if the trade cost of war increases over time (g1F < g2F ), then F may require more


                                                                          28
than the entire current pie to be induced not to start a war (sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 1). Since negotiators
cannot allocate future pies, they cannot avoid war. Similarly, from (25), if L expects to become
weaker over time, or expects that the future cost of arming will be high, not even the possibility
of keeping the entire pie for itself will be enough to prevent it from going to war.26

                       sF1 aL1 , aF1


                                                 1


                    F -led war                                  L-led war

                                                                           w
                                                 0                   q2F       aF1 /(aL1 + aF1 )

                                                     K1

                                       Figure 3: Welfare reducing war.


       Figure 3 plots the minimum share that F must be o↵ered (the solid downward sloping line)
alongside the maximum share that L is willing to o↵er (the dashed downward sloping line), as
a function of the rise in F ’s military power. The solid thick line represents the outcome of
successful negotiations (i.e. negotiations that avoid war). If sF1 aL1 , aF1 2 [0, 1], the best L can
do is to o↵er exactly sF1 aL1 , aF1 : by definition, that is both sufficient to avoid war, and the
cheapest way to do so. But what if sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 1, or sF1 aL1 , aF1 < 0? In the first case, the
best L can do is to o↵er 1. This, however, is not sufficient to avoid war, which must then occur.
In the second case, the best L can do is to o↵er 0. This is more than what L would ideally like
to o↵er, but it is sufficient to avoid war, and the cheapest feasible way to do so. But does L
want to make such an o↵er? Clearly, it does so if sF1 aL1 , aF1                K1 , since then the maximum
that L is willing to o↵er (eq. 25) is more than 0. Otherwise, this country prefers to start a war
than to o↵er anything.
       We next introduce the following:
  26
    As anticipated in Section 3.5, the future cost of arming is a determinant of the size of the bargaining range:
                w                                                                       w
a higher mF 2     increases the minimum that F must be o↵ered, while a higher mL     2    decreases the maximum
that L is willing to o↵er.


                                                          29
Definition 2. A J-led war is a war that takes place when there exists a peaceful partition that
would induce             J to prefer peace to war, but J prefers war to such a partition.

       Applying this definition to the case just discussed, it is evident that there is a F -led war in
period 1 if and only if sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 1, and there is an L-led war if and only if sF1 aL1 , aF1 <
  K1 .27
       Having found how war decisions depend on sF1 aL1 , aF1 , we move back one sub-period and
examine the arming decisions that determine this threshold. These must simultaneously satisfy

                                                     ⇤
                                               aL1       = arg max        V1L aL1 , aF1                                (26)
                                                              cF  F   F
                                                               1 a1 x1

                                                     ⇤
                                              aF1        = arg max        V1F aL1 , aF1 ,                              (27)
                                                              cF  F   F
                                                               1 a1 x1



where
                                                           8
                                                           >
                                                           > 0                      if sF1    aL1 , aF1 > 1
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           < K                      if sF1    aL1 , aF1 2 [0, 1]
                                                               1
       V1L   aL1 , aF1   =   V1L   w1 =   1|aL1 , aF1    +
                                                           >
                                                           > K1 + sF1 aL1 , aF1 ⇡1 if sF1     aL1 , aF1 2 [ K1 , 0)
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           : 0                      if sF1    aL1 , aF1 <     K1
                                                           8
                                                           >
                                                           > 0                     if sF1    aL1 , aF1 > 1
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           < 0                     if sF1    aL1 , aF1 2 [0, 1]
       V1F aL1 , aF1 = V1F w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1              +                                                             .
                                                           >
                                                           >   sF1 aL1 , aF1 ⇡1    if sF1    aL1 , aF1   2 [ K1 , 0)
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           >
                                                           : 0                     if sF1    aL1 , aF1 <      K1

       The above maximands have an intuitive interpretation. If arming decisions are such that
sF1 aL1 , aF1 is either greater than 1 or smaller than                     K1 , then a war occurs, and both countries
obtain their payo↵s with war. If this minimum share lies between zero and one, then war is
  27
     We prefer to characterise a war based on Definition 2, and not based on who starts the war, because the latter
approach depends on the specific tie-breaking rule used, while the former approach does not. When deriving the
full equilibrium in Online Appendix B, we show that, under reasonable tie-breaking rules, if there is a J-led war,
this is always started by J. These rules can be summarised as follows: given equal wartime and peacetime payo↵s,
a country prefers not to start a war. Note that, had we assumed the opposite, both an L-led war and an F -led
war would be started by L, the country who moves first. More details are provided in the proofs to Propositions
1 and 2.


                                                                  30
avoided, and L can o↵er the minimum that F is willing to accept. It follows that F is driven
down to its war payo↵, while L reaps the entire gain from not going to war, K1 . Finally, if the
minimum share is just below zero, then war is avoided, but L must o↵er more than the minimum.
Relative to the previous case, F ’s payo↵ must be higher, and L’s payo↵ lower (note that the
term sF1 aL1 , aF1 ⇡1 is negative in this range).
       What armies will countries have in equilibrium, and will this lead to war? To provide a
general answer to this question would require maximising the expressions in (26) and (27), two
complicated functions of aL1 and aF1 . Here, we adopt a simpler approach: instead of looking at the
entire range  2 [̂, 1], we focus on the case in which  is close enough to ̂. This is enough for our
purposes: to show that a welfare reducing war can occur, it is enough to show that it can occur
if its e↵ective cost is small enough (but still positive).28 This approach simplifies the problem
in (26) and (27), since the V1J aL1 , aF1 for both countries converge to V1J w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1 . The
                        ⇤              w             ⇤              w
solution is aL1             = aL1          and aF1       = aF1          , implying that the minimum share F must be
o↵ered converges to

                                                           Additional military expenditure
                                                                   z        }| {
                                                                                w
            ⇥       w                  w ⇤ ⇧1                               mF2                            g2F    g1F
                q1F              q2F          (1     ̂)           +                                +B                           .       (28)
                                           ⇡1                                ⇡1                          ⇡
            |                    {z                    }                                            |  {z 1          }
                        Shift in relative power                                              Increase in the trade cost of war


       From the previous discussion, we know that an L-led war occurs if and only if the above share
is smaller than             K1 , and an F -led war occurs if and only if it is greater than one. However, for
 close enough to ̂, K1 is close to zero. So, what we have to check is whether or not the above
                                                                                                                                 w           w
share is smaller than 0 or greater than 1. All have we to do, then, is to write q1F                                                  , q2F       ,
     w
 mF2 ,     g1F and g2F as functions of the fundamental parameters of the model, and examine the
value of the resulting expression. We separately consider the case in which L does not have the
capacity to blockade (B = 0), and the case when it does (B = 1). Again, we only report here
the (period 1) equilibrium path, while the full description of the equilibrium is contained in the
proofs.
  28                                                                                                      w
    As already mentioned, K1 = 0 if and only if  = ̂. Furthermore, since (m2 )                              is decreasing in , K1 is
increasing in .



                                                                       31
     Suppose L does not have the capacity to blockade. The results we obtain are reported in

                                                     ⇤            w                   ⇤              w
Proposition 1. Suppose  ! ̂. Then, aL1                 = aL1        and aF1             = aF1          . If L does not have
the capacity to blockade, there cannot be a F -led war. There is an L-led war if and only if
                                                     ✓            ◆2
                                        ↵                  ↵
                                                                       < 0.                                             (29)
                                       1+↵                1+↵




Proof. In Online Appendix B.

     If L does not have the capacity to blockade, F ’s military power increases as it catches up
                                                              w                   w
to the leader (see Figure 2). Then, the term q1F                            q2F           in eq. (28) can be negative.
If this shift in relative power is large enough, this may make sFt aL1 , aF1                             negative, leading to
an L-led war. The condition for this to happen is presented in condition (29). The expression
is true if F catches up fast enough, that is if ↵ is large relative to ↵. Proposition 1 is simply
the well-known result that an industrial leader may find it optimal to start a pre-emptive war
against a catching-up follower. Intuitively, catching up will make the follower more powerful in
the future (q2F > q1F ), and the follower cannot commit not to use this augmented power against
the leader. In these circumstances, L may want to start a pre-emptive war so as to defeat the
follower before it is too late. In Online Appendix C, we present two vectors of parameters which
satisfy all assumptions of the paper, and such that, if B = 0, there is, respectively, no war and a
L-led war in period 1.
     If L does have the capacity to blockade, we can obtain the results reported in

                                                 ⇤               w                ⇤              w
Proposition 2. Suppose  ! ̂. Then, aL1             = aL1           and aF1          = aF1          . If L has the capacity
to blockade, there can be both an F -led war and an L-led war. There is an F -led war if and only
if

          h       1           1
                                  i [⇧ (1 ̂)] 12                                 ↵                  ↵
                                      1
              ↵   2
                          ↵   2
                                                  +    + (1            ⌘)                                      > 1,     (30)
                                         ⇡1         ⇡1                                      ⇡1

while there is an L-led war if and only if the LHS of the above inequality is less than zero.

                                                         32
Proof. In Online Appendix B.

       If L has the capacity to blockade, an F -led war is now possible. Two channels make it
potentially attractive for F to start a war. First, there is the shift in relative power channel,
which is captured by the first term in (28), or on the LHS of (30). From Figure 2, we know that
                                                    w           w
F may now become weaker over time ( q1F                 > q2F       ): that happens when F ’s catching up is
not fast enough to make up for its increased dependence on imported raw materials, ↵/↵ < / .
In this case, the first term in (28), or on the LHS of (30), is large and positive: this may imply
that the minimum share that F is willing to accept is greater than one, making a F -led war
unavoidable. Intuitively, if faced with a large enough decline in its relative power, F may find
it optimal to go to war immediately. The second channel is the increase in the trade cost of
war channel, which is captured by the third term in (28), or on the LHS of (30). Intuitively, if
dependence on imported raw materials grows fast (so that ↵                   is much greater than ↵         ), F
faces a much higher trade cost of war in period 2 than in period 1. Anticipating that this will
make it weaker over time, by a logic similar to that of a decline in relative power, F may then
decide to start a war immediately. It turns out that, even if F ’s relative power is constant or
increasing (which, from Figure 2, is the case if ↵/↵                 / ), this second channel may still make
an F -led war unavoidable.29
       On the other hand, an L-led war may still occur: this may happen when ↵/↵ is much larger
than / . Intuitively, F ’s prodigious economic growth makes its military technology increasingly
sophisticated, and increasingly good at using scarce domestic raw materials. Then, F ’s relative
power increases fast between period 1 and period 2, making the first term in (28), or on the LHS
of (30), negative. If this e↵ect is large enough, (28), or the LHS of (30), may then be negative,
making a L-led war unavoidable.
       These results are summarised by the following:

Corollary 1. If ↵/↵  / , there is either peace or a F -led war. If ↵/↵ > / , there can be a
  29
    As explained in footnote 23, the third channel contained in eq. (28), the additional military expenditure
channel, cannot, in itself, be a cause of war. This can be seen by setting ↵/↵ = / = 1, which “shuts down”
both the shift in relative power channel and the increase in the trade cost of war channel: as shown in the proof
to Corollary 1, there can never be a war in this case. However, the additional military expenditure channel still
contributes to determining the size of the bargaining range, and may therefore matter in conjunction with the
other two channels.

                                                        33
L-led war, peace or a F -led war.

Proof. In Online Appendix B.

    In Online Appendix C, we present three vectors of parameters which satisfy all assumptions
of the paper, and such that, if B = 1, there is, respectively, no war, an F -led war, and an L-led
war in period 1.



5     Extensions
So far, we have assumed that, if L has the capacity to blockade, countries must take this initial
condition as given. In this section, we briefly consider two ways in which this assumption can
be relaxed. We begin by looking at a case in which F can attack C, and thus conquer enough
raw materials to become immune to a blockade. We then consider the possibility that L may
surrender the capacity to blockade.


5.1    Conquest of C

Suppose that, before any other event takes place, F may attack C. We assume that, if F is
indi↵erent between attacking or not, it does not attack. For simplicity, we also assume that an
attack costs nothing (or very little), and is always successful. As a result of a successful attack,
F annexes a portion of C’s territory producing no less than ↵         in raw materials in period 1,
      t 1
and         times that amount in period t > 1. In order to focus on our security of supply channel,
we assume that even if F conquers a portion of C, it must still pay for any raw materials it
imports from there, at the original price ⌘. Thus, if B = 0, F will never attack C, since it gains
nothing by doing so. However, as soon as conquered resources become part of F ’s endowment,
they become non-blockadable by L. This can give the follower a strategic incentive to attack.
    Suppose then that B = 1. The choice to attack or not is equivalent to a choice between
playing the baseline game when B = 0, or playing it when B = 1. Because F receives its wartime
payo↵ in both cases, it will attack if and only if its wartime payo↵ is higher in the former case,
than in the latter. In terms of Figure 1, it will attack if and only if its wartime payo↵ is higher


                                                 34
at point A than at point B. It is possible to show that, if F is equal in size (in terms of its
endowment of y) or larger than L, or if it is smaller, but is severely constrained in its arming
decisions, then its wartime payo↵ is higher at point A than at point B. In either case, F attacks
C. Intuitively, by attacking, F can increase its chances of winning a war against L, as well as
reduce its trade costs from such a war. This benefits F both if the war actually occurs, and if it
does not, since it increases its bargaining power in negotiations.30
       What does F ’s attack on C actually imply for bilateral relations between L and F ? Com-
paring Propositions 1 and 2, we see that the model allows for a rich set of cases. If F does not
attack, and L’s capacity to blockade remains intact, there can an F -led war, no war, or an L-led
war (Proposition 2). If it does attack, there may either be no war or an L-led war (Proposi-
tion 1). The actual impact of an attack on C thus depends on economic fundamentals. Three
possibilities seem of particular interest. First, if F ’s dependence on imported raw materials is
growing fast, but its economy is not catching up too rapidly on L’s economy, then the attack will
stave o↵ the F -led war that would otherwise have occurred. Second, if catch-up growth is rapid,
and F ’s import dependence is not growing rapidly, then the attack may trigger an L-led war,
when otherwise there would have been peace. And third, if F is growing rapidly and becoming
much more import-dependent, then the attack will transform what would otherwise have been
an F -led war into an L-led war.
       Finally, because we have assumed that an attack makes F fully self-sufficient, it can never
be the case that, after an attack, there is an F -led war. However, it is easy to imagine a more
general case in which F would first attack C, and then attack L. All is required for this is for F
to be capable of conquering only a portion of C, so that the raw materials that it can grab from
C are not enough to make it fully self-sufficient. In this case its dependence on imported raw
materials may still grow fast enough during structural transformation for it to attack the leader.
However, it may well make sense for F to first attack C, so as to increase the probability that it
  30
    Perhaps surprisingly, F ’s wartime payo↵ is not always higher at point A than at point B. F ’s arming decision
at point A is optimal given L’s arming decision. This does not rule out the possibility that if both countries
choose di↵erent arming levels (e.g. those at point B), F ’s payo↵ might be higher. It turns out that, if F is smaller
than L, and B is not too far from A, then F ’s wartime payo↵ can be higher at point B. This is because, in this
case, at point A F arms “too much” against a powerful opponent. Interestingly, then, the model admits a case
in which F chooses not to attack C in order to avoid an escalation in arming levels.



                                                         35
will defeat the leader.31


5.2     Surrendering the capacity to blockade

We again focus on the case B = 1. Suppose that, before any other event takes place, L may
decide to surrender the capacity to blockade, with immediate e↵ect. This is again a choice
between playing the baseline game when B = 1, or playing it when B = 0. The e↵ect on bilateral
relations between L and F will depend on economic fundamentals, as in the previous section.
When does L surrender to capacity to blockade? To answer this question, note that L’s payo↵
is equal to its wartime payo↵ if there is a war, and to its wartime payo↵ plus the surplus K1 if
there is no war. It is possible to show that L’s wartime payo↵ is always higher for B = 1 than for
B = 0, because its chances of winning the war are higher in the former case.32 Then, of the three
examples considered in the previous section, L will only consider surrendering the capacity to
blockade in the first, when F ’s import dependence is growing fast but its economy is not growing
too rapidly. In this case surrendering the capacity to blockade can stave o↵ an F -led war: L
would then have to trade o↵ the fall in its wartime payo↵ against its ability to reap the surplus
K1 from not going to war. In both other cases, the fact that F ’s economy is growing fast implies
that, if L surrenders the capacity to blockade, it will then have to start a war against F : this
cannot possibly be an optimal choice for L.



6      A brief historical discussion
Our model predicts that war can arise when a rising power finds its import dependence growing
more rapidly than it is converging on the industrial leader. In this case, its relative military
strength will be declining over time, and the follower may have an incentive to strike before it
is too late. Indeed, the rising cost to consumers of wartime blockades may give the follower an
  31
      Conquering a portion of C will move the equilibrium along the leader’s best response function in Figure 1
from B in the direction of A. As in the case when the follower is capable of conquering all of C, and the equilibrium
moves all the way to A, for many parameter values shifting the equilibrium in this way will increase the follower’s
payo↵ from war.
   32
      That is to say, contrary to what we saw for F , points A and B in Figure 1 are unambiguously ranked in L’s
preferences: B always dominates A.



                                                         36
incentive to go to war, even in circumstances when its relative power is not declining. The model
also predicts that the follower may attack resource-rich peripheral areas, in an attempt to become
more self-sufficient, or entirely self-sufficient, in raw materials. It may do so prior to launching
an attack on the leader. It may even do so in circumstances when it knows that this will provoke
an attack upon it by the leader, when otherwise the two countries would not have gone to war. If
the follower is not only becoming rapidly more import-dependent, but is also converging rapidly
on the leader, then conquering the country supplying raw materials transforms what would have
been a follower-led war into a leader-led war. In this case, while it is the leader who decides to
go to war against the follower, the root cause of the war remains the follower’s incentive to fight,
arising from its import-dependence.
   There is a substantial body of historical literature which suggests that this trade-dependence
mechanism was at work in the first half of the twentieth century, and that concerns over the
supply of imported raw materials was an important motivating factor at various points in time
for both German and Japanese military planners. In the words of Azar Gat, “the quest for
self-sufficiency in strategic war materials became a cause as well as an e↵ect of the drive for
empire, most notably in the German and Japanese cases towards and during the Second World
War” (Gat 2006, p. 556). This seems especially obvious in the Japanese case.
   To repeat: the world is much more complicated than the simple structure envisaged in our
model, or any other, and we do not argue that our mechanism can “explain” the Second World
War in some monocausal way. However, our model provides useful insights into the origins of
this war, especially in the Pacific. It is much less useful in understanding the origins of the First
World War, which lie elsewhere, but does provide insights into the Anglo-German naval rivalry
which preceded it, and which helps explain Britain’s decision to join the war once it had started.
We therefore provide a very brief account of the build-ups to the Second World War in Asia,
the Second World War in Europe, and the First World War. In each case, we indicate how the
mechanisms identified by our model are relevant in understanding the episode in question, as
well as some of the ways (certainly not all) in which reality was more complex than allowed for
in the theoretical discussion above.




                                                 37
6.1    World War II in Asia

Japan’s industrial output had been growing more rapidly than American output since 1890
(Bénétrix et al. 2015). Between 1920 and 1938, Japan’s industrial output grew at an average
of 6.7 per cent per annum, much higher than the growth rates recorded in the USA (1.2 per
cent, although that reflected the severity of the Great Depression) and UK (3 per cent) over
the same period. Rapid growth meant an increase in Japan’s relative military power, already
dramatically displayed during the Russo-Japanese war of 1904-5. This was a case where ↵/↵
was unambiguously high.
   However,    /   was also very high in interwar Japan. Japan was endowed with very few
natural resources, and rapid growth meant greater dependence on trade: by the eve of the war
Japan was producing “only 16.7 per cent of her total iron ore consumption, 62.2 per cent of
her steel consumption, 40.6 per cent of her aluminium consumption, 20.2 per cent of her crude
oil consumption, and 31.3 per cent of her salt consumption”. Japan was completely reliant
on imports for such strategic minerals as nickel and bauxite (Milward 1977, pp. 31-2). The
United States was a major supplier of several crucial materials to Japan, including oil, scrap
iron, and raw cotton (Liberman 1996, p. 169); it supplied Japan with two thirds of her oil in
1936 (Millward, op. cit.). On the other hand, if Japan managed to seize control over not only
Manchuria and China, but Southeast Asia as well, then planners estimated that she would be
self-sufficient in the major strategic commodities, aside from nickel (ibid ).
   A group of “total war” military officers became convinced that Japan would only be secure if
it was self-sufficient. “War hereafter would be protracted...and nations had to be able to supply
themselves during wartime with adequate quantities of raw materials and manufactured goods.
Reliance on other countries for the materiel of war was a sure path to defeat... The need for
security became, slowly, an impulse for empire, and it led directly to the Pacific War” (Barnhart
1987, p. 9). And so Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931, China in 1937, French Indochina in 1940,
and South East Asia more generally in 1941, the latter invasion implying direct confrontation
with the Western powers.
   Unlike what we assume in the extension to our simple model (Section 5.1), conquering China
was far from costless, and increased the need for imported raw materials from the West (Yasuba

                                                 38
1996). It also increased Western suspicion of Japan and aid to China. The US response confirmed
in the minds of Japanese planners that their basic assumption, that a reliance on trade was
dangerous for national security, was correct. In July 1940 the President was empowered to ban
the export of strategic commodities, and soon the US had banned the export of scrap iron and
steel, aviation fuel and other commodities. While in the short run Japan could live with this,
having stockpiled American raw materials since 1937, the ban on oil exports which came in July
1941 was a di↵erent matter, and was seen as a de facto declaration of war.33 The fact that
critical raw materials were now in short supply became an argument, not for restraint, but for
                                                                 F
an immediate all-out war (Ferguson 2007), since it implied that qt+1 < qtF .
      This case seems the one that best fits our model. Japan was growing relatively rapidly, and
becoming more dependent on imported raw materials, just as is true of the follower country in our
model. The European imperial powers and the United States possessed colonies which produced
vital raw materials, or (as in the case of US oil) produced those raw materials domestically. This
gave them an ability to blockade which was used by the United States in the run-up to war.
Japan’s invasions of Manchuria, China and Southeast Asia corresponded to invasions first of C,
and then of L, in our model, a possibility discussed in Section 5.1. They were motivated by a
desire for economic and strategic self-sufficiency, to be formalised via the creation of a Greater
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. This would have deprived the Western powers of the ability
to blockade Japan. But trying to achieve such self-sufficiency was a high risk gamble, since
attacking Southeast Asia required launching an attack on the Western powers, despite Japan’s
economic and military inferiority relative to America.


6.2      World War II in Europe

Again and again, Hitler returned in his speeches and writings to the need for secure supplies of
both food and raw materials. The key was the Soviet Union. As early as 1931 he told a Party
member that “Europe needs the grain, meat, the wood, the coal, the iron, and the oil from
Russia in order to be able to survive” (Overy 2009, p. 51), and shortly before the war began he
 33
   As is well known, Roosevelt had not envisaged the oil embargo as being a complete one, but the State
Department officials who implemented the embargo ensured that it became one (Iriye 1987, p. 150).



                                                  39
told a Swiss diplomat that “I need the Ukraine, so that no one will starve us out as they did in
the last war” (Hildebrand 1973, p. 88).
   In a speech to the heads of the armed forces of November 1937, Hitler stated that:
   “There was a pronounced military weakness in those States which depended for their existence
on foreign trade. As our foreign trade was carried on over the sea routes dominated by Britain,
it was more a question of security of transport than one of foreign exchange, which revealed in
time of war the full weakness of our food situation. The only remedy...lay in the acquisition of
greater living space...areas producing raw materials can be more usefully sought in Europe, in
                                                      34
immediate proximity to the Reich, than overseas...”
   Germany was extremely or entirely dependent on imports for its supplies of such strategi-
cally vital raw materials as bauxite, chromium, copper, iron, lead, nickel, oil, rubber, and zink
(Volkmann 1990, p. 246). The 1934 New Plan and 1936 Four Year Plan therefore tried to pro-
mote import substitution: in terms of our model, increasing . The annexations of Austria and
Czechoslovakia in 1938 and 1939 provided the Reich with lignite, coal, and iron ore, as well as
heavy industry (Overy 2002, pp. 197, 227), and Germany also tried to increase its economic hold
over the resources of Hungary, Bulgaria and Romania via a series of bilateral deals. Dominating
Poland was “necessary, in order to guarantee the supply of agricultural products and coal for
Germany”(Overy 2002, p. 222). However, the ultimate prize, Russian resources, were still essen-
tial in order to make the Nazi empire blockade-proof (Kaiser 1980, pp. 277-9; Volkmann 1990, p.
258; Hildebrand 1973, p. 92). The conclusion of the Nazi-Soviet pact was thus crucial for Hitler,
who could now invade Poland confident that even if Britain and France intervened, “We need
not be afraid of a blockade. The East will supply us with grain, cattle, coal, lead and zinc.”And
indeed, in 1940 the USSR supplied Germany with 74 per cent of its phosphates imports, 67
per cent of its imported asbestos, and 34 per cent of its oil (Tooze 2006, p. 321). Ultimately,
however, Hitler’s aim was to grab these resources, so as to be able to rival the Anglo-American
powers, rather than to buy them from the Communist enemy. It is in that light that his decision
to invade the Soviet Union in 1941 needs to be understood.
  34
     According to notes taken at the meeting, the so-called Hossbach memorandum,     available at
http:/germanhistorydocs.ghi-dc.org/pdf/eng/English50.pdf.




                                               40
   There was nothing rational about Hitler’s racial theories and rabid nationalism. However,
his desire for Lebensraum is quite consistent with our model. Vis à vis the Western nations, the
Nazi state was a rising power. However, its dependence on trade left it vulnerable to blockade
by sea. One obvious solution was to attack Eastern Europe, which corresponded to C in our
model. Indeed, as Section 5.1 argues, it might even have made sense to attack Poland in 1939,
despite the fact that this risked war with France and Britain. And in the long run, conquering
Russia was the only way to achieve complete self-sufficiency in raw materials.


6.3    Anglo-German naval rivalry and World War I

Our model does not explain the origins of World War I, which as every schoolchild knows lie in
a dispute between Austria-Hungary and Serbia. Our model does, however, have something to
say about Britain’s decision to enter the war, as well as about the Anglo-German naval rivalry
which preceded it.
   The British economy had been heavily dependent on international trade from the time of
the Industrial Revolution (Clark et al. 2015), and naval supremacy was therefore a strategic
imperative for that country. By the late 19th century, industrialization and structural change
were making Germany increasingly dependent on imports of food and raw materials as well. 74
per cent of these imports were arriving by sea, either directly or indirectly (O↵er 1989, p. 335),
implying that they were potentially vulnerable to blockade by the British.
   According to Avner O↵er (1989), a key factor underlying Anglo-German naval rivalry was
the fact that both Germany and Britain were increasingly dependent on overseas imports of food
and raw materials. “The economies of both Britain and Germany came to depend on hundreds
of merchant ships that entered their ports every month. Overseas resources, the security of the
sea lanes and the economics of blockade a↵ected the war plans of the great powers and influenced
their decision to embark on war” (O↵er 1989, p. 1).
   In 1898 Germany embarked on a naval buildup whose aim was to achieve naval parity with
Britain, not globally, but locally (that is to say, in the waters between the two countries). But
this strategy completely underestimated the importance of preserving naval hegemony in British
eyes: it was essential both for the security of the Empire, and of Britain herself. The result was

                                               41
a naval arms race which Britain eventually won, but which in the process helped to shift British
strategic thinking in an anti-German, rather than a pro-German, direction. As Sir Edward Grey,
the British Foreign Secretary, told the Canadian Prime Minister, in 1912, “There are practically
no limits to the ambitions which might be indulged by Germany, or to the brilliant prospects open
to her in every quarter of the globe, if the British navy were out of the way. The combination of
the strongest Navy with that of the strongest Army would a↵ord wider possibilities of influence
and action than have yet been possessed by any Empire in Modern Times” (Steiner 1977, p. 42).
As Section 5.2 suggests, abandoning the capacity to blockade a rival that was growing as rapidly
as Germany was unthinkable to the British.
    The failure to make any headway in challenging Britain’s naval superiority prompted some
in Germany to argue for a strategy of German continental dominance, based on a European eco-
nomic bloc with Germany at its centre (Strachan 2001, pp. 46-7). This was also unacceptable
to Britain, since it would have granted Germany access to Atlantic ports, weakening or elimi-
nating Britain’s capacity to blockade her. As Grey said in 1911, if a European power achieved
continental hegemony Britain would permanently lose its control of the sea, which would in turn
mean its separation from the Dominions and the end of the Empire (Howard 1972, pp. 51-52).
Paradoxically, Britain’s traditional maritime orientation meant that it was more likely that she
would intervene in a war in which France risked being destroyed by Germany.



7     Conclusions
This paper has developed a model of the links between growth, trade and military power in which
a follower country may choose to launch a pre-emptive attack on a leader, despite the fact that
it is growing more rapidly. Faster growth may not translate into greater future military strength
if it is accompanied by increased dependence on imported raw materials, and the leader has the
capacity to blockade; since the leader cannot pre-commit to not use this capacity in the future,
the follower may choose to launch a pre-emptive war.
    In our view, this mechanism is most likely to have been at work during the post-Industrial
Revolution period. Rapid industrial growth involved profound structural change, and it is this


                                               42
structural change which made rising powers potentially vulnerable to blockade. We would not
therefore expect to see our mechanism at work during the 18th century or earlier, even though
there were of course many wars involving the English/British, Dutch and French trying to es-
tablish naval superiority over each other.
   But neither was it the case that rapid industrial growth and structural change necessarily led
to war from the 19th century onwards. There are several historical examples of countries rapidly
catching up on established leaders, without their attacking either the leader or adjacent sources
of raw materials. Sometimes this was because these rising powers were impossible to blockade.
Thus, a classic example of a follower country catching up on and overtaking a leader, without
provoking a war, is the United States’ ascent relative to Britain. Our mechanism could not have
been at work in this instance, since the United States was a vast continental economy abundant
in raw materials, and impossible to blockade. Nor did Russia, or the Soviet Union, launch pre-
emptive wars against Germany in 1914, 1939 or 1941. Again, our mechanism would not have
been expected to work in this instance, since Russia was another vast, resource-abundant country
that was impossible to blockade.
   On the other hand, neither did the USSR attack the West after 1945 (or vice versa), despite
the fact that the former was growing more rapidly than the latter until the 1970s, and that Russia
was importing food by the end of this period. Nuclear weapons are one obvious reason why the
peace was kept on this occasion. Nor has China’s rise over the past three decades provoked an
attack on its trading partners, despite the fact that it is becoming increasingly import-dependent.
   Several historians have noted that there was a circularity to some of the strategic and military
logics driving nations to war in the 1930s. In the case of Germany, David Kaiser (1980, p. 282)
wrote that “Having insisted upon rearmament for the sake of conquest, he (Hitler) found himself
in a situation where conquest was the only means of continuing rearmament. His belief that
Germany must conquer a self-sufficient economic empire, rather than rely upon world trade, had
become a self-fulfilling prophecy.” In the case of Japan, Hatano and Asada (1989, pp. 399-400)
comment that Japanese military thinking during this period “was characterised by peculiarly
circular reasoning: to prepare for hostilities with the Anglo-American powers, Japan would have
to march into Indochina to obtain raw materials; the United States would counter by imposing


                                                43
an economic embargo; this in turn would compel Japan to seize the Dutch East Indies to secure
essential oil, a step that would lead to hostilities with the United States.” Ralph Hawtrey (1952,
p. 72) wrote that “the principal cause of war is war itself”, in that “the aim for which war is
judged worth while is most often something which itself a↵ects military power.”
   As Kaiser noted, the danger with circular logics is that they can become self-fulfilling. Stan-
dard political economy considerations imply that it would be difficult if not impossible to unwind
today’s globalization, on which the Chinese economy depends: production is so fragmented, and
the Chinese and Western economies so inter-dependent, that a move away from free trade would
be impossibly costly, not just in the aggregate, but for large corporations that wield considerable
political as well as economic power. This paper sounds a cautionary note (although one hopes
that the costs of war have now become so enormous as to make it unthinkable): if strategic con-
siderations were ever allowed to gain an upper hand, globalization would become more fragile,
and the world would become a much more dangerous place.




                                                44
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Michael Golosov, Aleh Tsyvinski and Pierre Yared (2012). “A Dynamic
    Theory of Resource Wars”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 127, No. 1, pp. 283-331.

 [2] Barbieri, Katherine (1996). “Economic Interdependence: A Path to Peace or a Source of
    Interstate Conflict?”, Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 29-49.

 [3] Barnhart, Michael A. (1987). Japan Prepares for Total War: The Search for Economic
    Security, 1919-1941, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.

 [4] Bénétrix, Agustı́n, Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke and Je↵rey G. Williamson (2015). “The
    Spread of Manufacturing to the Poor Periphery 1870-2007”, Open Economies Review, Vol.
    26, No. 1, pp. 1-37.

 [5] Caselli, Francesco, Massimo Morelli and Dominic Rohner (2015). “The Geography of Inter-
    state Resource Wars”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 130, No. 1, pp. 267-315.

 [6] Clark, Gregory, Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke and Alan M. Taylor (2014). “The Growing De-
    pendence of Britain on Trade during the Industrial Revolution”, Scandinavian Economic
    History Review, Vol. 62, No. 2, pp. 109-136.

 [7] Copeland, Dale C. (1996). “Economic Interdependence and War: A Theory of Trade Ex-
    pectations”, International Security, Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 5-41.

 [8] Fearon, James D. (1995). “Rationalist Explanations for War”, International Organization,
    Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 379-414.

 [9] Ferguson, Niall (2007). “The Second World War as an Economic Disaster”, in Oliver, Michael
    J. and Derek H. Aldcroft, (Eds.), Economic Disasters of the Twentieth Century, Chel-
    tenham, Edward Elgar.

[10] Garfinkel, Michelle and Stergios Skaperdas (2000). “Conflict without Misperceptions of In-
    complete Informations”, Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 44, No. 6, pp. 793-807.


                                               45
[11] Garfinkel, Michelle, Stergios Skaperdas and Constantinos Syropoulos (2012). “Trade in the
    Shadow of Power”, in Skaperdas, Stergios and Constantinos Syropoulos (Eds.), Oxford
    Handbook on the Economic of Peace and Conflict, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

[12] Gat, Azar (2006). War in Human Civilization, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

[13] Gilpin, Robert (1981). War and Change in World Politics, Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
    sity Press.

[14] Glick, Reuven and Alan M. Taylor (2010). “Collateral Damage: Trade Disruption and the
    Economic Impact of War”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 92, No. 1, pp. 102-127.

[15] Harrison, Mark and Nikolaus Wolf (2012). “The Frequency of Wars”, Economic History
    Review, Vol. 65, No. 3, pp. 1055-1076.

[16] Hatano, Sumio and Sadao Asada (1989). “The Japanese Decision to Move South”, in Boyce,
    Robert and Esmonde M. Robertson, (Eds.), Paths to War: New Essays on the Origins of
    the Second World War, New York, St. Martin’s Press.

[17] Hawtrey, R.G. (1952). Economic Aspects of Sovereignty, 2nd edition, London, Longman,
    Greens and Co.

[18] Hildebrand, Klaus (1973). The Foreign Policy of the Third Reich, London, B.T. Batsford.

[19] Howard, Michael (1972). The Continental Commitment, London, Temple Smith.

[20] Iriye, Akira (1987). The Origins of the Second World War in Asia and the Pacific, Harlow,
    Pearson Education.

[21] Kaiser, David E. (1980). Economic Diplomacy and the Origins of the Second World War,
    Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.

[22] Liberman, Peter (1996). “Trading with the Enemy: Security and Relative Economic Gains”,
    International Security, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 147-175.




                                               46
[23] Martin, Philippe, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2008). “Make Trade Not War?”,
    Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 75, No. 3, pp. 865-900.

[24] McDonald, Patrick J. and Kevin Sweeney (2007). “The Achilles’ Heel of Liberal Ir Theory?
    Globalization and Conflict in the Pre-World War I Era”, World Politics, Vol. 59, No. 3, pp.
    370-403.

[25] Mearsheimer, John J. (1990). “Back to the Future: Instability in Europe After the Cold
    War”, International Security, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 5-56.

[26] Milward, Alan S. (1977). War, Economy and Society 1939-1945, Harmondsworth, Allen
    Lane.

[27] O↵er, Avner (1989). The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation, Oxford, Clarendon
    Press.

[28] Overy, Richard J. (2002). War and Economy in the Third Reich, Oxford University Press
    Press.

[29] Overy, Richard with Andrew Wheatcroft (2009). The Road to War, Vintage.

[30] Powell, Robert (2006). “War as a Commitment Problem”, International Organization, Vol.
    60, No. 1, pp. 169-203.

[31] Rowe, David M. (2005). “The Tragedy of Liberalism How Globalization Caused the First
    World War”, Security Studies, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 407-447.

[32] Steiner, Zara S. (1977). Britain and the Origins of the First World War, London, Macmillan
    Press.

[33] Strachan, Hew (2001). The First World War. Volume I: To Arms, Oxford, Oxford University
    Press.

[34] Tooze, Adam (2006). The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi
    Economy, London, Allen Lane.


                                              47
[35] Volkmann, Hans-Erich (1990). “The National Socialist Economy in Preparation for War”, in
    Deist, Wilhelm et al. (Eds.), Germany and the Second World War, Volume I: The Build-Up
    of German Aggression, Clarendon Press.

[36] Waltz, Kenneth (2006). Theory of International Politics, McGraw-Hill.

[37] Yasuba, Yasukichi (1996). “Did Japan Ever Su↵er from a Shortage of Natural Resources
    Before World War II?”, Journal of Economic History, Vol. 56, No. 3, pp. 543-560.




                                             48
Appendix A: key variables as functions of parameters

                                                                                       1
                                           w,u           ⇡1                            ↵                     ⇡1                      ↵
                                     aL
                                      1          =                   (1     ) ⇣               ⌘2 =                   (1     )             2   (31)
                                                     1                                     1             1                        (1 + ↵)
                                                                                  1+       ↵
                                                         t 1                           t 1
                                     w,u                         ⇡1                ↵
                               aL
                                t                =                    (1    )                  2                                               (32)
                                           t>1       1                           (1 + ↵)
                                                                                           2
                                           w,u           ⇡1                        (↵)
                                     aF
                                      1          =                   (1     )                 2                                                (33)
                                                     1                           (1 + ↵)
                                                         t 1                           2       t 1
                                     w,u                         ⇡1              (↵)
                               aF
                                t                =                    (1    )                  2                                               (34)
                                           t>1       1                           (1 + ↵)
                         w,u               w,u           ⇡1                         ↵
                   mL
                    1          = mF
                                  1              =                   (1     )                 2                                                (35)
                                                     1                        (1 + ↵)
                                                         t 1
             w,u                     w,u                         ⇡1               ↵
        mL
         t               = mF
                            t                    =                    (1    )         2                                                        (36)
                   t>1                     t>1       1                         (1 + ↵)
                                           w,u        ↵
                                     q1F         =                                                                                              (37)
                                                   1+↵
                                     w,u              ↵
                               qtF               =                                                                                              (38)
                                           t>1     1+↵
                                                                                          1
                                           w,c         ⇡1                                  2
                                     aL
                                      1          =           (1              ) ↵                    ↵                                          (39)
                                                     1
                                                    t 1                                                          1
                                  w,c                     ⇡1                                                      2

                               aL
                                t                =           (1               )       t 1
                                                                                                ↵    2(t 1)
                                                                                                                           ↵   2(t 1)
                                                                                                                                                (40)
                                           t>1       1
                                           w,c
                                     aF
                                      1          =   1       = ↵                                                                                (41)
                                                     ↵
                                                             t 1
                                     w,c
                               aF
                                t                =           1        = ↵     2(t 1)
                                                                                                                                                (42)
                                           t>1               t   1
                                                     ↵
                                                                                          1
                                        w,c                  ⇡1                            2
                                     mL
                                      1          =                     (1    ) ↵                    ↵                                          (43)
                                                         1
                                                                                                      1
                                  w,c                        ⇡1                                        2
                               mL
                                t                =                     (1    ) ↵          2(t 1)
                                                                                                                  ↵    t 1
                                                                                                                                                (44)
                                           t>1           1
                                           w,c
                                     mF
                                      1          =                                                                                              (45)
                                     w,c
                               mF
                                t                =           t 1
                                                                                                                                                (46)
                                           t>1
                                                                                 1
                                         w,c          1                           2
                                     q1F         =                          ↵                                                                   (47)
                                                     ⇡1 (1             )
                                                                                 1
                                     w,c              1                           2
                               qtF               =                          ↵                                                                   (48)
                                           t>1       ⇡1 (1             )




                                                                      49
Online Appendix B: proofs
In this section, we first provide a set of additional results (Section B.1), which we then build on
to provide proofs (Section B.2) to all results in the main text.
   Section B.1 contains four additional lemmas, Lemmas 4-7. Lemma 4 establishes that arming
             w             w
levels aLt       and aLt       must be chosen in a period when war occurs. Lemma 5 defines the gain
from delaying war by one period, kt ; it establishes that such a gain is constant from period 1
onwards (if B = 0) or from period 2 onwards (if B = 1); and it derives a threshold  2 (0, 1) such
that this constant value of kt is negative if and only if  < . Finally, Lemmas 6 and 7 describe
the full balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame that starts in period 2, for the case  < 
and        respectively. Results in this section use the following tie-breaking rules:
   Tie-breaking rule 1: If J 2 {L, F } is indi↵erent between an action which leads to war with
  J, and an action which does not, it chooses the latter.
   Tie-breaking rule 2: Between an action that leads to J starting a war, and an action that
leads to     J starting a war, J 2 {L, F } prefers the latter.


B.1 Additional results
                                                                                                         w
Lemma 4. If, in the SPNE, war occurs in period t, then it must be the case that aLt = aLt
                  w
and aFt = aFt         .

Proof. Suppose that, in equilibrium, war occurs in t. Let (At )w be the set such that, in the equi-
                              ⇥       ⇤                              ⇥         ⇤
librium under consideration, aLt , aFt 2 (At )w implies wt = 1. Let âLt , âFt denote equilibrium
arming levels. It must be that âLt lies on L’s best response function, âLt = aLt âFt . Suppose
                                                                                ⇥       ⇤
otherwise. Then, L’s payo↵ should be at least as high with arming levels âLt , âFt as with arming
      ⇥               ⇤        ⇥               ⇤
levels aLt âFt , âFt . But if aLt âFt , âFt 2 (At )w , that contradicts the definition of aLt âFt . If
⇥ L F          ⇤
 at ât , âFt 2 / (A)w , that again contradicts the definition of aLt âFt , since L’s payo↵ must be
                                                            ⇥            ⇤
at least as high if there is peace with arming levels aLt âFt , âFt as if there is war with those
same arming levels (given that L can always set wtL = 1) and, by the definition of aLt âFt , L’s
                                                                               ⇥           ⇤
payo↵ in the latter case must be higher than if there is war with arming levels âLt , âFt . Similarly,
it can be shown that it must be that âFt = aFt âLt . Together, âLt = aLt âFt and âFt = aFt âLt

                                                    50
     ⇥           ⇤ ⇥              w               w⇤
imply âLt , âFt = aLt                   , aFt        .

Lemma 5. Let kt be the joint welfare gain from delaying war by one period in period t (expressed
as a share of period t pie). Such a gain can be written as

                                                                  (mt+1 )w   gF     F
                                                                                   gt+1
                                                  kt ⌘                    +B t         ,                                   (49)
                                                                    ⇡t          ⇡t

If B = 0, such a gain is constant from period 1 onwards, while if B = 1 it is lower in period
1 than in period 2, and constant from period 2 onwards. In either case, let k be the expression
denoting this constant value of kt . There exists  2 (0, 1) such that k < 0 if  < , k = 0 if
 = , and k > 0 if  > .

                                                                                                                w
Proof. By Lemma 4, if war occurs in period t + 1, it must be that aLt+1 = aLt+1                                     and aFt+1 =
         w
 aFt+1       . By definition, kt can then be written as 1/⇡t times


                      ytL       iLt         cLt aLt + sLt ⇡t + Vt+1
                                                                 L
                                                                    (wt+1 = 1)        VtL wt = 1|aLt , aFt +

                    +ytF        iFt         cFt aFt + sFt ⇡t + Vt+1
                                                                 F
                                                                    (wt+1 = 1)        VtF wt = 1|aLt , aFt ,


which, using (11)-(12) and (20)-(21) and re-arranging, can be written as in (49). If B = 0, kt is
constant over time, since, as evident from (44) and (46), (mt+1 )w grows at a rate                                   like ⇡t . If
B = 1, the term kt is constant from period 2 onwards, since gtF                                F
                                                                                              gt+1 can then be written as
(1        ) gtF , which also grows at a rate . However, k1 < k2 , since gtF grows faster than                          between
                                                                                             w             w
period 1 and 2. From (44) and (46), we see that (mt+1 )w = mLt+1                                 + mFt+1       is continuously
decreasing in . It follows that k is continuously increasing in . All we need to show is that
there exists  2 (0, 1) such that k = 0 if  = . If B = 0,  is easy to derive explicitly. Using
(35) and (36),
                                           ⇢                                    ⇢
                                                           (mt+1 )w                                         2↵
         arg {k = 0} = arg                                       =0     = arg            (1    )            =0
                                                             ⇡t                        1                 (1 + ↵)2
                                               2↵
                                      1      (1+↵)2
                            =                     2↵
                                                             2 (0, 1) .                                                     (50)
                                1+         1   (1+↵)2




                                                                          51
If B = 1, using (43)-(46), we can write:
                              ⇢h                                 i 12
                                       ⇡1
                                            (1       ) ↵                     ↵+
                                   1                                                            (1         ) (1        ⌘) ↵
            k=                                                                             +                                      .       (51)
                                                      ⇡1                                                          ⇡1

Because k is continuously increasing in , all we need to show is k < 0 for  = 0, and k > 0 for
 ! 1. If  = 0, condition k < 0 can be written as
                                   "✓                          ◆ 12                   #
                                                ⇡1
                                                           ↵                 ↵+            + (1         ⌘) ↵           < 0.                (52)
                      1                     1

                                                    w,u
By assumption, it is xFt  mFt                            . Using (36) and (2), it is easy to see that this implies
⇡1 / (1    )↵ >      (1 + ↵)2 . Then, a sufficient condition for (81) to hold is

                  h                             1                       i
                          2
                              (1 + ↵)2          2
                                                          ↵+                + (1      ⌘) ↵               <0
           1
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                               > (1      ⌘) ↵          ,
                                                                                                1

which is the same as Assumption 1. If  ! 1, condition k > 0 converges to

                                            (↵ 1) (1                           ) (1        ⌘) ↵
                               1+                +                                                         > 0.                            (53)
                                             ⇡1                                       ⇡1

                                                                                                                       w,u
Again, using (36) and (2), it is easy to see that the assumption xFt  mFt                                                   implies /⇡1 < (1
)/ (1     )⇤↵/ (1     ↵)2 . Then,  ! 1 implies /⇡1 ! 0 (or, in other terms, (mt+1 )w /⇡t ! 0).
It follows that (53) must hold true.

Lemma 6. Suppose war does not occur in period 1. If  < , where  was defined in Lemma
5, the unique balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in period 2 is as follows. In




                                                                             52
t        2, if war has not yet occurred, actions are
                                                     8
                                ⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ < 0                        if sFt    sFt aLt , aFt
                                 wt at , at , st   =                                                                    (54)
                                                     : 1                if sFt < sFt aLt , aFt
                                                     8
                                                     >
                                                     >                  if sFt aLt , aFt > 1
                                                     > s
                                    ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ <
                                     st (at , at ) =   s0               if sFt aLt , aFt 2 (0, 1]                       (55)
                                                     >
                                                     >
                                                     >
                                                     : 0                if sFt aLt , aFt  0
                                                     8
                                    ⇥ L L F ⇤⇤ < 0                      if sFt aLt , aFt > 0
                                     wt (at , at ) =                                                                    (56)
                                                     : 1                if sFt aLt , aFt  0
                                                                    w
                                                    (aLt )⇤ = aLt
                                                                    w
                                                    (aFt )⇤ = aFt       ,


where


           sFt aLt , aFt ⌘ arg ytF         iFt      cFt aFt + sFt ⇡t + Vt+1
                                                                         F
                                                                            (wt+1 = 1) = VtF wt = 1|aLt , aFt       ,

               w                                                 ⇥
and aJt            were defined in (19), and s 2 [0, 1], and s0 2 0, sFt aLt , aFt                  . In t > 2, if war has
                                                ⇤           ⇤
already occurred, actions are               aLt     =   aFt     = 0.

Proof. Preliminaries. First, note that the term k, defined in Lemma 5, is the joint welfare
gain (expressed as a share of the current pie) from delaying war by one period. As shown in that
lemma, given  < , we have k < 0. Next, note that, in t                             2, if war has not yet occurred, the
actions in (54)-(56) imply wt = 1 (one country starts a war).35 The proof proceed in three steps,
and various sub-steps. Step 1. The proposed outcome is a balanced growth path SPNE
of the subgame starting in period 2. Step 1.1. In t > 2, if war has already occurred, by
                       ⇤             ⇤
Lemma 1, aLt               and aFt       are optimal actions. Step 1.2. In t             2, if war has not yet occurred, if
wt = 0, then wt+1 = 1. It follows that sFt aLt , aFt is the share that leaves F indi↵erent between
                                  ⇥                    ⇤⇤
starting a war in t, or not. Then, wtF aLt , aFt , ⇡tF    follows from backward induction, and from
tie-breaking rule 1. Next, note that the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that
    35
         If sF   L F
             t a t , at  0 it is L that starts a war, otherwise it is F .


                                                                  53
share (and being accepted) and starting a war,


                 arg ytL          iLt        cLt aLt + sLt ⇡t + Vt+1
                                                                  L
                                                                     (wt+1 = 1) = VtL wt = 1|aLt , aFt             ,            (57)


can, substituting (11) into (57) and re-arranging, be written as sFt aLt , aFt + k. Since k < 0, it
                                                                                     ⇥             ⇤⇤
follows that the share that leaves L indi↵erent is lower than sFt aLt , aFt . Then, sFt aLt , aFt
                                         ⇥           ⇤⇤
follows from backward induction, and wtL aLt , aFt      from backward induction and from tie-
                               ⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤                 ⇥            ⇤⇤
breaking rule 2. Finally, given wt at , at , ⇡t  , st at , at    and wtL aLt , aFt     , it is wt = 1
for any aLt and aFt . Then, (aLt )⇤ and (aFt )⇤ follow from backward induction. Step 2 (interme-
diate result). In t                 2, if war has not yet occurred, in any balanced growth path
SPNE of the subgame starting in period t, war must occur immediately. Take any
balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in period t, and denote equilibrium actions
by ˆ. Step 2.1. In the SPNE under consideration, war cannot happen in T > t. Suppose it did.
By the logic of Step 1.2 (replacing t with T                          1), actions in T      1 would have to be as in (54)-(56).
By the Preliminaries, that would imply wT                         1   = 1: a contradiction. Step 2.2 (intermediate step).
Suppose that, in the SPNE under consideration, war never happened. For s                                        t, let

                                                              m̂s+1    (1               ) gsF
                                                 k̂ ⌘              +B                          ,
                                                               ⇡s                  ⇡s

which, given m̂s+1 = m̂s in a balanced growth path SPNE, and given ⇡s = ⇡s                                             1   and gsF =
 gsF 1 , does not depend on s. Then, the joint surplus from not going to war in period s can be
            P
written as 1   v=s
                   v s
                       k̂⇡v = k̂⇧s . Let êJs+1 2 [0, 1] be the share of such surplus appropriated by J
in the subgame starting in period s + 1, and let


                                                                  ⇥                                               ⇤
ŝF   L F        F            F
  s (as , as , ês+1 ) ⌘ arg ys         iF
                                         s    cF   F     F
                                               s a s + s s ⇡s +
                                                                        F
                                                                      Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1|âL       F         F
                                                                                       s+1 , âs+1 ) + ês+1 k⇧s+1 = Vs
                                                                                                                       F
                                                                                                                         ws = 1|aL    F
                                                                                                                                 s , as   ,
                                                                                                                                (58)



be the share that leaves F indi↵erent between starting a war in period s, or not. Then, backward




                                                                        54
induction and tie-breaking rule 1 require
                                                            8
                                                            < 0 if sF ŝF (aL , aF , êF )
                                                                    s     s   s    s     s+1
                                 ŵsF aLs , aFs , sFs     =                                  .                         (59)
                                                            : 1 if sF < ŝF (aL , aF , êF )
                                                                    s     s   s    s     s+1


Next, note that the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share (and being ac-
cepted) and starting a war,

        n                                          h                                 i                       o
     arg ysL          iLs    cLs aLs + sLs ⇡s +           L
                                                        Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1) + êLs+1 k̂⇧s = VsL ws = 1|aLs , aFs   ,       (60)


can, substituting (11) into (60) and re-arranging, be written as ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) + k̂⇧s . Step 2.3.
                                                                                                                           w
It cannot be the case that, in the SPNE under consideration, war never happens, and aJs = aJs
for J 2 {L, F }. Suppose this was the case. It would then be the case that k̂ = k < 0. Then, the
share that leaves L indi↵erent, ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) + k⇧s , would be less than ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ), given
which
                      8
                      >
                      > s     if ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) > 1                              8
                      >
                      <                                                                      < 0 if ŝF (aL , aF , êF ) > 0
                                                                                                      s   s    s     s+1
ŝFs (aLs , aFs ) =     s0 if ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) 2 (0, 1]        ŵtL (aLt , aFt ) =                                 ,
                      >
                      >                                                                      : 1 if ŝF (aL , aF , êF )  0
                      >
                      : 0 if ŝF (aL , aF , êF )  0                                                 s   s    s     s+1
                                 s    s     s      s+1

                         ⇥                             ⇤
where s 2 [0, 1] and s0 2 0, ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) , would follow, respectively, from backward induc-
tion, and from backward induction and tie-breaking rule 2. But given ŵsF aLs , aFs , sFs , ŝFs (aLs , aFs )
and ŵtL (aLt , aFt ), it would be the case that ws = 1 for any aLs and aFs , a contradiction. Step 2.4. It
                                                                                                                           w
cannot be the case that, in the SPNE under consideration, war never happens, and aJs 6= aJs
for at least one J 2 {L, F }. Suppose this was the case. It cannot be that k̂ < 0, or, by the
logic of Step 2.3, we would have ws = 1, a contradiction. Given k̂                            0, the share that leaves L
indi↵erent, ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) + k̂⇧s , is at least as high as ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ). Then,




                                                                    55
                   8
                   >
                   > s                              if    ŝF   L F        F                                    8
                   >
                   <                                        s (as , as , ês+1 ) > 1                            < 0 if ŝF (aL , aF , êF )             k̂⇧s
                                                                                                                         s   s    s     s+1              ⇡s
ŝF   L F
  s (as , as ) =        sF   L F        F
                         s (as , as , ês+1 )       if    ŝF   L F        F
                                                            s (as , as , ês+1 ) 2 [0, 1]
                                                                                             ŵsL (aL
                                                                                                    s , a F
                                                                                                          s ) =                                                ,
                   >
                   >                                                                                            : 1 if ŝF (aL , aF , êF ) <           k̂⇧s
                   >
                   : 0                                                                                                   s   s    s     s+1              ⇡s
                                                    if    ŝF   L F        F
                                                            s (as , as , ês+1 ) < 0

                                                                                                                                                 (61)



follow, respectively, from backward induction and tie-breaking rule 1, and from backward induc-
tion and tie-breaking rule 2. Also,

                                                      8
                                                      >
                                                      > 0                                  if ŝF     L F       F
                                                      >
                                                      >                                          s (as , as , ês+1 ) > 1
                                                      >
                                                      >
                                                      < k̂⇧s                               if ŝF     L F       F
                                                                                                 s (as , as , ês+1 ) 2 (0, 1]
 âL
   s = arg        max          L          L F
                             Vs ws = 1|as , as +                                                                          h             i        (62)
               cF  F   F
                s as xs
                                                      > k̂⇧s + ŝF (aL , aF , êF )⇡s if ŝF (aL , aF , êF ) 2
                                                      >                                                                         k̂⇧s
                                                                                                                                     ,0
                                                      >
                                                      >            s    s    s   s+1             s    s    s    s+1              ⇡ s
                                                      >
                                                      >
                                                      : 0                                  if ŝF     L F       F             k̂⇧s
                                                                                                 s (as , as , ês+1 ) <        ⇡s
                                                      8
                                                      >
                                                      > 0                                 F
                                                                                     if ŝs (aL    F     F
                                                      >
                                                      >                                       s , as , ês+1 ) > 1
                                                      >
                                                      >
                                                      < 0                            if ŝF   L F        F
                                                                                          s (as , as , ês+1 ) 2 (0, 1]
 âF
   s = arg        max        VsF (ws = 1|aL
                                          s , a F
                                                s ) +                                                             h             i                (63)
               cF  F   F
                s as xs
                                                      >
                                                      >   ŝF (aL , aF , êF   )⇡s if sF    (aL , aF , êF   )2       k̂⇧s
                                                                                                                            , 0
                                                      >
                                                      >     s   s    s     s+1            s   s    s     s+1           ⇡ s
                                                      >
                                                      >
                                                      : 0                            if ŝF (aL , aF , êF ) < k̂⇧s
                                                                                                 s   s       s    s+1           ⇡s




follow from backward induction. Given (59) and (61), for war not to occur in period s, it must
                                       h            i
be that ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 ) 2    k̂⇧s
                                                , 1   . However, that cannot be the case. First, it cannot be the
                                         h ⇡s           i
case that ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 ) 2      k̂⇧s
                                               ⇡s
                                                    , 0   . To see this, note that, substituting (12) into (58) and
re-arranging, ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 ) can be written as

                                            ⇧s                        ⇧s+1                  m̂Fs+1           (1         ) gsF        êFs+1 k⇧s+1
  ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 )   =   q̂sF      (1    )         F
                                                              q̂s+1        (1          ) +              B                                        .
                                            ⇡s                        ⇡s                     ⇡s                    ⇡s                     ⇡s
                                                                                                                                                (64)

Then, substituting in (11)-(12) and (64), and re-arranging, payo↵s in the case under consideration




                                                                               56
can be written as


                         VsL ws = 1|âLs , âFs + k̂⇧s + ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 )⇡s = dLs (êFs+1 )             cLs âLs             (65)

                                      VsF ws = 1|âLs , âFs          ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 )⇡s = dFs êFs+1    cFs âFs ,          (66)


where the dJs êFs+1 are expressions which do not depend on aJt . It follows that at least one
country could obtain a higher payo↵ by decreasing arming by ✏.36 Next, it cannot be the case
that ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 ) 2 (0, 1). In that case, payo↵s would be VsL ws = 1|aLs , aFs + k̂⇧s and
                                                                                                                                        w
VsF ws = 1|aLs , aFs (with k̂⇧s an expression that does not depend on aJt ). Since âJs 6= aJs                                              for
at least one of J 2 {L, F }, given concavity of VsJ (ws = 1|aLs , aFs ) in aJs , at least one of J 2 {L, F }
could obtain a higher payo↵ by either increasing or decreasing arming by ✏. Finally, it cannot
be the case that sFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 ) = 1. To see this, note that, in a balanced growth path SPNE,
it must be that q̂sF = q̂s+1
                         F
                             . Then, (64) can be written as

                                          m̂Fs+1                 (1          ) gtF        êFs+1 k̂⇧s
                            q̂sF (1      ) +                B                                        =
                                           ⇡s                           ⇡s                    ⇡s
                                              
                               F                                 m̂Fs+1    (1                ) gtF      êFs+1 k̂⇧s
                             q̂s (1 ) +                              +B                                          < 1.
                             |     {z    }                        ⇡s                     ⇡s                 ⇡s
                                   <1         |                         {z                         }  |     {z    }
                                                                          >k̂ 0                               0


                                                                                         h             i
Since it cannot be the case that                      ŝFs (âLs , âFs , êFs+1 )   2       k̂⇧s
                                                                                              ⇡s
                                                                                                  ,1    , a war must occur in s, a con-
tradiction. Step 2.5. In summary, we have shown that, in any balanced growth path of the
subgame starting in period t, war cannot happen in T > t (Step 2.1), nor can it be the case
that war never occurs (Step 2.2). It follows that war must occur immediately. Step 3. The
proposed SPNE is the unique balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting
                                                                                                                    ⇤             ⇤
in period 2. In t > 2, if war has already occurred, by Lemma 1, aLt                                                     and aFt       are the
unique optimal actions. Next, take any t                               2, and suppose that war has not yet occurred. If
                                                                                                       ⇥                    ⇤⇤
wt = 0, by Step 2, it is the case that wt+1                        = 1. By the logic of Step 1.2, then, wtF aLt , aFt , sFt    ,
⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ ⇥ L L F ⇤⇤ L ⇤
 st at , at   , wt at , at      , (at ) and (aFt )⇤ are uniquely pinned down by backward induction,
  36
       If ŝF    L F         F
                              it is L who can obtain a higher payo↵ by decreasing arming (with ŝF
            s (âs , âs , ês+1 ) =
                                        k̂⇧s
                                         ⇡s ,                                                                         (âL , âF , êF )
                                                                                                          ⇣        ⌘ s s s s+1
remaining in the assumed range); if ŝF    L F         F                         F    L F         F
                                      s (âs , âs , ês+1 ) = 0, it is F ; if ŝs (âs , âs , ês+1 ) 2
                                                                                                            k̂⇧s
                                                                                                             ⇡s , 0 , it is both.



                                                                             57
and by tie-breaking rules 1 and 2.

Lemma 7. Suppose war does not occur in period 1. If                                           , where  was defined in Lemma
5, the unique balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame that starts in period 2 is as follows. In
t         2, if war has not yet occurred, actions are
                                                        8
                                   ⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ < 0                     if sFt       sFt aLt , aFt
                                    wt at , at , st   =                                                                         (67)
                                                        : 1             if sFt < sFt aLt , aFt
                                                        8
                                                        >
                                                        >                             if sFt aLt , aFt > 1
                                                        > s
                                       ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ <
                                        st (at , at ) =   sFt            aLt , aFt    if sFt aLt , aFt 2 [0, 1]                 (68)
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        : 0                           if sFt aLt , aFt < 0
                                                        8
                                       ⇥ L L F ⇤⇤ < 0                   if sFt aLt , aFt             k⇧t /⇡t
                                        wt (at , at ) =                                                                         (69)
                                                        : 1             if sFt aLt , aFt <           k⇧t /⇡t
                                                                    w
                                                    (aLt )⇤ = aLt                                                               (70)
                                                                    w
                                                    (aFt )⇤ = aFt       ,                                                       (71)

where k was defined in Lemma 5, and

                     sF   L F
                      t a t , at ⌘ arg ytF           iF
                                                      t   cF  F    F        F
                                                           t at + st ⇡t + Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1) = Vt
                                                                                              F
                                                                                                wt = 1|aL    F
                                                                                                        t , at           ,       (72)




                w
and aJt              were defined in (19), and s 2 [0, 1]. In t > 2, if war has already occurred, actions are
          ⇤              ⇤
    aLt       = aFt          = 0.

Proof. Preliminaries. First, note that the term k, defined in Lemma 5, is the joint welfare
gain (expressed as a share of the current pie) from delaying war by one period. As shown in
that lemma, given                        , we have k       0. Next, note that in t                  2, if war has not yet occurred,
the actions in (67)-(71) imply wt = 0. They also imply that F receives payo↵ VtF (wt = 1), and
L receives payo↵ VtL (wt = 1) + k⇧t . To see this, note first that the actions in (67)-(69) imply
                                   w           w
wt = 0 i↵ sFt                aLt       , aFt       2 [ k⇧t /⇡t , 1], and they imply that F receives payo↵ VtF (wt = 1)
                     w             w                                w            w
i↵ sFt         aLt       , aFt          2 [0, 1]. But sFt     aLt       , aFt        2 (0, 1). To see the latter point, note that,


                                                                            58
                                                           w                 w
substituting (12) into (72), sFt                    aLt        , aFt                 can be written as

                                                                                                                                          w
            w           w                w    ⇧t                                  w            ⇧t+1                            mFt+1                    (1            ) gtF
  sFt   aLt     ,   aFt      =       qtF         (1            )             F
                                                                             qt+1                    (1            ) +                             B
                                              ⇡t                                               ⇡t                               ⇡t                               ⇡t
                                                                                  w
                                          w                                 mFt+1                 (1               ) gtF
                             = qtF            (1          ) +                                  B                          ,                                             (73)
                                                                             ⇡t                               ⇡t

                                                                   w                       w                                                        w             w
where we have used the fact that qtF                                      F
                                                                       = qt+1                  . On the one hand, sFt                         aLt       , aFt           < 1,
since (73) can be re-written as
                                                                "                               w
                                                                                                                                   #
                                w                                                    mFt+1                    (1           ) gtF
                            qtF      (1 ) +                                                      +B                                 < 1.
                        |             {z     }                                        ⇡t                             ⇡t
                                     2(0,1)                     |                                   {z                             }
                                                                                                >k 0


                                                                                           w              w
On the other hand, under Assumption 3, sFt                                           aLt        , aFt              > 0. To see this, note that, using
                                              w                        w
(73) and the fact that mFt+1                      =           mFt           , such inequality can be re-written as

                                                                                                              w
                                              w           ⇡t                                        mFt
                                          qtF                          (1        ) +                                BgtF .                                              (74)
                                                      1                                        1

                                                                                                                                         w
A sufficient condition for (74) to hold can be obtained by subtracting mFt                                                                    > 0 from the LHS
and re-arranging,

                                                      w        ⇡t                                         w
                                              qtF                       (1           )         mFt                BgtF .                                                (75)
                                                          1

                                                                                                                                          w                                   w
The LHS of (75) is F ’s gain from war (gross of any trade cost) if aLt = aLt                                                                    and aFt = aFt                     .
                        w
Because aFt = aFt            > 0 maximises such gain, and not aFt = 0 (the latter being a level of arming
at which the LHS is zero), the LHS must be positive.37 If B = 0, then, (75) always holds. If
B = 1, substituting in (48) and (46), (75) can be written as

                                                                                1
                                                    ⇡1                           2
                                          ↵                   (1        )                         (1         ⌘) ↵             .                                         (76)
                                              1
 37                                                  w                                                        w                                              2
    To verify, if B = 0, plug in qtF    = cL    L    F        F
                                           t /(ct + ct ) and mt  = ⇧t (1 ) cL    L    F
                                                                             t / ct + ct . The LHS
                        ⇣ L ⌘2
                           ct      ⇡t
can then be written as cL +cF    1    (1 ) > 0. If B = 1, as shown below, the LHS can be written as
                                 t    t




                                                                                     59
                                                         w,u
By assumption, it is xFt  mFt                                 . Using (36) and (2), it is easy to see that this implies
↵⇡1 / (1             ) (1          ) >   (1 + ↵)2 . Then, a sufficient condition for (76) to hold is                      (1 + ↵)      =
    ↵         (1    ⌘) ↵             , that is Assumption 3. We have shown that, in t                             2, if war has not yet
occurred, wt = 0. This implies that it is also true that ws = 0 for s > t (war is forever delayed).
Given that, as shown, F receives payo↵ VtF (wt = 1) in period t, L must then receive payo↵
VtL (wt = 1) + k⇧t . The rest of the proof proceed in four steps, and in various sub-steps. Step
1. The proposed outcome is a balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting
in period 2. Step 1.1. In t > 2, if war has already occurred, by Lemma 1, (aLt )⇤ and (aFt )⇤ are
optimal actions. Step 1.2. Take t                          2, and suppose war has not yet occurred. If wt = 0, by the
                                                       F                   L
Preliminaries, in period t+1, F and L receive payo↵s Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1) and Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1)+k⇧t+1 .
It follows that sFt aLt , aFt is the share that leaves F indi↵erent between starting a war in t, or not.
        ⇥                   ⇤⇤
Then, wtF aLt , aFt , ⇡tF      follows from backward induction, and from tie-breaking rule 1. Next,
note that the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share (and being accepted)
and starting a war,

                                                           ⇥                          ⇤
          arg ytL       iLt         cLt aLt + sLt ⇡t +           L
                                                               Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1) + k⇧t+1 = VtL wt = 1|aLt , aFt                  ,      (77)


can, substituting (11) into (77) and re-arranging, be written as sFt aLt , aFt + k⇧t . It follows
                                                                                     ⇥              ⇤⇤
that the share that leaves L indi↵erent is at least as high as sFt aLt , aFt . Then, sFt aLt , aFt
                                                                   ⇥             ⇤⇤
follows from backward induction and from tie-breaking rule 1, and wtL aLt , aFt     from backward
                                                          ⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤
induction and from tie-breaking rule 2. Finally, given wt at , at , ⇡t         , st at , at       and
h                           i 12
    cL   ⇡t
     t
    cF 1       (1   ) xF
                        t           xF
                                     t . This must be positive, or else
     t


                                                                cL
                                                                 t
                                                                   ⇧t (1   ) < xF
                                                                                 t
                                                                cF
                                                                 t
                                                                                     ✓           ◆
                                                     cL  F
                                                      t ct                                  cL
                                                                                             t
                                                                 2 ⇧t (1   ) < xF
                                                                                 t     1+            ,
                                                   cL    F
                                                    t + ct
                                                                                            cF
                                                                                             t

                                                                            w,u                               2
which is in contradiction with the assumption that mF
                                                    t                             > xF       L F     L    F
                                                                                     t , or ct ct / ct + ct       ⇧t (1   ) > xF
                                                                                                                                t .




                                                                           60
⇥                   ⇤⇤
    wtL aLt , aFt        , it follows from backward induction that aLt and aFt must simultaneously solve

                                                        8
                                                        >
                                                        > 0                                                  if sFt (aLt , aFt ) > 1
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        < k⇧t                                                if sFt (aLt , aFt ) 2 (0, 1]
      aLt = arg max                L         L F
                                 Vt (wt = 1|at , at ) +                                                                            h           i
                    cF  F   F
                     t at xt
                                                        >
                                                        > k⇧t + sFt (aLt , aFt )⇡t                           if sFt (aLt , aFt ) 2     k⇧t
                                                                                                                                           , 0
                                                        >
                                                        >                                                                               ⇡t
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        : 0                                                  if sFt (aLt , aFt ) <     k⇧t
                                                                                                                                        ⇡t

                                                                                                                                                   (78)
                                                        8
                                                        >
                                                        > 0                                         if sFt (aLt , aFt ) > 1
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        < 0                                         if sFt (aLt , aFt ) 2 (0, 1]
      aFt   = arg max              F         L F
                                 Vt (ws = 1|at , at ) +                                                                   h           i .          (79)
                    cF  F   F
                     t at xt
                                                        >
                                                        >   sFt (aLt , aFt )⇡t                      if sFt (aLt , aFt ) 2     k⇧t
                                                                                                                                  , 0
                                                        >
                                                        >                                                                      ⇡t
                                                        >
                                                        >
                                                        : 0                                         if sFt (aLt , aFt ) <       k⇧t
                                                                                                                                 ⇡t


                w                                                   w
That aLt             solves (78) given aFt = aFt                        follows from the following three facts. First, by
                        w                                                   w
definition,         aLt     maximises VtL wt = 1|aLt , aFt                          +k⇧t (given that k⇧t does not depend on aLt ).
                            w           w                                                                w                                     w
Second, sFt aLt , aFt      2 (0, 1). Third, k⇧t + sFt aLt , aFt ⇡t  k⇧t for sFt (aLt , aFt ) 2
h         i
   k⇧t                w                              w                            w
    ⇡t
       , 0 . Does aFt   solve (79) given aLt = aLt ? Since, by definition, aFt        maximises
                          w                                     w               w
VtF (wt = 1| aLt              , aFt ), and since sFt ( aLt          , aFt           ) 2 (0, 1), a necessary and sufficient condition
                                                                                                w
for this is that F ’s payo↵ be higher when choosing aFt , then when choosing any aFt such
                         h         i
              w            k⇧t
that sFt ( aLt , aFt ) 2    ⇡t
                               , 0   . Since, in the latter range, F ’s payo↵ is ytF iFt cFt aFt +
      F
    Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1), F ’s payo↵ in the latter case is at most ytF                                         iFt + Vt+1
                                                                                                                  F
                                                                                                                     (wt+1 = 1). Then, a
                                             w                                                  w
sufficient condition for aFt                     to solve (79) given aLt = aLt                      is


                                            VtF (wt = 1)        ytF      iFt + Vt+1
                                                                                 F
                                                                                    (wt+1 = 1).                                                    (80)


Using (12), (80) can be re-written as

                                        w                                             w
                                  qtF       ⇡t (1    )    (1            ) mFt                 B (1           ) gtF     0
                                                                w       ⇡t                                   w
                                                          qtF               (1            )        mFt            BgtF .                          (81)
                                                                    1

Condition (81) is the same as (75), which has been shown to hold under Assumption 3. Since

                                                                         61
       w                                                  w                       w                                                 w             ⇤
 aLt       solves (78) given aFt =               aFt          , and aFt                   solves (79) given aLt =             aLt       , aLt         and
     ⇤
 aFt       simultaneously solve (78) and (79). They then follow from backward induction. Step 2
(intermediate result) In t                       2, if war has not yet occurred, in any balanced growth
path SPNE of the subgame starting in t, in which war never occurs, it is the case
                    w                            w
that aLs = aLs          and aFs = aFs                 for s         t, and F and L receive payo↵s VsF (ws = 1) and
VsL (ws = 1) + k⇧s . Take any balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in period
t, in which war never occurs, and denote equilibrium actions by ˆ. Step 2.1. By Step 2.4 in the
                                                                          w                                                                           w
proof to Lemma 6, it must be that âJs = aJs                                  for J 2 {L, F }. Step 2.2. Given âJs = aJs                                 for
J 2 {L, F }, the joint surplus from not going to war in period s can be written as k⇧s . Let eJs+1
be the share of the surplus from not going to war appropriated by F in the subgame that starts
in period s + 1, and

                                                                                      ⇥                                ⇤
sFs aLs , aFs , eFs+1 ⌘ arg ysF            iFs       cFs aFs + sFs ⇡s +                     F
                                                                                          Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1) + eFs+1 k⇧s+1 = VsF ws = 1|aLs , aFs                  ,


that is the share that leaves F indi↵erent between starting a war in period s, or not. Next, note
that the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share (and being accepted) and
starting a war,

                                                      ⇥                              ⇤
       arg ysL    iLs    cLs aLs + sLs ⇡s +                 L
                                                          Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1) + eLs+1 k⇧s = VsL ws = 1|aLs , aFs                               ,          (82)


can, substituting (11) into (82) and re-arranging, be written as sFs aLs , aFs , eFs+1 + k⇧s . Then,
backward induction and tie-breaking rules 1 and 2 require actions to be as in (59) and (61)
(replacing ŝFs (aLs , aFs , êFs+1 ) with sFs aLs , aFs , eFs+1 and k̂ with k). Given such actions, for war not
                                                                         w                w
to occur in period s, it must be that sFs                         aLs         , aFs           , êFs+1 2 [ k⇧s /⇡s , 1]. However it cannot
                                                                     h                i
                                     w           w                           k⇧s
be the case that sFs          aLs        , aFs       , êFs+1     2           ⇡s
                                                                                 ,0       , or else payo↵s could be re-written as

                         w           w                                       w                w                                           w
  VsL ws = 1| aLs            , aFs         + k⇧s + sFs              aLs          , aFs            , eFs+1 ⇡s = dLs (eFs+1 )   cLs aLs                 (83)
                                     w           w                           w                w                                               w
            VsF ws = 1| aLs              , aFs              sFs     aLs          , aFs            , eFs+1 ⇡s = dFs eFs+1       cFs aFs            , (84)


where the dJs eFs+1 are expressions which do not depend on aJt . It follows that at least one country


                                                                             62
                                                                                                                            w               w
could obtain a higher payo↵ by decreasing arming by ✏. Given sFs                                                  aLs           , aFs           , eFs+1 2 (0, 1],
                                          w           w                        w           w
it is the case that ŝ              aLs       , aFs       = sFs          aLs       , aFs       , eFs+1 . This implies that F receives
payo↵ VsF (ws = 1), which in turn implies that L receives payo↵ VsF (ws = 1) + k⇧s .38 Step 3
(intermediate result). In t                           2, if war has not yet occurred, in any balanced growth
path SPNE of the subgame starting in period t, war never occurs. Take any balanced
growth path SPNE of the game starting in period t. We now show that, in such a SPNE, in
any s           t, war does not occur. In order to do that, we derive optimal actions in period s for
any possible equilibrium path of the subgame starting in s + 1, and show that those actions do
not lead to war. There are two possible cases. Step 3.1. First, in the equilibrium path of the
subgame that starts in period s + 1, war never occurs. By Step 2, in period s + 1, F and L receive
         F                   L
payo↵s Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1) and Vs+1 (ws+1 = 1) + k⇧s+1 . By the logic of Step 1.2 (replacing t with
    ⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ ⇥ L L F ⇤⇤                     ⇤          ⇤
s), ws as , as , ⇡s  , ss as , as   , ws as , as     , aLs   and aFs    follow from backward
induction and from tie-breaking rules 1 and 2. By the Preliminaries, it is then the case that
ws = 0. Step 3.2. Second, in the equilibrium path of the subgame that starts in period s + 1, war
                                                                         w
occurs in T            s + 1. By Lemma 4, aJT = aJT                          . It follows that, if wT                   1   = 0, then wT = 1, and,
in period T , F and L receive payo↵s VTF (wT = 1) and VTL (wT = 1). Consider optimal actions
                                                                   ⇥                        ⇤⇤
in period T 1. By the logic of Step 1.2 (replacing t with T 1), wTF 1 aLT 1 , aFT 1 , sFT 1
follows from backward induction, and from tie-breaking rule 1. Next, note that, the share that
leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share (and being accepted) and starting a war,


   arg yTL         1   iLT    1    cLT 1 aLT    1   + sLT 1 ⇡T   1   + VTL (wT = 1) = VTL                 1           wT    1    = 1|aLT 1 , aFT          1       ,
                                                                                                                                                                  (85)

can, substituting (11) into (85) and re-arranging, be written as sFT                                          1       aLT 1 , aFT        1    + k. Again by
                                                                 ⇥                                                                           ⇤⇤ ⇥ L                           ⇤⇤
the logic of Step 1.2 (additionally replacing k⇧T 1 with k⇡T 1 ), sFT                                         1       aLT 1 , aFT       1      , wT 1 (aLT 1 , aFT       1)        ,
            ⇤                 ⇤
 aLT    1       and aFT   1       follow from backward induction, and from tie-breaking rule 2. By the logic of
the Preliminaries (replacing t with T                      1, and k⇧T              1   with k⇡T    1 ),   these actions imply wT                              1   = 0,
and that F and L receive payo↵s VTF 1 (wT                            1   = 0) and VTL 1 (wT               1   = 0) + k. If T = s + 1, it is
established that ws = 0. If T > s + 1, it is established that, if wT                                              2   = 0, then wT                 1   = 0, and,
  38                                                                                                                                 w             w
       It is then the case that eF                                                       F
                                 s = 0. Indeed, we have shown in the Preliminaries that ss                                      aL
                                                                                                                                 s       , aF
                                                                                                                                            s          , 0 2 (0, 1).


                                                                          63
in period T    1, F and L receive payo↵s VTF 1 (wT          1   = 0) and VTL 1 (wT      1   = 0) + k. Consider
optimal actions in period T       2. By the logic of the analysis just conducted for period T                  1
(now replacing t with T     2, and k⇧T       2   with k⇡T   2   + k⇡T    1)   it follows that wT     2   = 0, and
F and L receive payo↵s VTF 2 (wT     2   = 0) and VTL 2 (wL      2   = 0) + k⇡T   2   + k⇡T    1.   If T = s + 2,
it is established that ws = 0. If T > s + 2, ws = 0 can be established using the logic of the
analysis just conducted recursively. Step 4. The proposed SPNE is the unique balanced
growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in period 2. In t > 2, if war has already
                              ⇤             ⇤
occurred, by Lemma 1, aLt         and aFt        are the unique optimal actions. Next, take any t              2,
and suppose that war has not yet occurred. If wt = 0, by Step 2 and 3, in period t + 1, F and
                   F                   L
L receive payo↵s Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1) and Vt+1 (wt+1 = 1) + k⇧t+1 . By the logic of Step 1.2, then,
⇥ F L F F ⇤⇤ ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ ⇥ L L F ⇤⇤
 wt at , at , st , st at , at   , wt at , at    , (aLt )⇤ and (aFt )⇤ are uniquely pinned down by
backward induction, and by tie-breaking rules 1 and 2.


B.2 Proofs of results in the main text

Lemma 1. Provided in main text. ⌅

Lemma 2. We begin by summarising a few results (established earlier in this Online Appendix)
that are used in the proof, and we then proceed to the proof itself.
   Summary of earlier results. In Lemma 5, we derived the joint welfare gain from delaying war
by one period (expressed as a share of the current pie); we showed that, if B = 0, this is constant
from period 1 onwards, while if B = 1, it increases between period 1 and period 2, and is then
constant from period 2 onwards; and, letting k denote this constant value of the joint welfare
gain, we showed that there exists  2 (0, 1) such that k < 0 if and only if  < . In Lemmas
6 and 7, we showed that, in the unique balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in
period 2, if  < , war is welfare increasing (since the gain from delaying it is negative), and
always occurs in period 2, while if        , war is welfare reducing, and never occurs; and, in the
latter case, F and L receive payo↵s V2F (w2 = 1) and V2L (w2 = 1) + k⇧2 in period 2.




                                                      64
   Proof. Let


      sF1 aL1 , aF1 ⌘ arg y1F       iF1   cF1 aF1 + sF1 ⇡1 + V2F (w2 = 1) = V1F w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1   ,


that is the share that leaves F indi↵erent between starting a war in period 1, or not (note that, by
the results summarised above, F always receives payo↵ V2F (w2 = 1) in period 2). By backward
induction and tie-breaking rule 1, in a SPNE, it must be that
                                                  8
                                                  < 0 if sF sF aL , aF
                                                          1    1  1    1
                          w1F aL1 , aF1 , sF1   =                              .                       (86)
                                                  : 1 if sF < sF aL , aF
                                                          1    1  1    1


   If B = 0, let ̂ ⌘ . If  < ̂, the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share
(and it being accepted) and starting a war must be equal to


                arg y1L   iL1     cL1 aL1 + sL1 ⇡1 + V2L (w2 = 1) = V1L w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1   ,           (87)


since, by the results summarised above, there is a war in period 2. Using (11), (87) can be
re-written as

                                                     m2
                                sF1 aL1 , aF1 +        = sF1 aL1 , aF1 + k.
                                                     ⇡1

The term k is the joint welfare gain (expressed as a share of period 1 pie) from delaying war by
one period in period 1. As explained above, it is equal to k. By the results summarised above,
since  < , k < 0. Then, war is welfare increasing in period 1. Since the share that leaves L
indi↵erent is less than sF1 aL1 , aF1 , by backward induction and tie-breaking rule 2, in a SPNE,




                                                     65
it must be that
                                                  8
                                                  >
                                                  > s   if sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 1
                                                  >
                                                  <
                             sF1 (aL1 , aF1 ) =s0 if          sF1 aL1 , aF1 2 (0, 1]                                    (88)
                                             >
                                             >
                                             >
                                             : 0 if           sF1 aL1 , aF1  0
                                             8
                                             < 0 if           sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 0
                              L L F
                             w1 (a1 , a1 ) =                                           ,                                (89)
                                             : 1 if           sF1 aL1 , aF1  0

                         ⇥
where s 2 [0, 1] and s0 2 0, sF1 aL1 , aF1        . Given (86), (88) and (89), we have w1 = 1.
   If B = 1, there are two cases. If  < , the share that leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering
that share (and being accepted) and starting a war, still defined as in (87), can now be re-written
(using 11) as

                                                              m2 g1F    g2F
                                  sF1 aL1 , aF1 +               +          .
                                                              ⇡1     ⇡1

The term

                                                                                 g2F                  g2F
                          m2 g1F    g2F                  m2 (1               )             g1F
                            +          =                  +                          +
                          ⇡1     ⇡1                      ⇡1             ⇡1                       ⇡1
                                                                 g2F
                                                        g1F
                                                  =k+
                                                          ⇡1
                                                             ⇥                                   ⇤
                                                        (1 ⌘) ↵                        ↵
                                                  =k+                                                <k
                                                                        ⇡1

is the joint welfare gain (expressed as a share of period 1 pie) from delaying war by one period
in period 1. As explained above, it is less than k, which by the results summarised above, is
negative (since  < ). Then, war is welfare increasing in period 1. Since the share that leaves
L indi↵erent is less than sF1 aL1 , aF1 , by backward induction and tie-breaking rule 2, in a SPNE,
actions must be as in (88) and (89). Given (86), (88) and (89), w1 = 1. If                                 , the share that
leaves L indi↵erent between o↵ering that share (and it being accepted) and starting a war, must




                                                        66
now be equal to

                                                     ⇥                     ⇤
         arg y1L    iL1   cL1 aL1 + sL1 ⇡1 +             V2L (w2 = 1) + k⇧2 = V1L w1 = 1|aL1 , aF1       ,   (90)


since, by the results summarised above, if war does not occur in period 1, it does not occur
anymore. Using (11), (90) can be re-written as

                                                             m2 g1F    g2F    ⇧2
                            sF1 aL1 , aF1 +                    +          + k .
                                                             ⇡1     ⇡1        ⇡1

The term
                                                    ⇥                                       ⇤
                   m2 g1F    g2F     ⇧2       (1 ⌘) ↵     ↵                                         ⇧2
                     +          + k    =k+                                                     + k
                   ⇡1     ⇡1         ⇡1               ⇡1                                            ⇡
                                                       ⇥                                          ⇤ 1
                                            k     (1 ⌘) ↵                                   ↵
                                        =       +                                                            (91)
                                          1               ⇡1

is the joint welfare gain (expressed as a share of period 1 pie) from permanently delaying war
in period 1. To determine its sign, we use another result established earlier in this Online
Appendix. In the proof to Lemma 5, it was shown that k is continuously increasing in ,
and increases from 0 to 1 + (1                ) (1        ⌘) ↵         /⇡1 as  increases from  to 1. It follows
that the RHS of (91), which is continuously increasing in k, is continuously increasing from
       ⇥               ⇤
(1 ⌘) ↵         ↵        /⇡1 < 0 to

                               (1        )(1 ⌘)(↵        )              ⇥               ⇤
                          1+                ⇡1                   (1   ⌘) ↵         ↵
                                                             +
                                     1                                        ⇡1
                                    1         (1         ⌘) ↵
                          =               +                            > 0,
                              1                           ⇡1

as  increases from  to 1. Then, there exists ̂ 2 (, 1) such that, if  < ̂, the RHS of (91)
is negative, and war is welfare increasing in period 1. In addition, since the share that leaves L
indi↵erent is less than sF1 aL1 , aF1 , by backward induction and tie-breaking rule 2, in a SPNE,
actions must be as in (88) and (89). Given (86), (88) and (89), w1 = 1. ⌅



                                                                 67
Lemma 3. The Lemma is valid under Assumption 2,                              ̂. The threshold ̂ was defined in
Lemma 2. As shown in the proof to that lemma, it is ̂                         , where  2 (0, 1) is a threshold
defined earlier in this Online Appendix. Then,                   ̂ implies          . It follows that, if war does
not occur in period 1, the unique balanced growth path SPNE of the subgame starting in period
2 is as described in Lemma 7. In such an equilibrium, as shown in the proof to that lemma (see
                                                                                                         w                   w
in particular the Preliminaries), for t          2, it is the case that wt = 0, aLt = aLt                    and aFt = aLt       ,
and F receives payo↵ VtF (wt = 1). ⌅

Proposition 1. If w1 = 0, by Lemma 3, F receives payo↵ V2F (w2 = 1) in period 2; as for L’s
payo↵ in period 2, given  ! ̂, it converges to V1L (w1 = 1). Then,
                                           8
                   ⇥                     ⇤⇤< 0 if sF sF                  aL1 , aF1
                        F   L F      F                 1   1
                       w1 a1 , a1 , s1   =                                                                               (92)
                                           : 1 if sF < sF                aL1 , aF1
                                                       1   1
                                           8
                                           >
                                           >                              sF1 aL1 , aF1 > 1
                                           > s             if
                          ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤ <
                           s1 (a1 , a1 ) =   sF1 aL1 , aF1 if             sF1 aL1 , aF1 2 [0, 1] ,                       (93)
                                           >
                                           >
                                           >
                                           : 0             if             sF1 aL1 , aF1 < 0

(where s 2 [0, 1]) follow from backward induction, and from tie-breaking rule 1). It also follows
                                ⇥            ⇤⇤
from backward induction that w1L (aL1 , aF1 ) converges to
                                                8
                               ⇥ L L F ⇤ < 0 if sF1 aL1 , aF1       0
                                w1 (a1 , a1 ) =                       .                                                  (94)
                                                : 1 if sF aL , aF < 0
                                                        1  1    1

              ⇥                    ⇤ ⇤ ⇥ F L F ⇤⇤        ⇥                ⇤⇤
Finally, given wtF aL1 , aF1 , sF1    , s1 (a1 , a1 ) and w1L (aL1 , aF1 ) , it follows from backward in-
duction that (aL1 )⇤ and (aF1 )⇤ converge to


                                  aLt = arg max              VtL (wt = 1|aLt , aFt )                                     (95)
                                                 cF  F   F
                                                  t at xt


                                  aFt = arg max              VtF (ws = 1|aLt , aFt ),                                    (96)
                                                 cF  F   F
                                                  t at xt




that is to (aL1 )w and (aF1 )w . Clearly, as  approaches ̂, the equilibrium becomes one in which
                                         w            w                                      w           w
there is an F -led war i↵ sF1      aL1        , aF1       > 1, no war if sF1           aL1       , aF1       2 [0, 1], and an

                                                             68
                                 w           w
L-led war i↵ sF1         aL1         , aF1        < 0.
   We have
                                                                                                                                       w
                                     w           w           ⇥        w                    w⇤     ⇧1                         mF2
                   sF1           aL1     ,   aF1         =        q1F                  q2F           (1        ̂) +                       .
                                                                                                  ⇡1                         ⇡1

                                                             w
If it were the case that (q1F )w = q2F                           , this could be written as

                                                             w
                                                                                                      "                       w
                                                                                                                                  #
                    w                                mF2                     w                                     mF2
                q1F          (1       ̂) +                      =       q1F     (1 ̂) + ̂              ̂                           < 1.
                                                     ⇡1              |            {z      }                         ⇡1
                                                                                 2(0,1)               |           {z               }
                                                                                                                 >k=0


                                       ↵          ↵                  w                                                       w                 w
   Then, since (q1F )w =              1+↵
                                                1+↵
                                                         = q2F           , it is always true that sF1                  aL1       , aF1             < 1. To see
                                                         w                           ↵                    w            w
this, note that if we increased q1F                          to the value           1+↵
                                                                                        ,   sF1     aL1        , aF1         would unambiguously
                                                                                     w          w
increase. However, this increased value of sF1                                   aL1 ,      aF1       would still be less than 1, since it
                                                     w               w
would then be the case that q1F                          = q2F            .
                                                                                                                                                                w           w
   It follows that there cannot be an F -led war. Using (37), (38) and (36), condition sF1                                                                aL1       , aF1       <
0 can be written as
                         
                              ↵                    ↵   ⇧1            ⇧1            ↵
                                                          (1 ̂) +      (1 ̂)          <0
                             1+↵                 1 + ↵ ⇡1            ⇡1        (1 + ↵)2
                                                      "           ✓      ◆2 #
                                                          ↵          ↵        ⇧1
                                                                                 (1 ̂) < 0.
                                                        1+↵         1+↵       ⇡1

Then, there is an L-led war if and only if the condition in the proposition holds. ⌅

Proposition 2. The first part of the proof is identical to that of the proof to Proposition 1. It
is the case that
                                                                                                                        w
                    w                 w          ⇥       w                        w⇤   ⇧1                        mF2              g1F           g2F
          sF1   aL1          ,    aF1        =       q1F                      q2F         (1       ̂) +                                              .
                                                                                       ⇡1                        ⇡1                        ⇡1

Using (47), (48), (46) and (9), and imposing sF1 aL1 , aF1                                           > 1 as a necessary and sufficient
condition for an F -led war, and sF1 aL1 , aF1                                < 0 as a necessary and sufficient condition for a
L-led war, we obtain the two conditions in the proposition. ⌅

                                                                               69
Corollary 1. Consider first the case ↵/↵ =                          / . This can be divided into two subcases,
↵/↵ = / = 1 and ↵/↵ = / > 1. If ↵/↵ = / = 1, the LHS of (30) can be written as

                                                          1
                                         1   [⇧1 (1 ̂)] 2                               (1           ) ↵
                   (1       )       ↵    2
                                                           +              (1        ⌘)                           ,
                                                   ⇡1        ⇡1                                       ⇡1

which, using (48) and (46), and (9), can be re-written as

                                                                     w
                                            w                 mF2          (1             ) g1F
                                        q1F     (1   ) +                                         .                           (97)
                                                              ⇡1                    ⇡1

The last expression was shown in the Preliminaries of the Proof to Lemma 7 to lie between 0
and 1, implying that there is peace. Next consider the case ↵/↵ = / > 1. The LHS of (30)
can now be written as
                                                      1
                                    1   [⇧1 (1 ̂)] 2                                     ↵                 ↵
              (1        )       ↵   2
                                                      +    + (1                ⌘)                                    .        (98)
                                              ⇡1        ⇡1                                            ⇡1

As shown in numerical example 4 in Online Appendix C, this expression can be greater than 1,
implying that there can be a F -led war. Next, (98) is greater than zero, implying that there
cannot be a L-led war. To see this, note that one can always simultaneously decrease ↵ and
(while keeping ↵) and ( constant) so as to obtain ↵/↵ = / = 1. Such a change unambiguously
decreases (98), making it equal to (97), or to an expression which we have shown to be greater
than zero. The result then follows.
   Second, consider the case ↵/↵ <                   / . That there can be peace (i.e., that the RHS of 30
can lie between zero and one) follows from continuity, since: if ↵/↵ = / = 1, the LHS of (30)
lies between zero and one; the case ↵/↵ < / can be obtained starting from ↵/↵ = / = 1,
and increasing      by a small amount; and the LHS of (30) is continuous in                                       . Similarly, that
there can be a F -led war (i.e. that condition 30 can hold) follows from continuity, since the case
↵/↵ < / can be obtained starting from ↵/↵ = / > 1, and increasing                                               by a small amount.
There cannot be a L-led war (i.e. the LHS of 30 cannot be negative). To see this, note that one
can always decrease         so as to obtain ↵/↵ = /                      1. Such a change unambiguously decreases
the LHS of (30), making it equal to either (97) or (98), or two expressions which were shown to

                                                              70
be greater than zero. The result then follows.
   Finally, consider the case ↵/↵ > / . Again, that there can be peace or an F -led war (i.e.
that the LHS of 30 can take value between 0 and 1, or be greater than 1) follows from continuity,
since this case can be obtained starting from ↵/↵ =      /   = 1 or from ↵/↵ =     /   > 1, and
increasing ↵ by a small amount. There can also be a L-led war (i.e. the LHS of 30 can be less
than 0), as shown in numerical example 5 in Online Appendix C. ⌅




                                                 71
Online Appendix C: Numerical examples
              ⇥                               ⇤T
Let      =          , , ⇢, ↵, ↵, , , ⇡1 , ⌘        denote the vector of parameters of the model (excluding ,
                                                                                                                             0
which is set to be equal to an endogenous threshold). In this section, we find three vectors,                                    ,
 00          000
      and          , that satisfy all relevant parametric assumptions, and such that
                                                       0                           00
      • If B = 0, there is peace if                =       , an L-led war if   =        .

                                                       0                           00                           000
      • If B = 1, there is peace if                =       , an F led war if   =        , an L-led war if   =         .

We begin by summarising the parametric assumptions of the paper in Section C.1, and we then
provide numerical examples in Section C.2.


C.1: Summary of parametric assumptions

The parametric assumptions of the paper can be divided in two groups: those that define the
basic characteristics of the environment, and those that ensures that the endogenous variables
are within the desired ranges. The former need to hold for any B, while the latter are specific to
a value of B.
      The first group of assumptions are


                                                                    <1                                                     (99)

                                                                     1                                                    (100)

                                                                ⇢    0                                                    (101)

                                                                0<↵↵                                                     (102)

                                                                0                                                       (103)

                                                               ↵                                                          (104)

                                                               ⇡1 > 0                                                     (105)

                                                                ⌘ 2 [0, 1) .                                              (106)


In addition, it must be that  2 [0, 1); however this is ensured by the fact that we set  = ̂ (see
below), and that, by Lemma 2, ̂ 2 (0, 1).

                                                                    72
      If B = 0, the second group of assumptions are as follows. First, it should be the case that


                                                        = ̂,                                                           (107)


where the endogenous threshold ̂ is defined as in (50) (recall from the proof to Lemma 2 that
                                                                         w,u
̂ =  in this case). Next, it should be the case that mJt                      ytJ       iJt for J 2 {L, F } and t           1:
in both countries, the national endowment of the industrial input should be enough to produce
the unconstrained optimal arming level (see Section 3.3). The next four conditions, derived using
(35), (36), and (2), ensure that this is true, respectively, in L in t = 1, in L in t                            2, in F in
t = 1, and in F in t     2:

                                  ⇡1                 ↵
                                       (1     ̂)                 (1     ⌘) + ⌘⇢                                        (108)
                              1                   (1 + ↵)2
                                  ⇡1                 ↵
                                       (1     ̂)                 (1     ⌘) + ⌘⇢.                                       (109)
                              1                   (1 + ↵)2
                                  ⇡1                 ↵
                                       (1     ̂)                 (1     ⌘) ↵ + ⌘                                       (110)
                              1                   (1 + ↵)2
                                  ⇡1                 ↵
                                       (1     ̂)                 (1     ⌘) ↵ + ⌘ .                                     (111)
                              1                   (1 + ↵)2

      If B = 1, the second group of assumptions are as follows. First, it should be the case that


                                                        = ̂,                                                           (112)


where the endogenous threshold ̂ is now defined as the value that makes the RHS of (91) equal
                                                           w,c
to zero. Next, we need to make sure that mLt                      ytL         iLt for t     1: L’s endowment of the
industrial input should always be enough to produce the constrained optimal arming level.39 The
next two conditions, derived using (43), (44), and (2), ensure that this is true, respectively, in
 39                             w,u           w,c                                  w,u            w,u                    w,c
   Note that, for F , it is mF t    > mF t          . For L, however, if aF
                                                                          t                > aL
                                                                                              t         , it may be aL
                                                                                                                     t         >
   w,u                       w,c      w,u
aL
 t     , which implies mL  t     > mL
                                    t     .




                                                         73
t = 1 and t > 1:
                                                                        1
                                           ⇡1                            2
                                                       (1    ̂) ↵                ↵  (1      ⌘) + ⌘⇢             (113)
                                       1
                                                                  1
                             ⇡1                         2(t 1)
                                                                   2
                                                                                 t 1
                                  (1       ̂) ↵                             ↵          (1   ⌘) + ⌘⇢.            (114)
                         1

                                                             w,u
Also, it should be the case that xFt  mFt                         for t         1: in F , the national endowment of raw
materials should never be enough to produce the unconstrained optimal arming level (see Section
3.3). The next two conditions, derived using (35), (36) and (2), ensure that this is true for t = 1
and t > 1 respectively:

                                                       ⇡1                     ↵
                                               <              (1       ̂)                                        (115)
                                                   1                       (1 + ↵)2
                                                       ⇡1                     ↵
                                               <              (1       ̂)          .                             (116)
                                                   1                       (1 + ↵)2

Finally, one additionally needs to check that Assumptions 1 and Assumption 3 hold. This requires

                                               2
                                                            > (1       ⌘) ↵                                       (117)
                                           1
                                                   ↵ > (1              ⌘) ↵             .                         (118)




                                                                 74
C.1: Numerical examples

Consider the vectors
                       2                  3            2                      3            2                    3
                            0                                0                                  0
                                = 0.900
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6    0             7           6      0                7            6    0               7
                       6        = 1.100   7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6   ⇢0 = 0.900     7           6     ⇢0                7            6   ⇢0               7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6   ↵0 = 4.000     7           6     ↵00 = 2.000       7            6   ↵000 = 2.000     7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                  0    6                  7     00    6                       7     000    6                    7
                      =6   ↵0 = 4.000     7          =6     ↵00 = 6.000       7           =6   ↵000 = 6.000     7,
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6    0             7           6      00               7            6    000             7
                       6        = 0.400   7           6           = 0.600     7            6          = 0.400   7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6    0             7           6      00               7            6    000             7
                       6        = 0.400   7           6           = 0.200     7            6          = 0.400   7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6                  7           6                       7            6                    7
                       6   ⇡ 0 = 0.900    7           6     ⇡0                7            6   ⇡0               7
                       4                  5           4                       5            4                    5
                           ⌘ 0 = 0.800                      ⌘0                                 ⌘0

which clearly satisfy (99)-(106).
                                                             0
      Numerical example 1: B = 0,                      =         . Using (50), we find ̂ = 0.964.40 We then set
 = 0.964, so that (107) holds. Simple calculations yield


                                                                 y1L   iL1 = 0.910

                                                                 y2L   iL2 = 1.012

                                                                 y1F   iF1 = 1.120

                                                                 y2F   iF2 = 1.232
                                                     w,u               w,u
                                              mL1          = mF1             = 0.441
                                                     w,u               w,u
                                              mL2          = mF2             = 0.485,

                                                                                                        0
given which it is easy to check that (108)-(111) also hold. It follows that                                 satisfies all relevant
 40
      All derivations and calculations used in this section are available from the authors upon request.




                                                                  75
parametric assumptions. Simple calculations also give

                                                                                 w
                                                                        q1F            = 0.800
                                                                                 w
                                                                        q2F            = 0.800
                                                         w                    w
                                           sF1     aL1           , aF1                 = 0.509.

                  w           w
Since sF1   aL1       , aF1       2 (0, 1), there is no war in period 1.
                                                                  00
     Numerical example 2: B = 0,                         =             . Using (50), we find ̂ = 0.960. We then set
 = 0.960, so that (107) holds. Simple calculations yield


                                                                  y1L            iL1 = 0.920

                                                                  y2L            iL2 = 1.012

                                                                  y1F            iF1 = 0.880

                                                                  y2F            iF2 = 1.496
                                                   w,u                           w,u
                                            mL1          = mF1                         = 0.792
                                                   w,u                           w,u
                                            mF2          = mF2                         = 0.480,

                                                                                                   00
given which it is easy to check that (108)-(111) also hold. It follows that                             satisfies all relevant
parametric assumptions. Simple calculations also give

                                                                              w
                                                                       q1F         = 0.667
                                                                              w
                                                                       q2F         = 0.857
                                                         w                   w
                                          sF1     aL1        , aF1                 =      0.240.

                  w           w
Since sF1   aL1       , aF1       < 0, there is an L-led war in period 1.
                                                             0
     Numerical example 3: B = 1,                    =            . To find ̂, recall that this is defined as the value
that makes the RHS of (91) equal to zero. This expression can be written as a quadratic in
        1
(1    ) 2 , which can be used to recover ̂. This gives ̂ = 0.970. We then set  = 0.970, so that
(112) holds. The value of ytJ          iJt , for J 2 {L, F } and t 2 {1, 2}, is the same as for B = 0. Simple


                                                                   76
calculations yield

                                                                     w,c
                                                              mL1          = 0.489
                                                                     w,c
                                                              mL2          = 0.538
                                                                     w,u
                                                              mF1          = 0.436
                                                                     w,u
                                                              mF2          = 0.455,


given which it is easy to check that (113)-(116) also hold.41 It is also easy to check that (117) and
                                          0
(118) hold. It follows that                   satisfies all relevant parametric assumptions. Simple calculations
also give

                                                                                 w
                                                                           q1F       = 0.766
                                                                                 w
                                                                           q2F       = 0.766
                                                                w                w
                                                  sF1    aL1         , aF1           = 0.455.

                   w           w
Since sF1    aL1       , aF1       2 (0, 1), there is no war in period 1.
                                                                00
       Numerical example 4: B = 1,                       =           . Proceeding as in the last case, we find ̂ = 0.967.
We then set  = 0.967, so that (112) holds. The value of ytJ                                    iJt , for J 2 {L, F } and t 2 {1, 2},
is the same as for B = 0. Simple calculations yield

                                                                     w,c
                                                              mL1          = 0.682
                                                                     w,c
                                                              mL2          = 0.750
                                                                     w,u
                                                              mF1          = 0.656
                                                                     w,u
                                                              mF2          = 0.398,


given which it is easy to check that (113)-(116) also hold. It is also easy to check that (117) and
                                      00
(118) hold. It follows that                   satisfies all relevant parametric assumptions. Simple calculations
  41                                w,c                 w,c
    We are not reporting mF 1     and mF
                                       2   because these variables are not required to check any assumption.
By construction, they are equal to and respectively.



                                                                       77
also give

                                                                              w
                                                                        q1F       = 0.638
                                                                              w
                                                                        q2F       = 0.638
                                                            w                 w
                                              sF1    aL1          , aF1           = 1.206.

                  w           w
Since sF1   aL1       , aF1       > 1, there is an F -led war in period 1.
                                                            000
   Numerical example 5: B = 1,                      =             . Proceeding as in the first case, we find ̂ = 0.962.
We then set  = 0.962, so that (112) holds. Simple calculations yield


                                                      y1L          iL1 = 0.920

                                                      y2L          iL2 = 1.012

                                                      y1F          iF1 = 0.729

                                                      y2F          iF2 = 1.672
                                                                  w,c
                                                          mL1           = 0.861
                                                                  w,c
                                                          mL2           = 0.525
                                                                  w,u
                                                      mF1               = 0.767
                                                                  w,u
                                                      mF2               = 0.465,


given which it is easy to check that (113)-(116) also hold. It is also easy to check that (117) and
                                     000
(118) hold. It follows that                satisfies all relevant parametric assumptions. Simple calculations
also give

                                                                              w
                                                                    q1F           = 0.482
                                                                              w
                                                                    q2F           = 0.834
                                                           w              w
                                             sF1    aL1        , aF1              =   0.003.

                  w           w
Since sF1   aL1       , aF1       < 0, there is an L-led war in period 1.



                                                                    78
