NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BARRIERS TO ELECTRIFICATION FOR "UNDER GRID" HOUSEHOLDS IN RURAL
KENYA
Kenneth Lee
Eric Brewer
Carson Christiano
Francis Meyo
Edward Miguel
Matthew Podolsky
Javier Rosa
Catherine Wolfram
Working Paper 20327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20327

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We thank Marshall Burke, Dimitri Gershenson and seminar participants at Toulouse School of
Economics, "The Economics of Energy Markets," for useful comments. This research was made
possible with the support and cooperation of the Rural Electrification Authority. This work was
supported by the Development Impact Lab (USAID Cooperative Agreements AID-OAAA-13-00002 and AID-OAA-A-12-00011, part of the USAID Higher Education Solutions
Network), the Blum Center for Developing Economies, the Berkeley Energy and Climate
Institute, the UC Center for Energy and Environmental Economics, and the Center for Effective
Global Action. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kenneth Lee, Eric Brewer, Carson Christiano, Francis Meyo, Edward Miguel,
Matthew Podolsky, Javier Rosa, and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Barriers to Electrification for "Under Grid" Households in Rural Kenya
Kenneth Lee, Eric Brewer, Carson Christiano, Francis Meyo, Edward Miguel, Matthew Podolsky,
Javier Rosa, and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 20327
July 2014, Revised July 2016
JEL No. O18,O55,Q01,Q41
ABSTRACT
In Sub-Saharan Africa, 600 million people live without electricity. Despite ambitions of
governments and donors to invest in rural electrification, decisions about how to extend electricity
access are being made in the absence of rigorous evidence. Using a novel dataset of 20,000 geotagged structures in rural Western Kenya, we provide descriptive evidence that electrification rates
remain very low despite significant investments in grid infrastructure. This pattern holds across
time and for both poor and relatively well-off households and businesses. We argue that if
governments wish to leverage existing infrastructure and economies of scale, subsidies and new
approaches to financing connections are necessary.

Kenneth Lee
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
kennethlee@berkeley.edu
Eric Brewer
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
brewer@eecs.berkeley.edu
Carson Christiano
Center for Effective Global Action
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley CA 94720
christiano@berkeley.edu
Francis Meyo
Innovations for Poverty Action
P.O. Box 72427 - 00200
Nairobi, Kenya
fmeyo@poverty-action.org

Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
Matthew Podolsky
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
podolsky@berkeley.edu
Javier Rosa
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
javirosa@eecs.berkeley.edu
Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu

I. Introduction
In Sub-Saharan Africa nearly 600 million people—or 70% of the population—live without
electricity (IEA 2013). This region contains nearly half of the unelectrified households in the
world and decisions about how to increase energy access will have major implications for
poverty alleviation and global climate change. Yet there is limited evidence on even the most
basic patterns of energy demand and the socio-economic impacts of electrification in Africa.
Policy makers, non-governmental organizations, and donors often assume that the majority of the
unelectrified are “off grid,” or too far away to realistically connect to a national electricity
network. The International Energy Agency constructs its World Energy Outlook forecasts using
an assumption that mini-grids and small, stand-alone off-grid solutions will be required for 70%
of all rural areas in developing countries (IEA 2012). As a result, there is growing support for
off-grid, distributed energy approaches, most of which are best suited for regions without access
to grid power. At the same time, the cost-benefit calculations driving large-scale energy
infrastructure investments tend to be based on the assumption that “if you build it, they will
come.” In this view, expanding high voltage distribution networks and building out greater
generation capabilities should translate into increased connectivity for rural households and
businesses.
In this paper, we present novel descriptive evidence to address both of these assumptions using
an original dataset of over 20,000 geo-tagged structures located across 150 rural communities in
Western Kenya. Our study focuses on a region in which we would expect to find evidence of
rapid growth in rural connectivity. Since 2007, Kenya has experienced a period of economic
growth. In addition, the recent push to expand rural grid coverage nationwide has resulted in
higher levels of electricity access, particularly in the densely populated counties of Western
Kenya. Keeping these factors in mind, we collected rich spatial and economic data in each of our
sample communities on the universe of rural structures, including households, businesses, and
public facilities, to produce a unique high-resolution dataset illustrating local electrification rates
in this region. We are not aware of any other comparable dataset with a similar level of detail in
a low-income setting.
2

Using our high-resolution data, we estimate local household and business electrification rates
and identify the correlates of household connectivity. We also combine our household-level data
with detailed geo-coded information on the local distribution network, in terms of transformers
and connection points, to generate relevant statistics on the location or households with respect
to the grid. In addition, we create a new distinction between households that are “off grid,”
meaning that they are too far away to connect to the national electrical grid without significant
additional investments, and households that are “under grid,” meaning that they are close enough
to connect to a low-voltage line at a relatively low cost.
We demonstrate that even in a seemingly ideal setting, where there is high population density
and extensive grid coverage, electrification rates remain very low, averaging 5% for rural
households and 22% for rural businesses. This pattern holds across time and is observed for both
poor and relatively well-off households and businesses. Furthermore, we find that half of the
unconnected households in our sample are “under grid,” or clustered within just 200 meters of a
low-voltage power line. We argue that if governments wish to leverage existing grid
infrastructure, subsidies and new approaches to financing are necessary. In regions that have yet
to build out grid or off-grid infrastructure, we highlight the need for forward-looking policies
that consider household and business demand for connections, as well as potential economies of
scale in costs.
Our work is related to the literature that estimates the impact of electrification on development
outcomes. Several studies suggest that rural electrification drives improvements in employment,
health, agricultural productivity, and education (see, e.g., Dinkelman 2011; Khandker et al. 2012;
Kitchens and Fishback 2013; Lipscomb et al. 2013; Barron and Torero 2014). Additionally, most
of the growth in energy demand over the coming decade is predicted to come from low-income
countries (Wolfram et al. 2012). For these reasons, policy makers have begun to view energy
poverty with an increasing sense of urgency. The challenge to electrify Africa rapidly while
minimizing environmental impacts has led to the formation of high profile efforts to achieve
universal energy access, including Sustainable Energy for All, a joint venture of the United
Nations and the World Bank, and President Obama’s Power Africa initiative. Similarly, there is
increasing momentum in the private sector to finance and commercialize off-grid solutions that
3

can provide rural households with enough renewable power to light a room or charge a mobile
phone.
While academics and policymakers agree that modern energy is a key input to development,
there are fundamental disagreements concerning how best to expand energy access in rural areas.
A number of organizations promote off-grid solutions—such as solar lanterns, solar home
systems, and microgrids—over the alternative of existing grid infrastructure under the
presumption that these alternatives would be less environmentally damaging.1 Others remain
critical of this approach. For example, The Breakthrough Institute describes it as, “a vision of, at
best, charity for the world’s poor, not the kind of economic development that results in longer
lives, higher standards of living, and stronger and more inclusive socioeconomic institutions.”2
These debates, however, take place in a data vacuum that this paper seeks to fill. We document
that there are a number of households in Western Kenya that remain unconnected, even though
there are electricity lines nearby. Moreover, the presumption that increasing the number of gridconnected households would lead to environmental damage may not necessarily hold in Kenya,
where over 60% of current installed generation capacity (roughly 1,700 MW) comes from non
fossil fuel sources such as hydro and geothermal. Furthermore, there are plans to build an
additional 5,000 MW of capacity by 2017 of which more than 50% will be comprised of
geothermal and wind sources. With its relatively “green grid,” it may be possible for Kenya to
substantially raise rural energy access without leaning too heavily on increases in fossil fuel
consumption.
Our findings also relate to existing work on technology adoption that highlights the importance
of social, behavioral, and other factors in influencing take-up of new technologies in Africa (see,
e.g., Kremer and Miguel 2007; Duflo, Kremer and Robinson 2011; Jack and Suri 2011).
However, grid electricity differs from previously studied technologies such as deworming,
fertilizers and perhaps even mobile phones in that physical structures must be individually
integrated into a wider network—in order to connect to power, there must be an electric line
1

Examples of organizations promoting off-grid solutions include the IEA and the Sierra Club.
Trembath, Alex. 2014. The Low-Energy Club. The Breakthrough Institute. Available at http://thebreakthrough.org/index.php/programs/energy-and-climate/the-low-energy-club.

2

4

nearby. Furthermore, the interconnected physical electrical network has important economies of
scale in terms of cost. When one household connects, it becomes far cheaper for neighboring
households to connect, pointing to the existence of a positive externality associated with each
new connection. In standard economic theory, externalities provide a rationale for providing
public subsidies to achieve socially desirable outcomes.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief background on rural electrification
in Kenya. Section III describes our data collection strategy. Section IV provides a summary of
the leading patterns that emerge from our dataset. Section V discusses the implications of our
results.

II. Background
In Kenya, rural electrification first became a public priority in 1973 with the establishment of the
Rural Electrification Programme, a government plan to subsidize the cost of electricity supply in
rural areas. Under this initial setup, rural electrification was the joint responsibility of the
Ministry of Energy and its implementing partner, Kenya Power (KPLC), the country's regulated
monopoly transmission, distribution, and retail company.3 Over the next few decades, however,
the pace of rural electrification remained stagnant. The cost of grid expansion was prohibitively
high and there was a general perception that demand for energy in rural areas was too low to be
financially viable.
In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in the coverage of the national electricity grid.
In 2003, a mere 285 public secondary schools across the country were connected to electricity.
By November 2012, Kenyan newspapers were projecting that 100% of the country’s 8,436
secondary schools would soon be connected. This recent big push to electrify rural Kenya began
with the ratification of the Energy Act of 2006, which restructured the country’s electricity sector
and created the Rural Electrification Authority (REA), an agency that would operate
independently of Kenya Power, and would be in charge of accelerating the pace of rural

3

Initially, KPLC was also the largest power-producing company in Kenya. The Kenya Electricity Generating
Company (KenGen), the country’s main power producer, was established in 1998 in a spin-off of KPLC.

5

electrification. Almost immediately, REA announced a strategy to prioritize the connection of
three major types of rural public facilities—markets, secondary schools and health clinics. In the
densely populated regions of Central and Western Kenya, where the majority of the population
lives, it is widely believed that households are within walking distance of multiple public
facilities, although detailed data verifying these claims are lacking. By following this strategy,
public facilities would not only benefit from electricity but could also serve as community
connection points, bringing previously off-grid homes and businesses within reach of the grid.
By 2013, REA announced that 90% of the country’s public facilities had been electrified
suggesting that a large share of the population had access to the electricity grid. Despite this
success, estimates of the national household electrification rate remain just between 18 and
26%.4 This gap—between those who are believed to live within range of power and those who
are connected to power—suggests that “last-mile” grid connections could be important moving
forward.

III. Data collection strategy
Estimates of grid coverage and grid connectivity in developing countries suffer from uncertainty
and measurement error. There is a need for better data on the extent to which unelectrified rural
households and businesses are truly “off grid,” and the barriers to last-mile electrification where
grid infrastructure is already present. We examine these questions by first defining a basic spatial
unit—what we refer to as a “transformer community”—to include all buildings within 600
meters of a transformer (the distance at which the utilities deem a building eligible to apply for a
grid connection). Our analysis focuses on 150 transformer communities that had transformers
installed by REA between 2008 and 2013. All of these communities are located in Busia and
Siaya, two Western counties that are broadly representative of rural Kenya in terms of
electrification rates and socio-economic development. Given the high population density in this
region, the potential for rapid rural electrification is high. After defining our transformer
communities, we conducted a census of all households, businesses and public facilities to
4

The 18% figure comes from The World Bank Databank (available at: http://data.worldbank.org/); the 26% figure
comes from REA (available at: http://www.rea.co.ke/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=4&Itemid=505).

6

determine electrification status and collect data on observable attributes of each building.
Community selection
In August 2013 local representatives of REA provided us with a master list of 241 unique REA
projects, consisting of roughly 370 individual transformers spread across the ten constituencies
of Busia and Siaya. Each project featured the electrification of a major public facility (market,
secondary school, or health clinic), and involved a different combination of high and low voltage
lines and transformers. Projects that were either too recent, or not commissioned, were not
included in this master list.5
In September 2013 we randomly selected 150 transformers using the following procedure: 1) in
each constituency, individual transformers were listed in a random order, 2) the transformer with
the highest ranking in each constituency was then selected into the study, and 3) any remaining
transformers located less than 1.6 km (or 1 mile) from, or belonging to the same REA project as
one of the selected transformers, were then dropped from the remaining list. We repeated this
procedure, cycling through all ten constituencies, until we were left with a sample of 150
transformers for which: 1) the distance between any two transformers was at least 1.6 km, and 2)
each transformer represented a unique REA project. In our final sample, there are 85 and 65
transformers in Busia and Siaya counties, respectively, with the number of transformers in each
of the ten constituencies ranging from 8 to 23.6
Sample representativeness
Table 1 presents a basic comparison between the sample counties, and all other counties in
Kenya, excluding Nairobi and Mombasa, which are entirely urban. In general, counties in
Western Kenya tend to have higher population densities with a higher share of rural homes. For
example, the population per square kilometer in the sample region is 375.4 compared to the
nationwide county-level median of 183.2. The population density of the 150 transformer
5

Since the primary objective was to estimate local electrification rates, projects that were funded after February
2013 were excluded to ensure that each community had reached a stable point in terms of electricity take-up.
6
This variation can be attributed to differences across constituencies in land size and population density. In smaller
constituencies, or constituencies where transformers were bundled closely together, our list of potential sites was
exhausted before the selection process was complete.

7

communities in our sample, however, is lower, averaging 238.1 people per square kilometer.
Although population and household density are relatively high, Busia and Siaya are broadly
representative of—or lag just behind—other parts of rural Kenya in terms of basic education and
income indicators. For example, the proportion of people with a secondary school education is
10.4% in our sample region, just below the nationwide county-level median, and the proportion
of buildings with high quality walls (i.e. those made of brick, cement, or stone) is 32.5%, just
above the nationwide county-level median. With respect to the number of public facilities (i.e.
secondary schools, markets, and health clinics), the sample region has 0.81 public facilities per
1,000 people, which is slightly above the nationwide county-level median of 0.75. Even though
the sample region is highly populated, there is a similar density of public facilities compared to
the rest of Kenya.
Based on the 2009 Kenya Population and Housing Census, rural and urban electrification rates in
Busia and Siaya are low compared to other parts of Kenya, perhaps because these are relatively
rural counties. A more appropriate question would address whether our sample is representative
in terms of grid penetration. Would the “under grid” observation apply to other parts of the
country? By July 2013, REA had identified 26,070 rural public facilities, located across the 46
non-Nairobi counties in Kenya, of which 22,860 were deemed to be electrified. This implied a
national public facility electrification rate of 87.7% and a median county-level rate of 88.2%. In
comparison, public facility connectivity in our sample region was 84.1%. Levels of grid
penetration in Busia and Siaya are therefore similar to those found in other parts of the country.
Data collection
Between September and December 2013, teams of Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA)
surveyors visited each of the 150 transformer communities to geotag each structure within 600
meters of the central transformer and to determine whether the structure had a visible electricity
connection at the time of the visit. We identified households at the level of the residential
compound, which is a unit known locally as a boma. In Western Kenya, it is common for related
families to live in different households but share the same compound. In our sample of 13,107
compounds, 29% consist of multiple households. Throughout this paper, we refer to these
8

compounds as households. In each community, we were assisted by local guides to quickly
capture basic socio-economic indicators for each structure, such as building quality, household
size, and whether there was a known business operating inside the household.
Data visualization
We create a series of maps, presented in Figure 1 (and Figures A1 to A3 in the Appendix), to
illustrate the degree to which rural Kenyans are living close to existing national grid
infrastructure. In these maps, the white circle labeled “T” in the center identifies the location of
the REA transformer. The larger white outline demarcates the 600-meter radius boundary. Green
circles represent unconnected households; purple squares represent unconnected businesses; and
blue triangles represent unconnected public facilities. Yellow circles, squares, and triangles
indicate households, businesses, and public facilities with visible electricity connections,
respectively. Household markers are scaled by household size, with the largest indicating
households with more than ten members, and the smallest indicating households with single
members.
Our maps depict several patterns. For example, businesses and public facilities (squares and
triangles) appear to be located along the roads, while households (circles) tend to be scattered
across the countryside. Also, across the communities depicted in Figures 1 (and Figures A1 to
A3), it is readily apparent that a large proportion of unconnected households (green circles) are
located near existing connection points (yellow circles, squares, and triangles).

IV. Findings
In this section, we discuss three leading patterns that emerge from our data.
1. Despite large investments in grid infrastructure, electrification rates remain low even up to
five years after infrastructure has been built.
Extending the grid across rural Kenya has been costly. A typical REA project involves the
construction of 11,000 V (11 kV) high-voltage lines, secondary distribution transformers, single

9

and three-phase low-voltage lines, and drop-down lines for last-mile connections. Since these
projects are implemented in remote areas, additional costs associated with transportation,
surveying and design, and temporary shutdowns tend to be high. In our sample, the median cost
of a single REA project is KSh 2.5 million, or $29,548.7 If we divide the cost of each REA
project by the number of transformers in the project, the estimated median cost of each deployed
transformer in our sample is $21,820.8
This high cost could potentially be justified if many of the surrounding households and
businesses were connected to the grid.9 The majority of households in our sample region are
willing to pay for an electricity connection. Based on a random sub-sample of 265 unconnected
households, 55% state that they would connect if the prices were just 30% lower. Nonetheless,
local electrification rates remain low, averaging 5.5% and 22.3% for households and businesses
in our sample of transformer communities, respectively.10 By dividing the estimated cost of each
transformer by the total number of observed connections—including households, businesses and
public facilities—we highlight the degree to which this infrastructure is currently underutilized.
In our sample, the median infrastructure investment per connection is $2,427. Yet if every
structure within each transformer community were to connect, this figure would drop to $210.
It is possible that electrification rates are low because the communities we analyze were
electrified only recently; connectivity may naturally increase over time. In order to assess
whether electrification rates remain low over time, we categorize our sample of transformers by
REA project year and compare electrification rates. The REA project year is the fiscal year in
which each project was nominated for electrification by the local Constituency Development
Fund and funded in the REA system. Typically, transformers are commissioned within several

7

For all currency conversions, we assume an exchange rate of 85 KSh per U.S. dollar.
These estimates are based on actual cost data supplied by REA. We were provided with budgetary estimates for
127 projects and actual expenditures for 121 projects in our sample. Most of the projects with missing data were
funded in 2008-09 and the data were not recorded in the latest database.
9
In our sample, there are an average of 85 households and 19 businesses in each transformer community.
10
We estimate local electrification rates by dividing the total number of structures with a visible electricity
connection by the total number of structures observed within the boundaries of the transformer community.
Household electrification refers to connectivity at the compound level.
8

10

months of being funded.11
In Figure 2, we plot average rates for communities grouped by year, with the most recently
connected group appearing on the left. The figure illustrates that electrification rates have
steadily increased over time for both households and businesses but remain at relatively low
levels, even after five years. Even for the oldest transformers in our sample, those funded during
2008-09, the average household electrification rate is 8.9%. Selection issues, however, may
confound our interpretation of these results. Communities with higher take-up potential may
have been electrified first, resulting in upward sloping curves. Yet even if we acknowledge this
selection issue, electrification rates remain low.
In our sample of 2,824 businesses, 33.6% are visibly connected to power. In Table 2, we report
the average electrification rate and number of observations for the ten most commonly observed
types of rural businesses. There is considerable variation across types. Connectivity is the lowest
for small food stands at 5.7% and the highest for barbershops and salons at 63.2%. These
differences form a snapshot of the demand for business electrification in rural areas. Barbershops
and hair salons cannot operate effectively without power, and given the relatively low cost of
related electrical appliances, connectivity is quite high. Surprisingly, connectivity is low for the
more energy-intensive business types. Only 13.3% of cornmeal “posho” mills—the business type
that is found across the largest number of communities—are visibly connected, suggesting that
the majority of millers are still operating diesel motors. Similarly, connectivity for welding,
carpentry and workshops is relatively low at 39.2%.
2. Connectivity is low even for relatively well-off rural households and businesses.
Should low levels of connectivity be attributed to a technical or an economic constraint? On the
one hand, since it is technically easier to supply a connection to a building that is close to a
transformer, connectivity should be lower for households that are further away from a
transformer. On the other hand, the current connection price of KSh 35,000, or $412, may not be

11

There is no reliable data on precise transformer commissioning dates in Western Kenya.

11

affordable for poor, rural households in a country where the GNI per capita (PPP) is $1,730.12
Connectivity should be lower for households with visible markers of poverty, such as lowquality building materials.
In our dataset of over 13,000 households, 76.4% have low-quality walls, made of mud, reeds,
wood, or iron, and 23.6% have high-quality walls, made of brick, cement, or stone. For each
structure, we use the GPS coordinates to calculate straight-line distances to the central
transformer, as well as the nearest distance to any type of connected structure to approximate
distances to low-voltage lines. In Figure 3, we plot locally weighted regressions of connection
status on distance to the central transformer for businesses and households with high and lowquality walls. While the likelihood of being connected improves slightly with proximity to the
transformer, there is a much larger improvement when households have better walls.
In Table 3, we report ordinary least squares regression results using connection status as the
outcome variable, and distance, wall quality and their interaction as the explanatory variables.
These coefficients are estimated using the regression model
𝑦!" = 𝛽! 𝑑!" + 𝛽! 𝑤!" + 𝛽! 𝑑!" ×𝑤!" +    𝜆! + 𝜀!"

where yic is an indicator variable for whether or not structure i in community c was visibly
connected to electricity, d is the straight line distance between the structure and the central
transformer (in 100 meter units), w is an indicator variable for whether or not the structure had
high-quality walls (e.g. brick, cement, or stone), and λc captures community fixed effects to
account for site-level differences in market status or geography. The coefficients in column 2
suggest that a household with high-quality walls is 3% more likely to be connected if it is 20
meters away than if it is 200 meters away. In comparison, at 200 meters, a household with highquality walls is 22% more likely to be connected compared to a household with low-quality
walls.

12

In March 2014, Kenya Power, the national utility, stated that it will continue to charge eligible customers $412 for
single-phase power connections, as long as the cost of connection does not exceed $1,588, inclusive of VAT.

12

Nonetheless, connectivity is under 30% for these relatively well-off households, most likely
because the majority of these households are still poor. While high-quality walls correlate with
being better off, the difference in primary economic activity between households with high and
low-quality walls in our sample is not large. Based on a sub-sample of 1,737 households in our
transformer communities, 70% of households with high-quality walls list small-scale farming as
a primary economic activity, compared to 77% of households with low-quality walls. Taken
together, the above patterns suggest that the current connection price is simply too high for rural
households and businesses. In ongoing work, we are experimentally varying the connection cost
to assess this hypothesis directly.
3. Half of the unconnected households in our sample are “under grid,” or clustered within 200
meters of a low-voltage line, and could be connected at a relatively low-cost.
Taking advantage of the spatial nature of our data, we calculate the shortest distance between
unconnected households and the nearest connection point or transformer to approximate the
extent to which each household is “under grid.” These estimates are conservative. Since our data
are limited to the 600-meter circles drawn around each transformer, these are upper bounds on
the actual distance because there may be other low-voltage lines immediately beyond our
mapped boundaries. In Figure 4, we plot the density of the 12,001 unconnected households and
1,875 unconnected businesses in our data set using this metric along the horizontal axis.
Although every structure within a transformer community is eligible to apply for a connection,
this is not enough to guarantee that an application will be immediately fulfilled by the local
utilities. From the supplier’s perspective, it is preferable to connect buildings that are no more
than a few service poles away from a low-voltage line because the installation costs associated
with single, distant connections are much higher.13
According to REA, service poles are required for every 50 meters of line; three or four service
poles would therefore imply a maximum distance of 150 to 200 meters. We conservatively
estimate the incremental cost of supplying an electricity connection to a single household 200
13

This is based on multiple discussions with REA and Kenya Power representatives that took place between July
2013 and March 2014.

13

and 100 meters away from a low-voltage line to be $1,940 and $1,058, respectively, inclusive of
material and transportation costs, as well as a 25% contractor markup. 14 Once connected,
households pay the utility an electricity tariff that is structured to cover the cost of additional
power generation.
These cost estimates, however, do not account for the significant economies of scale that could
be achieved by connecting multiple households along the same length of line at the same time. In
Figure 5, we plot estimates of the cost economies of scale based on the number of connections
and the distance to a low voltage line. For example, if two neighboring households were to
connect, the above per household costs would fall by roughly 47%, to $1,021 and $580 for
distances of 200 and 100 meters, respectively. These households could be located as far as 30
meters away from either side of the line. The average cost does not decrease by 50% because
each household would still require its own service line. If six households were to connect, these
estimates would drop to $409 and $262, respectively. While we do not have adequate data to
estimate marginal costs in a mass connection program, the costs would presumably be much
lower. For instance, if we ignore transportation costs and assume that there is no need to build
any additional distribution lines, the marginal cost of a single connection would theoretically fall
to $80, the cost of a single-service line. Our cost estimates, presented in Figure 5, are in line with
previous work on the costs of rural electrification in Kenya (see, e.g., Parshall et al. 2009).
There are no precise estimates of the overall value of electricity to a household. However, if we
assume that a connection generates benefits well into the future and apply an annualized interest
rate of 12%, then an $80 cost of connection need only generate the equivalent of $10 per
household per year in monetary and non-monetary benefits—or 0.6% of the GNI per capita—to
be welfare improving.15 For instance, these benefits could come in the form of higher net profits
14

This excludes additional last-mile costs of household wiring and the meter deposit that households pay to the
utility. We conservatively estimate the physical cost of supplying last-mile connection costs, as well as potential
economies of scale, using the following assumptions provided by REA: (a) low-voltage single-phase two-wire
overhead lines costing $7.06 per meter; (b) single-phase service lines costing $81.92 per connection; (c)
transportation costing $1.18 per kilometer for a single lorry traveling over an average distance of 50 km; and (d)
contractor costs equal to 25% of all material and transportation costs. Since each truck can carry a maximum of 30
poles, a single vehicle would be sufficient to transport the materials for small groups of neighboring households 600
meters away from a transformer.
15
The Kenya Government Bond 10 year rate was 11.44% in March 2014.

14

for household businesses or improved educational outcomes for children. Applying a 200-meter
threshold, we find that 47.2% of the 12,386 unconnected households in our sample could be
deemed “under grid.” These households are clustered together and are, on average, 115 meters
away from a connection point. Based on our data, this represents 36,800 individuals who lack
modern energy yet live within range of connecting to the grid at a relatively low cost.

V. Conclusion
We demonstrate that even in a seemingly ideal setting, where there is high population density
and extensive grid coverage, electrification rates for rural households and businesses remain very
low. This pattern holds across time and is observed for both poor and relatively well-off
households and businesses. Clearly, under the status quo pricing policies, significant investments
in grid infrastructure in Western Kenya have not translated into equally high rates of rural
electrification. Our data does however highlight an opportunity that may inform future policies.
Half of the unconnected households in our sample are “under grid,” or clustered within 200
meters of a low-voltage line, and could potentially be connected at relatively low marginal cost.
If this pattern were to hold across transformer communities nationwide, then given that over 90%
of Kenya’s major public facilities (i.e. markets, secondary schools and health clinics) are now
electrified, and that these structures are spatially distributed across the country, there is a
potential opportunity for millions of new connections.16
There are at least three ways in which our results could be useful in designing future
electrification strategies. First, governments may wish to subsidize mass connection programs.
There may be a natural redistributive motive behind this strategy. The fact that connectivity
remains so low in “under grid” Kenyan communities indicates that a $412 connection price is too
high for poor, rural households to face alone. Furthermore, each new connection expands the
geographic reach of the electricity network bringing more and more structures “under grid.” In
theory, subsidies can be useful in the presence of these types of externalities. Second,
16

For example, based on REA’s estimates of 8.8 million households and 26% household electrification (http://www.rea.co.ke/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=4&Itemid=505), then the 50% “under grid”
result would point to an opportunity for 3.3 million new connections

15

governments may wish to support innovative financing and payment approaches to raising
connectivity. The lack of a vibrant credit sector serving poor, rural households in developing
countries is well documented (see, e.g., Karlan et al. 2013). Providing access to credit or
financing options could help rural households meet the up-front cost associated with
electrification. Third, governments may wish to support group-based subsidies that are tied to the
number of applicants. When take-up is higher, it is cheaper for utilities to connect households
because transportation costs are lower and it is possible to design lower-cost local distribution
networks. This strategy would therefore take advantage of existing infrastructure and economies
of scale. Coordinating household connections, however, poses a collective action problem that
would need to be solved through government policies such as mass connection programs.
The idea of subsidizing last-mile electricity connections to households is, of course, nothing new.
Between 1935 and 1939 the United States implemented its own rural electrification program,
issuing roughly 0.3% of GDP—or $16 billion in chained 2009 dollars—in government
subsidized loans for rural electrification. Within two decades the proportion of electrified farms
in the U.S. increased from 10% to over 90% (Kitchens and Fishback 2013). Similarly, the
Tennessee Valley Authority Program, which featured major public investments in a series of
hydroelectric dams, has been attributed to persistent growth in regional manufacturing (Kline
and Moretti 2013).
Our results highlight an opportunity to greatly reduce energy poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa by
targeting last-mile connections in “under grid” communities. In regions that have yet to build out
grid or off-grid infrastructure, we highlight the need for forward-looking policies that take into
account household and business demand for connectivity, as well as potential economies of scale
in costs. In Sub-Saharan Africa, there has been a growing focus on expanding renewable
generation capacity. In countries like Kenya, where there is a relatively “green grid,” the usual
tradeoff between energy access and environmental damage is not as salient. As governments and
donors embark on the ambitious task of electrifying hundreds of millions of African households
over the coming years, the novel results in this paper call for further research on the demand for
and impacts of electrification as well as the potential of various financing mechanisms.

16

References
Barron, Manuel, and Maximo Torero. 2014. Short Term Effects of Household Electrification:
Experimental Evidence from Northern El Salvador.
Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence
from South Africa. American Economic Review 101, no. 7:3078-3108.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. Nudging Farmers to Use
Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review 101, no.
6:2350-2390.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2013. World Energy Outlook. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/weo-2013/.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 2012. World Energy Outlook. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/weo-2012/.
Jack, William, and Tavneet Suri. 2011. Mobile Money: The Economics of M-PESA. NBER
Working Paper 16721, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w16721.
Karlan, Dean, Robert Darko Osei, Isaac Osei-Akoto, and Christopher Udry. 2013. Agricultural
Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints. Quarterly Journal of Economics
(forthcoming).
Khandker, Shahidur, Hussain A. Samad, Rubaba Ali, and Douglas F. Barnes. 2012. Who
benefits most from rural electrification? Evidence in India. Policy Research Working Paper
6095, World Bank. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6095.
Kitchens, Carl, and Price Fishback. 2013. Flip the Switch: The Spatial Impact of the Rural
Electrification Administration 1935-1940. NBER Working Paper 19743, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w19743.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2013. Local Economic Development, Agglomeration
Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.
NBER Working Paper 19293, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19293.

17

Kremer, Michael, and Edward Miguel. 2007. The Illusion of Sustainability. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122, no. 3:1007-1065.
Lipscomb, Molly, Ahmed Mobarak Mushfiq, and Tania Barham. 2013. Development Effects of
Electrification: Evidence from the Topographic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, vol. 2:200-231.
Parshall, Lily, Dana Pillai, Shashank Mohan, Aly Sanoh, and Vijay Modi. 2009. National
electricity planning in settings with low pre-existing grid coverage: Development of a spatial
model and case study of Kenya. Energy Policy 37:2395-2410.
Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef, and Paul Gertler. 2012. How Will Energy Demand Develop in
the Developing World? Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, vol. 1:119-138.

18

Table 1. Comparison of socio-economic indicators between sample region and nationwide counties.
Nationwide county percentiles
Sample region

25th

50th

75th

1,586,250

528,054

724,186

958,791

per square kilometer

375.4

39.5

183.2

332.9

% rural

85.7

71.6

79.5

84.4

% at school

44.7

37.0

42.4

45.2

% in school with secondary education

10.3

9.7

11.0

13.4

353,259

103,114

154,073

202,291

per square kilometer

83.6

7.9

44.3

78.7

% with high quality roof

59.7

49.2

78.5

88.2

% with high quality floor

27.7

20.6

29.7

40.0

% with high quality walls

32.2

20.3

28.0

41.7

% with piped water

6.3

6.9

14.2

30.6

Total public facilities

1,288

356

521

813

per capita (000s)

0.81

0.59

0.75

0.98

Rural (%)

2.3

1.5

3.1

5.3

Urban (%)

21.8

20.2

27.2

43.2

Public facilities (%)

84.1

79.9

88.1

92.6

Total population

Total households

Electrification rates

Note: Sample region column presents aggregate and weighted-average statistics (where applicable) for Busia and Siaya counties. Demographic and socio-economic data obtained from 2009 Kenya Population and
Housing Census. Public facility electrification data obtained from the Rural Electrification Authority (REA).
Rural and urban electrification rates represent the proportion of households who stated that electricity was
their main source of lighting during the 2009 census. National county percentiles exclude the urban counties of Nairobi and Mombasa.

19

Table 2. Electrification rates for businesses of various types.

All businesses
Small retail
Posho mill
Barber shop / salon
Restaurant
Tailor
Guesthouse
Food stand
Bar / cinema / television hall
Butcher
Welding / carpentry / workshop
Other

%
(1)
33.6
36.2
13.3
63.2
31.3
26.5
14.2
5.7
62.9
29.7
39.2
42.2

N
(2)
2,824
1,163
294
209
182
162
155
140
105
91
74
249

Note: Column (1) reports the average electrification rate; (2)
reports the total number of observations.

20

Table 3. Predictors of electrification.
Households
(1)
Distance
Walls
Walls*Distance
Fixed effects
Mean of dep. var.
Observations
R-squared

-0.69

***

(0.14)

No
5.47
12,666
0.00

(2)

Businesses
(3)

-0.14 (0.15)
25.33*** (1.26)
-1.57*** (0.31)

-0.19 (0.16)
24.98*** (1.26)
-1.54*** (0.31)

No
5.47
12,666
0.13

Yes
5.47
12,666
0.16

(4)
-2.71

***

(0.55)

No
33.58
2,823
0.01

(5)
**

(6)

-2.11 (0.89)
29.19*** (2.83)
0.79 (1.11)

-1.39 (1.06)
27.69*** (3.03)
0.08 (1.21)

No
33.58
2,823
0.09

Yes
33.58
2,823
0.20

Note: All columns report OLS regressions. The dependent variable is an indicator variable for household connection status.
Columns (1) to (3) report results for households; Columns (4) to (6) report results for businesses. Definitions: (a) Distance is the
straight line distance to the central transformer (in 100 meter units); (b) Walls is equal to 1 for buildings with high-quality walls
(e.g. brick, cement, or stone) and is equal to 0 otherwise; (c) Walls*Distance is the interaction between Distance and Walls. All
coefficients are multiplied by 100. Columns (3) and (6) report community fixed effects regressions. Asterisks indicate coefficient
significance level (2-tailed): * P < 0.10; ** P < 0.05; *** P < 0.01.

21

Figure 1: Visualizing the proportion of households and businesses that are “under grid.”

Note: In these maps, the white circle labeled “T” in the center identifies the location of the REA transformer. The
larger white outline demarcates the 600-meter radius boundary. Green circles represent unconnected households;
purple squares represent unconnected businesses; and blue triangles represent unconnected public facilities. Yellow circles, squares, and triangles indicate households, businesses, and public facilities with visible electricity connections, respectively. Household markers are scaled by household size, with the largest indicating households
with more than ten members, and the smallest indicating single-member households. Residential rental units are
categorized as households. The figures illustrate the large proportion of unconnected households (green circles)
that are located near existing connection points (yellow circles, squares, and triangles). (Left) The transformer was
funded/installed in 2008-09 at a secondary school (although the school itself is unconnected). Connectivity is 14%
for households and 53% for businesses, and 84% of all unconnected households in this community are “under grid,”
or within 200 meters of a connection point. (Right) The transformer was funded/installed in 2012-13 and located
in a market center. The dark region in the upper left of the figure is Lake Victoria. Connectivity is 8% for households and 45% for businesses, and 75% of all unconnected households are “under grid.” Maps of 18 additional
transformer communities are presented in Figures A1 to A3 in the Appendix.

22

Figure 2: Median transformer community electrification rates by structure type and funding/installation year.

Note: Transformer communities are grouped by REA project year. The REA project year is
the fiscal year in which each project was nominated and funded for electrification. There are
12, 37, 22, 58, and 21 projects in the 1 Year (2012-13), 2 Years (2011-12), 3 Years (2010-11), 4
Years (2009-10), and 5 Years (2008-09) groups, respectively. Structures with high-quality walls
are defined as those made of brick, cement, or stone. Structures with low-quality walls are
defined as those made of mud, reeds, wood, or iron. The figure illustrates that electrification
rates have steadily increased over time for both households and businesses but remain at
relatively low levels, even after five years.

23

Figure 3: Connection rates by distance to the central transformer.

Note: In this figure, we plot locally weighted regressions (bandwidth 5) of the connection
status on the distance to the transformer for businesses and households with high and lowquality walls. As in Fig. 2, high-quality walls are defined as those made of brick, cement, or
stone. Low-quality walls are defined as those made of mud, reeds, wood, or iron. The figure
illustrates that: (1) electrification rates are correlated with both distance from transformer,
and quality of walls, for both businesses and households, and (2) even for the relatively welloff households, connectivity remains low.

24

.001

.002

Unconnected households (n=12,001)
Unconnected businesses (n=1,875)

0

Kernel density

.003

Figure 4: Kernel densities of unconnected households and businesses by distance from lowvoltage line.

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Distance from low−voltage line (meters)
Note: In this figure, we plot Epanechnikov kernels (bandwidth 12). The horizontal axis represents the distance of the unconnected household or business to the nearest connection point
or transformer. The vertical axis scale applies to household density only. The peak density
for businesses is 0.016. The figure illustrates that: (1) the mass of unconnected households is
within 100 and 200 meters of a low-voltage line, and (2) the mass of unconnected businesses
is within 50 meters of a low-voltage line (since businesses tend to be clustered in market
centers).

25

1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000

Single connection only
Two connections along same line
Four connections along same line
Six connections along same line

0

Per connection cost (USD)

Figure 5: Economies of scale in the cost of providing household electricity connections.

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Distance from low−voltage line or transformer (meters)
Note: In this figure, we plot the cost of supplying a single-phase connection as a function of
distance and the number of neighboring households connecting to the same length of lowvoltage line. These neighboring households can be located as far as 30 meters away from
either side of the line. Our estimates are based on actual assumptions used by REA for budgetary purposes. The horizontal axis can be interpreted as either the distance to the nearest
low-voltage line or the distance to the central transformer. The figure illustrates that the cost
per household drops dramatically when multiple structures are connected simultaneously
due to the fact that they can share some of the infrastructure.

26

Figure A1: Maps of transformer communities 1 to 6.

Note: The white circle labeled “T” in the center identifies the location of the REA transformer. The larger white outline demarcates the 600-meter radius boundary. Green circles represent unconnected households; purple squares
represent unconnected businesses; and blue triangles represent unconnected public facilities. Yellow circles, squares,
and triangles indicate households, businesses, and public facilities with visible electricity connections, respectively.
Household markers are scaled by household size, with the largest indicating households with more than ten members, and the smallest indicating single-member households. Residential rental units are categorized as households.

27

Figure A2: Maps of transformer communities 7 to 12.

Note: The white circle labeled “T” in the center identifies the location of the REA transformer. The larger white outline demarcates the 600-meter radius boundary. Green circles represent unconnected households; purple squares
represent unconnected businesses; and blue triangles represent unconnected public facilities. Yellow circles, squares,
and triangles indicate households, businesses, and public facilities with visible electricity connections, respectively.
Household markers are scaled by household size, with the largest indicating households with more than ten members, and the smallest indicating single-member households. Residential rental units are categorized as households.

28

Figure A3: Maps of transformer communities 13 to 18.

Note: The white circle labeled “T” in the center identifies the location of the REA transformer. The larger white outline demarcates the 600-meter radius boundary. Green circles represent unconnected households; purple squares
represent unconnected businesses; and blue triangles represent unconnected public facilities. Yellow circles, squares,
and triangles indicate households, businesses, and public facilities with visible electricity connections, respectively.
Household markers are scaled by household size, with the largest indicating households with more than ten members, and the smallest indicating single-member households. Residential rental units are categorized as households.

29

