                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              HEALTH CARE ADHERENCE AND PERSONALIZED MEDICINE

                                            Mark Egan
                                         Tomas J. Philipson

                                        Working Paper 20330
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20330


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




Previously circulated as "Non-Adherence In Health Care: A Positive and Normative Analysis." We
are thankful to seminar participants at Chicago, Indiana, NBER, and Northwestern as well as Michael
Dickstein, Dana Goldman, Kris Hult, Alex MacKay, Casey Mulligan, and Derek Neal for discussions
and comments. Tomas Philipson is thankful for financial support from the George Stigler Center for
Study of the Economy and the State, The University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Mark Egan and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Health Care Adherence and Personalized Medicine
Mark Egan and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 20330
July 2014,Revised September 2015
JEL No. I1,I10,I18

                                              ABSTRACT

Non-adherence in health care results when a patient does not initiate or continue care that a provider
has recommended. Previous research identifies non-adherence as a major source of waste in US health
care, totaling approximately 2.3% of GDP, and have proposed a plethora of interventions to raise adherence.
However, health economics provides little explicit analyses of the important dynamic demand behavior
that drives non-adherence, and it is often casually attributed to uninformed patients. We argue that
whereas providers may be more informed about the population-wide effects of treatments, patients
are more informed about the individual specific value of treatment. We interpret a patient’s decision
to adhere to a treatment regime as an optimal stopping problem in which patients learn the value of
a treatment through treatment experience. We derive strong positive and normative implications resulting
from interpreting non-adherence as an optimal stopping problem. Our positive analysis derives an
“adherence survival function,” depicting the share of patients still on treatment as a function of time,
and predicts how various observable factors alter adherence. Our normative analysis derives the efficiency
effects of non-adherence and the conditions under which adherence is too high or low. We consider
the efficiency implications of this analysis for common adherence interventions. We argue that personalized
medicine is intimately linked to adherence issues. It replaces the learning through treatment experience
with a diagnostic test, and thereby speeds up the leaning process and cuts over-adherence and raises
underadherence. We assess the quantitative implications of our analysis by calibrating the degree of
over- and under-adherence for one of the largest US drug categories, cholesterol-reducing drugs. Contrary
to frequent normative claims of under-adherence, our estimates suggest the efficiency loss from overadherence
is over 80% larger than from under-adherence, even though only 43% of patients fully adhere.


Mark Egan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
egan@uchicago.edu

Tomas J. Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
Section 1: Introduction

         Improving adherence to prescribed medical treatments remains a universally agreed-upon

and widespread challenge in health care. In the United States, estimates show that non-adherence

is wasteful;1 the New England Healthcare Institute (2009) estimates that the annual cost of non-

adherence in the United States is approximately $290 billion, equating to about 13% of total health

care spending, or 2.3% of GDP. Improving medical adherence through both private and public

interventions has been identified as a crucial step toward improving health outcomes and lowering

health care costs.2 Recent technological advancements have targeted medical adherence, for

example, electronic and educational messaging systems (Baum 2013, Comstock 2013, Vollmer et

al. 2011), as well as technology designed to help providers identify non-adherent patients

(Lesselroth et al. 2011). In the United States, The Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute

(PCORI), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, and the National Institutes of Health,

among other government bodies, dedicate substantial funding to support research on raising

medication adherence (Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America 2013). An

enormous literature outside of economics on the prevalence of non-adherence and its consequences

has driven these efforts. Indeed, since 1996, an estimated more than 25,000 peer-reviewed medical

articles have been published on patient adherence or compliance (Chernew 2008). The overall

implicit concern of this vast literature is that adherence is too low and that private or public

interventions are needed to raise adherence. Although many analysts stress inadequate patient

adherence in both economic and medical circles, one should be cautious about bystanders’ claims

of under-consumption.



1
 See Bosworth et al. (2011) for further discussion.
2
 See Black et al. (1987), Feldman et al. (1998), Flack et al. (1996), Haynes et al. (1996), Hershey et al. (1980),
Mallion et al. (1998), and Nelson et al. (1980).
                                                                                                                     1
       Despite the great concerns regarding under-adherence, little explicit economic analysis

examines the dynamic demand behavior resulting in non-adherence that offers predictions about

the conditions under which it is more likely to occur than not. Without an empirical validation of

such a positive theory, making credible normative claims that adherence is too low is difficult.

To this end, this paper provides an explicit analysis of non-adherence and derives its positive and

normative implications.

       We interpret non-adherence as an optimal stopping problem for a patient learning about

his individual value of a therapy. Although providers recommending treatments are likely more

informed about the population-wide effects of these treatments, patients experiencing a treatment

are more informed about its individual value to them. This individual value of treatment

incorporates how the patient trades off patient-specific treatment effectiveness, side effects, and

costs of care. In our analysis, a patient’s prior beliefs about a treatment coupled with the patient’s

experience with the treatment drive initiation and subsequent adherence. The patient behavior

mimics the common-sense approach of using a treatment, assessing its value, and discontinuing

if it is not valuable. Non-adherence is thus inherently a dynamic demand behavior that requires

an explanation of why people initiate but then discontinue therapy. Learning about treatment

value provides a natural explanation.

       Our positive analysis of non-adherence as an optimal stopping problem offers many

testable implications. As patients learn about the treatment, they will become more informed

over time, implying that good patient–treatment matches last, but bad ones don’t. More

precisely, we derive an “adherence survival function” depicting the share of patients still on

treatment as a function of time, and show how various observable factors affects it. We predict

that non-adherence occurs early in the sense that adherence decisions stabilize with sufficient


                                                                                                      2
learning about treatment value. We find that adherence as conventionally measured may

sometimes be insensitive to its price and even increase in price. We also predict that education

has non-trivial effects on adherence because it interacts with patient-level treatment effects; more

educated individuals adhere longer to individually valuable care, but shorter to non-valuable

care.3 Learning about treatment quality may occur in other ways than through experiencing it,

such as from communication with providers or through diagnostic tests in personalized medicine,

and we also analyze how these impact adherence behavior.

        To illustrate, consider Figure 1 below which depicts adherence behavior that the medical

literature reports across several treatment classes. It displays the general pattern that non-

adherence occurs early but then stabilizes, which we interpret as patients learning about

treatment value over time. Lien et al. (2010) find clinical evidence supporting the view that

patient adherence decisions are rational and incorporate a patient’s anticipated benefits from

treatment. Lien et al find that patients whose condition improves under treatment are more likely

to adhere while patient’s whose condition deteriorates under treatment are less likely to adhere.

        Non-adherence driven by patient learning produces many surprising normative

implications. In particular, we argue that separating ex-ante from ex-post efficient adherence is

important. When learning about personalized treatment value, patients act in an ex-ante optimal

fashion given their treatment beliefs. However, adherence may be ex-post inefficient in that some

patients adhere to what turns out to be non-valuable treatment for them, whereas others do not

adhere to what turns out to be valuable for them. Therefore, adhering patients who do not value

treatment display ex-post over-adherence, and non-adhering patients who value treatment display

ex-post under-adherence. We argue that such over-adherence vanishes over time as patients


3
 For example, uneducated individuals adhered longer to smoking after it was discovered that cigarettes had the
“side-effect” of inducing cancer.
                                                                                                                 3
eventually learn that they do not value the therapy. However, under-adherence is permanent if the

patient does not re-adhere.



     FIGURE 1: ADHERENCE SURVIVALS ACROSS TREATMENT CLASSES (YEAW ET AL. 2009)




Notes: Figure 1 illustrates observed adherence patterns for prostaglandin analogs, statins, bisphosphonates, oral
antidiabetics, angiotension II receptor blockers (ARBs), and overactive bladder (OAB) medications. Figure 1 is
taken directly (Figure 2) from Yeaw et al. (2009). Details for each drug cohort are as follows. Prostaglandin analogs,
such as Xalatan (Latanoprost) are used to manage glaucoma. Statins, such as Lipitor (Atorvastatin), are used to
lower cholesterol levels. Biophosonates, such as Fosamax (Alendtronate Sodium), are used to treat osteoporosis.
Oral antidiabetics, such as Glucophage (Metformin) are used control blood sugar levels for patients with Type 2
diabetes. Angiotension II Receptor Blockers, such as Hyzaar (Losartan Potassium and Hydrochlorothiazide), are
used to treat hypertension. OAB medications, such as Detrol LA (Tolterodine Tartrate) are used to treat overactive
bladders.




         This analysis has strong implications for the effects of private and public interventions

aimed at altering adherence behavior. We distinguish between interventions that have symmetric

versus asymmetric effects on those patients that value and do not value treatment. We stress the

indeterminate welfare effects of interventions with symmetric effects, such as copay reductions to

raise adherence, because they customarily raise adherence of both groups. We stress the

unrecognized but intimate relationship between personalized medicine and ex-post efficient

                                                                                                                    4
adherence. Testing for treatment value before undertaking therapy involves changing the therapy

from an experience good, for which consumption experience is required to determine its quality,

to a search good, for which it is not. Personalized medicine essentially speeds up the learning

process and is an asymmetric intervention that eliminates inefficient adherence for both those that

value and do not value treatment. The emergence of personalized medicine is therefore explained

by learning being central to adherence. In particular, the value of personalized medicine is higher

when learning through experience is costly relative to learning through a diagnostic, which

explains its emergence in cancer care, where over-adherence may be fatal. The fact that much of

the rationale of personalized medicine seems to be to reduce harmful over-adherence is in direct

contrast to the common belief that adherence is too low.

        To assess the quantitative importance of these implications, we calibrate the ex-post

efficiency effects in the case of the cholesterol-reducing drug simvastatin (Zocor). Interestingly,

our calibration results imply the vast majority of the efficiency loss comes from over-adherence,

as opposed to under-adherence, even though less than half of patients adhere. In particular, we find

that the ex-post efficiency loss from over-adherence is over 80% larger than that from under-

adherence. In this context, we stress that the common argument that patients under-adhere because

they do not understand the benefits of treatment seems unsatisfactory, because those perceived

benefits presumably made them start the therapy in the first place.

       This paper relates to several strands of previous analysis. A large literature on health care

demand starts with Grossman (1972), but we are not aware of any explicit analysis of the

dynamic demand behavior that is inherent in non-adherence. Elsewhere (Seabury et al. 2014), we

have provided a partial review of the vast empirical health services research literature on the

extent of non-adherence. This paper relates most closely to Philipson and Hedges (1998) and


                                                                                                   5
Philipson and Desimone (1997) who analyze attrition in clinical trials when patients learn about

treatments from their own experience in the same way investigators learn about population-wide

effects from aggregate data. Non-adherence driven by learning after the trial is thus analog to

attrition driven by learning in the trial. The paper also relates to later structural estimation papers

such as Crawford and Shum (2005), Chan and Hamilton (2006), Fernandez (2013) and Dickstein

(2014), but these papers are not concerned with the positive or normative analysis of adherence

behavior addressed here. Goldman et al. (2007) and Chernew et al. (2008) report estimates of

negative price elasticities for this type of health care demand. In the general economics literature,

this paper is most closely related in spirit and structure to the labor literature on job turnover

(Jovanovic 1979), where matching workers to jobs is the analog of matching patients to

treatments. Indeed, there appears to be many analogies between optimal matching issues in

economics and personalized medicine.

       The paper is briefly outlined as follows. Section 2 sets up the model and derives the

implied adherence survival functions. Section 3 discusses the large set of positive implications

regarding the effects of observable factors on the adherence survival function. Section 4

discusses the normative implications and the role of personalized medicine as an asymmetric

adherence intervention. Section 5 calibrates the amount of over-and under adherence for the

cholesterol-reducing drug simvastatin. Lastly, Section 6 concludes with a discussion of a large

set of future research avenues that the explicit analysis of this type of demand behavior suggests.



Section 2: Non-Adherence as an Optimal Stopping Problem

       In this section we derive the positive implications of interpreting non-adherence as an

optimal stopping problem when a patient learns about his own personal treatment value given

                                                                                                      6
prior knowledge about population wide effects.4 Following Philipson and Desimone (1997), we

assume the patient decides whether to initiate the treatment regime with limited information

regarding the value of the treatment. By initiating treatment, the patient learns if she values the

treatment and then decides to continue to adhere or stop the treatment depending on whether the

current experience suggests it valuable or not. We are interested in the observable conditions

under which so called primary adherence occurs, the patient initiates the treatment, as well as

when secondary adherence occurs, the patient continues after initiation.

           We assume that there is a continuum of patient types or true quality levels or treatment

effects denoted by         and distributed according to (⋅). These treatment effects correspond to the

patient-specific “quality” of the product the treatment represents. This level of quality represents

all health related outcomes and throughout the paper is interpreted as a net benefit index of

inclusive of treatment effectiveness, side effects, and any other effects on a patient’s health. For

example, the quality may represent quality-adjusted-life-years (QALY) net of side effects.

           The health of the patient in a given period reflects the quality of the treatment plus some

idiosyncratic shock (noise) according to

                                                      ℎ =     +

Thus, the observable health of the patient depends on the unobservable quality of treatment                        as

well as other unobservable factors,            . For example, a reduction in pain or body temperature may

be due to a treatment or the body healing itself naturally. For symptomatic disease, the health

outcome is observed directly by the patient and for asymptomatic disease it is observed through

lab results conveyed to the patient. For example, the value of statin therapy is assessed by

cholesterol tests conveyed to the patient. Either way, patients only observe health outcomes, ℎ ,



4
    Our model is similar in spirit to Jovanovic’s (1979) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (2006) analysis of job turnover.
                                                                                                                        7
and do not separately observe          and    . Thus, the patient cannot infer treatment quality

immediately from their health outcomes but rather learn about the quality of treatment over time.

          The period utility from the treatment is given by (ℎ , ) where

                                                (ℎ , ) = ℎ −

The parameter       represents patient’s health consumption trade-off. Utility is distinct from the

effectiveness or health; effective treatments may have little value and low adherence by a patient

not concerned with the condition being treated. If not on treatment, the patient has access to an

alternative treatment with per period utility (ℎ ,           ) where both ℎ and             are known with

certainty.5

          Patients have a prior over the quality of the treatment,           (⋅). We assume that each

patient’s initial prior beliefs reflect the true distribution of treatment heterogeneity such that

    (⋅) = (⋅). This may be interpreted as patients agreeing with providers, perhaps through

provider communication, about the population wide effects of treatments before learning about

their individual value of care. For example, this prior may be the result of knowing summary

statistics of the distribution of treatment effects from the labeling of the product, obtained from

clinical trials in the approval process. We denote a patient’s prior at time as                       ⋅ ℎ   where ℎ

is the history of personal health outcomes on the treatment. Under the maintained assumption

that treatment quality and noise/shocks are normally distributed,               ∼     ( ,      ) and        ∼

    (0,   ), standard normality results imply that a patient’s posterior distribution over their

treatment effect is given by

                                                                         ( +(
                                        ! ℎ" + (1 − ! )
                                                                                             %)'
                           ,ℎ    =                              , $% ' + % ' * , , ! = -'                         (1)
                                                                   &     )                   & /% '
                                                                                            .    )




5
  In the Appendix, we derive the analog implications for the case of multiple treatments which we interpret to
include partial adherence levels of a single treatment.
                                                                                                                      8
where the patient’s initial priors are         (⋅) =     (   ,   ).

         The patient optimally updates his beliefs about the quality of the treatment based on

weighting the average health outcomes, ℎ" , and his initial prior. With each observation the

patient places more weight on his treatment experience and less on his prior. In addition, his

posterior variance decreases after each treatment experience over time. In other words, the longer

a patient has been in treatment, the more he learns about the quality of the treatment and the

more his belief is informed by his own experience rather than any beliefs prior to initiating the

treatment, such as the population-wide beliefs offered by the provider.

         Given these beliefs about the personal treatment effect, the patient’s value function after

rounds of treatments is given by

                                                                                             (ℎ , )
              1 ℎ ,ℎ ,          = (ℎ , ) + 3 max 7891 ℎ               /( , ℎ /( ,       :,          ;
                                                                                             1−3

The patient elects to adhere to treatment if and only if the expected value of staying on the

treatment is larger than going on the alternative treatment from there on. The future is discounted

according the parameter 3 which may induce differential adherence across treatments with

differences in timing of benefits and costs. For example, a patient may adhere perfectly to a pain

medicine while adhering poorly to a cholesterol reducing drug given the immediate benefit of the

former and delayed benefit of the latter.

         Once a patient elects to forgo treatment for the alternative treatment, he will find it

optimal to continue the standard care in all proceeding periods.6 Patients will never find it


6
  Suppose patients potentially found it optimal to reenter treatment. Consider the patients decision to continue
treatment after receiving rounds of treatment
                                        max<891 ℎ=/( , ℎ=/( ,       = :, 1(ℎ , ℎ= , >
If a patient opts for the alternative treatment he does not learn any additional information about the treatment
regime. Thus if a patient opts for the alternative treatment he will do so in all proceeding periods. This was
originally shown in Bradt, Johnson and Karlin (1956).

                                                                                                                   9
optimal to “re-adhere” to the treatment regime. 7 Because of the future option value of continuing

treatment, a patient may elect adhere to treatment even if the expected future period return is

lower than that of the alternative treatment.

         It is well established that the optimal stopping behavior for this type of learning is

characterized by a treatment performance threshold (Gittins and Jones 1974, Gittins and Jones

1979).8 This implies that non-adherence occurs when the average experience on treatment ℎ" is

below a certain threshold level, here denoted ? . In other words, a patient remains in treatment as

long as their average treatment experience, ℎ" , is greater than the threshold ? . The optimal

stopping rule or threshold, ? , is a function of the patient’s prior mean and variance, discount rate

3, as well as the distribution of the treatment/signal noise.

         Adherence behavior conditional on patient type ( ) is characterized by survival function

@( | ) which reflects the proportion of type               individuals remaining in treatment at time .

                                 @( | ) = Pr(ℎ( > ?( , ℎ" > ? , … , ℎ" > ? | )

The overall survival function of adherence thus results from aggregating over all types

                                               @( ) = ∫ @( | )G ( )

For such a survival function, the degree of primary non-adherence or non-initiation corresponds

to the magnitude 1 − @(1) while secondary non-adherence or discontinuation usually seems to

refer to adherence conditional on initiation or @( )/@(1). For example the adherence behavior

depicted in Figure 1 in the Introduction concerns this type of secondary adherence.9


7
  In the case of multiple treatment options or the case when the value of the alternative treatment is not known with
certainty, as discussed in the Appendix A1, the patient may find it optimal to re-adhere to the initial treatment
regime.
8
   See also Gittins et. al (2011) and Powell and Ryzhov (2012) for a general discussion of characterizing stopping
problems.
9
   Sometimes the quantity S(t)/S(1) is referred to as persistence in the empirical and medical adherence literature,
referring to the fraction of patients that refill prescriptions, differentiating it from secondary adherence, referring to
fraction of days during the treatment period the prescription was followed.
                                                                                                                          10
Section 3: Positive Implications about Factors Driving Non-Adherence

       In this section we discuss the many testable implications of interpreting non-adherence as

an optimal stopping problem when patients learn about their individual treatment value.

3.1 Treatment Duration and Adherence

       In our analysis, learning about the quality of the treatment takes place initially but

eventually the patient learns about the quality of treatment with great precision. More precisely,

as treatment progresses, a patient’s observed average treatment effect ℎ" converges to the true

individual specific quality of the treatment, . As the number of periods increases, the posterior

variance converges to zero and the patient knows the true treatment quality. Once the patient

knows the true treatment quality, they elect to adhere to the treatment if and only if they value it

over the alternative treatment, ( , ) ≥ (            ,   ).

       The hazard rate out of treatment is defined as the fraction of remaining patients that quit

                                      J( )+J( /()
                                          J( )
the treatment in a given period, or              .   Since patients eventually learn about treatment

quality with great precision, this implies the hazard rate of non-adherence converges to zero over

time. Our model then predicts that the level of adherence @( ) flattens out and converges to some

positive level lim @( ) = @ ∗ > 0. This implication is consistent with the often reported empirical
               → ∞
finding that so called “incident users” who are new to therapy have larger non-adherence rates

than so called “prevalent users” who are already on therapy.

       In terms of the timing of non-adherence, an implicit implication of our analysis is also

that learning must precede non-adherence. In other words, symptoms or lab results that reveal

treatment quality must be observable before a patient exits therapy. For example, if side-effects




                                                                                                       11
take say three months to manifest themselves for a treatment treating an asymptomatic disease,

then a large amount of non-adherence in the first couple of months would invalidate our analysis.

The timing of non-adherence should match when patients learn about the quality of treatment.

3.2 The Effect of Prices and Income on Adherence

             There are two primary costs of treatment: the monetary cost of treatment               and the

opportunity cost of treatment incurred by forgoing an alternative treatment. The cost of treatment

may rise either due to higher co-pays, premiums, the time-cost of adherence, or other forms of

time or monetary costs that contribute to the total cost of care. Such a price increase naturally

lowers the value of treatment and lowers the adherence survival function by raising the optimal

                         OP.
                               > 0. For primary adherence, it’s governed by whether the value function
                         OQ
stopping threshold;

at initiation is larger than the permanent adoption of the alternative treatment: 1 >

     (   ,    )/(1 − 3). Since the left-hand side falls in the price         and the right hand side does not,

primary adherence falls in price. This simply says that demand is downward sloping in its own

price. 10

             However, secondary adherence may not be down-ward sloping in its own price. As

usually defined as the adherence conditional on initiation, @( )/@(1), it may potentially rise as

opposed to fall with price dependent on whether the denominator falls more than the numerator.

This will depend on the type of patient heterogeneity present. For example, consider when

differential prior beliefs in the treatment value determine the level of primary adherence. An

increase in price lowers primary adherence but those still initiating believe more in the treatment


10
  In the health policy literature, a common argument is since price (premium or copay) are a barrier to adherence, it
should be cut when adherence is price-sensitive. However, we here note that this pricing policy is the exact opposite
to optimal insurance design under moral hazard that implies larger copays for price-elastic demand. Standard
arguments about moral hazard imply that there is excessive adherence without copays. In short, moral hazard
implies there is over-adherence rather than under-adherence.

                                                                                                                   12
than those that initiated before the price increase. This would imply a potentially offsetting

positive selection effect on secondary adherence counteracting the direct negative price effect on

initiation11. For example, if the treatment lost patent expiration and went generic, the resulting

lower prices would imply larger primary adherence but potentially lower secondary adherence.

          The other cost of treatment is the opportunity cost in terms of alternative care that

represents the outside option in our stopping problem. It is straightforward to show that the better

the outside options, the lower the adherence. This implies that the price of the alternative

                                                                                                         RP
treatment raises adherence while the quality of alternative treatment lowers adherence; RQ . <
                                                                                                           S


     RP
0, RU . > 0. Analog arguments imply that primary adherence falls in the value of alternative care,
      S


whether through it having a higher quality or lower price, but that secondary adherence may rise

or fall with the value of alternative care.

          To consider the effect of income on adherence in this setting, we assume that health is

normal good that is valued more highly by wealthier patients. In this case, a wealthier patient

may be represented as having a lower price in terms of the utility loss from foregone

consumption represented by a lower parameter value for . It is straightforward to show that

                                   RP
adherence is decreasing in , RV. > 0.

3.3 Treatment Quality and Adherence

          A basic implication of our analysis is that better performance leads to higher adherence

both on the individual level as well as on an aggregate level relating to overall product quality.




11
  The selection generating these non-standard price-effects on secondary adherence are similar to the empirical
findings of Cardon and Showalter (2015) who find that advertising lowers adherence.

                                                                                                                  13
           On an individual level, our analysis implies that a patient’s treatment experience drives

adherence behavior. In our framework, if a patient experiences treatment outcomes ℎ that are

uniformly larger than another set of treatment outcomes ℎ ′, then he will adhere longer with the

first experience. In our particular learning environment based on normality assumptions, the first

set of experiences would imply a larger average health outcome throughout, which in turn would

imply a higher posterior mean, thus resulting in higher adherence.

           On an aggregate level, differences across treatments in terms of their overall quality are

represented by differences in the mean quality of the treatment .12 These population-wide

effects of treatments are often estimated in clinical trials conducted to gain approval for

marketing. At any given time, the performance threshold driving optimal stopping is decreasing

                                                RP.
                                                      ≤ 0.13 In fact, an increase in the average quality of the
                                                RX
in the average quality of the treatment,

treatment raises adherence through two channels. It lowers the performance threshold as well as

increases the fraction of patients that perform above any given threshold

3.4 Treatment Heterogeneity and Noise

           A patient’s health outcome in a given period is a function of treatment heterogeneity ( ∼

     ( ,   )) and the ability to infer treatment quality from health or so called noise (               ∼

     (0,   )). Treatment heterogeneity, captured by the true and prior variance                  , and the

treatment noise, captured by          , impact learning and thus adherence. Both have offsetting effects

on overall adherence and thus their impact on adherence is indeterminate.



12
   Aggregate effectiveness should be distinguished from so called “cost-effectiveness” of care which is more loosely
related to larger adherence. Cost-effectiveness is not perfectly related to adherence because patients may trade off
cost versus effectiveness differently than one to one, that is, the utility (ℎ, ) may differ from a ratio. Other reasons
include unmeasured quality dimensions that affect patient utility and adherence, or prices that do not correspond to
the full cost of care faced by the patient.
13
   See section 6.4 in Gittins (1989) and Corollary 1 in Yao (2006) for further details.
                                                                                                                      14
3.4.1 Heterogeneity in Treatment Quality and the Option Value of Care

         Heterogeneity in treatment value ( ), including effectiveness and side effects, has

opposing effects on adherence. On the one hand, the patient’s outside option to adopt the

alternative treatment allows patients to partake in the upside of treatment value without the

downside making the payoff of treatment resemble an equity call option. The option value of

treatment rises in heterogeneity because non-adherence limits the downside. Other things

                                                                                                            RP
constant, an increase in treatment heterogeneity lowers the patients stopping threshold, R%.' <0.14

On the other hand, treatment heterogeneity not only impacts the threshold                      but it also impacts

the distribution of treatment experiences observed by the patients. In particular treatment

heterogeneity raises the number of patients experiencing bad outcomes. 15 As a consequence,

heterogeneity has offsetting effects on adherence and produces an indeterminate effect on

adherence.

3.4.2 Noise in the Learning about Treatment Quality from Health

         Treatment noise also has offsetting effects on adherence. On the one hand, a greater

variance of treatment noise makes it harder for patients to discern between the true treatment

effect and the treatment noise. In other words, treatment noise ultimately slows the learning

process of patients. Other things constant, an increase in the variance of the treatment noise

                                                                                                            RP
lowers the value of continuing treatment and increases the stopping threshold such that R%.' >
                                                                                                               &


0.16 On the other hand, treatment noise interacts with treatment quality in driving adherence. To



14
   See Theorem 1 in Yao (2006) for details on the proof.
15
   Consider the trivial example where treatment is known to be valuable for all individuals; ( , ) > (ℎ , ),
                           Z
    = 0 and     > 0. If      > 0 , the ex-ante value of treatment rises but it would no longer be the case that all
                                                                                                                     Z
individuals find it valuable to stay in treatment. There exists ℎ′ such that (ℎZ , ) < (ℎ , ) since ℎ ∼            ,    .
Heterogeneity raises the value of treatment but produces an ambiguous effect on adherence.
16
   See Lemma 1 in Yao (2006) for details on the proof.
                                                                                                                       15
illustrate, consider the extreme case without noise (            =0). In the setting without noise, the

fraction of those who benefit ( ( , ) > (               ,    )) adhere while the rest leave. At the opposite

extreme, nothing is learned about treatment from adhering (                 is very large). In this case, if the

average value is positive then everyone adheres, otherwise no-one adheres. These extreme cases

illustrate how the impact of treatment noise on adherence interacts with the true value of the

treatment. The end result is that, the effect of noise on adherence is indeterminate.

3.5: Education and Adherence

         Learning about treatment quality may occur in other ways than through experiencing it,

such as from education or communication with providers. In particular, we examine how

education affects a patient’s ability to assess treatment quality in the particular Bayesian learning

framework assumed here.

         We discuss the implications of education where education results in patients holding

more accurate beliefs about the effectiveness of treatment. First, traditional education, as

measured a years of regular schooling, may enable more accurate beliefs. Second, even an

uneducated individual may have accurate beliefs due to “health-literacy” in his condition. Third,

provider education or communication may raise the accuracy of patient beliefs.17 However, a

provider may educate his knowledge in the population-wide effects of the treatment, here (⋅),

but the patient has the ultimate expertise in the individual value of the treatment after

experiencing it, here . In particular, providers do not have expertise in how the patient trades off




17
  There are of course other factors that may drive provider effects on adherence. One is through reimbursements
incentives, e.g. fee-for-service medicine may discourage adherence when it means less future care. Another way is
that high quality providers may have a direct effect on adherence without communication. If a doctor from a well-
known medical institution prescribes a treatment, the patient may believe in the treatment more than if a resident or
nurse from a community hospital prescribed it.

                                                                                                                    16
side-effects, efficacy, or the full time costs of compliance.18 It is perhaps not surprising that

providers often claim there is under-adherence since they do not face the cost of adherence.

           Consider when education results in patients having beliefs closer to the true distribution

of treatment effects. In particular, consider when the true mean is , educated individuals hold

prior mean      [\   and uneducated individuals hold prior         ]\   such that   ]\   >   [\   = . This says

that uneducated individuals are overly optimistic about the treatment. From our previous

discussion of the impact of priors on adherence, it follows that adherence falls with education in

this case. However, if uneducated patients are overly pessimistic about treatment (                  ]\   <   [\   =

     ), education raises adherence. In other words, if education corresponds to having beliefs closer

to the truth, education may either be positively or negatively related to adherence.

           In addition, regardless of why patients may have more accurate prior beliefs about a

treatment, various forms of education will not have a marginal effect on adherence in the long

run. This is because ultimately the patient will learn whether the treatment works for him or not

which will drive adherence. A patient’s posterior beliefs are determined more and more by

treatment performance over time (the weight ^ goes to unity) regardless of the patient’s prior

beliefs.

3.6 Provider Communication and Adherence

           Providers, such as nurses and doctors, play a critical role not only in the diagnosis and

prescription process but also in the patient’s adherence decision. The model is easily extended to

incorporate the role of providers by considering how providers impact a patient’s prior beliefs

about treatment as well as how patients update those beliefs based on treatment experience.




18
  In particular, doctors may incorrectly argue that patients under-adhere because doctors are often only focused on
health outcomes as opposed to the patients that must weigh all aspects of care and pay the price.
                                                                                                                   17
                A patient’s prior beliefs may be partially or totally determined by his medical provider. In

the context of the model, providers may provide patients with a noisy signal about the personal

effectiveness of treatment _, _ ∼                      ( ,   ` ).   The patient then incorporates this information into his

beliefs such that his beliefs prior to treatment are now

                            ( ; _) =     (    `
                                                  ,   `)


                                                                                        +(
                                                                            1       1
                                   =     b!_ + (1 − !)                 ,c       +       d e,! =
                                                                            `                     `   +

The patient then updates his beliefs based on treatment experience given his new prior beliefs

(    `
         ,   ` ).
                    Better providers may be characterized by providing less noisy signals about the

effectiveness of treatment (i.e. smaller                      `)    such that patients of better doctors have more precise

beliefs about the effects of the treatment. However, as discussed, more precise priors may

increase or decrease adherence. Thus more knowledgeable providers do not necessarily lead to

improved adherence. If there are agency issues, providers may provide biased information to

steer patients towards more highly reimbursed treatments. Consider when the provider provides

more positive information about a more highly reimbursed treatment. Hence, rather than

providing a signal _ ∼             ( ,       ` ),     doctors may provide patients with a biased signal _f ∼        ( +

g,       ` ),   g > 0. If patients are aware of the bias, then this will not impact their adherence decision.

If patients are unaware of the bias then the bias results in overly optimistic patients and an

increase in short-run adherence. However, in the long run the effect of the doctor’s bias on

patient beliefs disappears. As illustrated by eq. (1), the patient’s treatment experience dominates

the patient’s biased prior beliefs. In other words, our model suggests that the agency problem

between patients and doctors is muted in the long run when patients can learn treatment quality

over time.


                                                                                                                          18
3.7: Comorbidities and Adherence

        A patient undergoing a given treatment may be undertaking other treatments due to

multiple diagnoses or comorbidities. There are three ways in which comorbidities may affect

adherence in our analysis. First, the effectiveness of a treatment may depend critically on the

patient’s comorbidities and the associated treatments. For example, the effectiveness of one drug

may be partially subdued or enhanced when taken in conjunction with another drug.

        Secondly, comorbidities may make it harder for patients to infer treatment value from

health outcomes. This is because when the patient is on several treatments due to comorbidities,

the patient does not know whether it is the treatment itself, the comorbidities, or the treatment for

comorbidities that may be causing a given health outcome. In other words, comorbidities raise

the variance of the treatment noise    . As discussed, a rise in the variance of the treatment noise

produces an indeterminate effect on adherence.

        Lastly, comorbidities may affect adherence by making it marginally more taxing on a

patient, both financially and mentally, to undertake multiple treatments for multiple morbidities.

For example, it may be more taxing to remember when to take eight medicines rather than one.

This would be reflected by a higher total price   (including time costs) in our analysis and

clearly lowers adherence.

        The overall effect of comorbidities on adherence will be determined by the relationship

of these three effects.




                                                                                                   19
Section 4: Normative Implications for Efficient Adherence

        In this section we discuss the efficiency implications of non-adherence.19 Inefficient

adherence transpires as the direct result of heterogeneous and unknown personalized treatment

effects. The process in which individuals learn about their own value of the treatment creates the

potential for both under and over-adherence.

4.1 Ex-ante vs Ex-post Efficient Adherence

        Ex-ante efficient behavior occurs if an individual cannot be made better off given their

individual information at a given point in time. By definition, our stopping behavior is ex-ante

efficient unless there are external effects across patients that are not internalized (we discuss such

issues in the conclusion). Ex-post efficient adherence behavior occurs when only those who
                                                                 ∗
actuality truly value the treatment adhere to it. Let                be threshold level of health or treatment

quality at which the patient is indifferent between the treatment and the alternative treatment

                                               ( ∗ , ) = (ℎ ,            )

We will refer to individuals who value treatment, such that                  >   ∗
                                                                                     , as “valuers” and the
                                                                                               ∗
remaining group as “non-valuers”. Naturally, the reservation level of health                       is increasing in

the price of the treatment and the quality of the alternative treatment but decreasing in the price

                                 RU ∗       RU ∗          RU ∗
                                        > 0, Rh >0, and RQ < 0.
                                  RQ
of the alternative treatment;
                                               S            S


        It is ex-post efficient for valuers to be on the treatment but ex-post inefficient for non-

valuers to be on the treatment. Therefore, there are two types of ex-post inefficiencies. The first


19
  Both medical and economic discussions of adherence often state that patients do not adhere enough, although
there is no explicit criteria discussed defining whom and why a patient should adhere. In some sense, our theory
suggests an explanation of this normative claim by third party bystanders about the under-consumption of patients;
the selection effect inherent in learning means that those that adhere do better than those who do not adhere. With
the inherent upward bias in adherence effects under optimal learning, it maybe ill-advised to argue everyone should
adhere.


                                                                                                                      20
inefficiency is under-adherence. Even though treatment is valuable for a fraction 1 − ( ∗ ) of

patients, some of those patients will stop treatment because of incorrect inferences about

treatment value. The second type of inefficiency is over-adherence. Treatment is not valuable for

the fraction ( ∗ ) of non-valuers even though they may initially adhere to the treatment before

learning that it is not valuable for them.

       Figure 2 illustrates the general pattern of ex-post inefficient adherence. The survival

curve @ i ( ) reflects the proportion of valuers that adhere for each period. Under-adherence by

valuers is reflected by the fact that the survival curve @ i ( ) is not equal to one. The shaded area

above represents @ i ( ) thus reflects the proportion of valuers that inefficiently under-adhere to

treatment. Inefficient under-adherence occurs because some of the patients experiencing poor

initial performance on the treatment leave even though it is in fact valuable.

       The survival curve @ j (⋅) reflects the proportion of non-valuers that adhere at each period.

Treatment is not valuable for non-valuers, thus @ j (⋅) represents inefficient adherence. The

shaded area underneath the curve @ j (⋅) thus represents the fraction of non-valuers that

inefficiently adhere to treatment. Such inefficient over-adherence is reflected by a strictly

positive survival curve for this group. Inefficient adherence occurs because of either the option

value of treatment and/or because the patient experienced good initial performance on the

treatment. However, sooner or later all of the non-valuers will learn that the treatment is

invaluable such that no non-valuers adhere; lim @ j ( ) = 0.
                                               →k




                                                                                                      21
                FIGURE 2: ADHERENCE BEHAVIOR BY VALUERS AND NON-VALUERS




Notes: The non-valuers survival function, @ j ( ) represents adherence for those for whom treatment is not valuable.
The valuers survival function, @ i ( ) represents adherence for those for whom treatment is valuable.


         Because true treatment quality raises adherence, as discussed previously, adherence by

non-valuers will always be lower than that by valuers, @ j ( ) < @ i ( ) ∀ , as depicted in Figure

2. The overall solid survival curve is the mixture of the two conditional survival functions with

the mixture weights given by the fraction of true valuers and non-valuers:

                                 @( ) = ( ∗ )@ j ( ) + 1 − ( ∗ ) @ i ( )

It follows that in the short-run there will be both under-adherence for valuers and over-adherence

for non-valuers. However, in the long run there will always be under-adherence because there are

valuers who drop out and will never find it optimal to re-adhere. The dotted line in Figure 2

reflects the optimal adherence level which is simply the fraction of the population that responds

to treatment, 1 − ( ∗ ), assumed half in the Figure. In the long run, the overall adherence

survival function @(⋅) goes below the optimal level of adherence because non-valuers all
                                                                                                                  22
disappear and valuers who leave never return. It asymptotes to a stable level since learning

makes the non-adherence hazard goes to zero. The survival function @ j (⋅) of non-valuers goes to

zero as non-valuers learn that the treatment is not worthwhile for them.

       This previous discussion concerned the inefficiency in quantities, that is, who is on the

treatment or not compared to who should be. The monetary value lost from under- and over-

adherence results from how much the foregone therapy is valued. Let the reservation price for

the treatment beyond the going price for an individual of type       be denoted m( ) and defined by

                                        , + m( ) = (         ,   )

Thus the sign of m( ) reflects whether the treatment is truly valued or not relative to the

alternative treatment. It follows directly that higher performing treatments have a higher

reservation price, m Z ( ) > 0, and that the reservation price is positive for valuers and negative

for non-valuers. The dollar value of the welfare loss at time    can then be written as the total loss

of the two groups

                                              U∗                           k
nopqrmo st__ r        = sj ( ) + si ( ) = u −m( )@( | )G ( ) + u m( )[1 − @( | )]G ( )
                                              +k                          U∗


The first term sj ( )is the loss in welfare at time from non-valuers over-adhering; those who do

not value the treatment but still adhere to it. The second term si ( ) is the loss in welfare at time

 from valuers under-adhering; those who value the treatment but stopped adhering.

       Given the welfare loss at each period, the present value of the total welfare loss over time

is the discounted value of the loss from both groups
                                          k
                                   s = u 3 [sj ( ) + si ( )]G


The important aspect of this overall welfare loss is that over-adherence is front-loaded while

under-adherence is back-loaded as displayed in Figure 2 above. This results from the fact that
                                                                                                      23
non-adherence occurs early during learning and vanishes in the long run. Therefore, in present

value terms over-adherence often matters more than under-adherence. This is part of the reason

we find that efficiency losses from over-adherence dominate under-adherence in our later

calibration results for cholesterol lowering drugs. More generally, the importance of front-loaded

over-adherence for overall efficiency is in contrast to common arguments of the importance of

raising adherence.

4.2 Welfare Effects of Adherence Interventions

       We separate adherence interventions into those that have symmetric- versus asymmetric

effects on valuers and non-valuers.

4.2.1 Adherence Interventions that do not affect Learning

       Adherence interventions often target treatment costs or other treatment parameters rather

than target the patent learning process. However, by doing so the adherence intervention affects

true valuers and non-valuers symmetrically by raising adherence for both groups. As a canonical

illustration of such symmetric interventions that do not affect learning, consider price-based

interventions that lower the time- or dollar expense of treatment. However, lowering price raises

adherence for both valuers and non-valuers which implies that over-adherence is increased while

                             Rxy               Rxz
                                     > 0 and         < 0. This implies counteracting effects on the
                                RQ             RQ
under-adherence decreased;

overall welfare loss given by

                                 Gs   k
                                          {sj ( ) {si ( )
                                    =u 3 c       +        dG
                                 G          {       {

Therefore, any intervention that affects adherence behavior by the two groups symmetrically will

have indeterminate effects on ex-post efficiency. On the other hand, this will likely be the norm




                                                                                                      24
as it is extremely difficult to make adherence interventions operate differently across valuers and

non-valuers.

        The long-run effects of interventions not based on learning that raise adherence are easier

to sign. In the long run, we discussed over-adherence must go to zero when those truly not

responding eventually learn that they should not adhere. Therefore, in the limit the welfare loss

must fall from an intervention that raises adherence

                                   {sj ( )           Gs( )
                                lim        = 0 ⟹ lim       <0
                                →k   {            →k G




4.2.1 Adherence Interventions that affects learning

        An optimal intervention would have an asymmetric effect on adherence, raising

adherence among valuers while decreasing adherence among non-valuers. One such asymmetric

adherence intervention is personalized medicine. Personalized medicine, by use of so called

companion diagnostics, aims to provide patients with better information about treatment value

before undertaking treatment. The companion diagnostic is taken before treatment and is aimed

at better diagnosing the value of the treatment given the disease, as opposed to the disease itself.

In other words, the companion diagnostic essentially “speeds up” the patient learning process.

The emergence of personalized medicine is therefore explained by learning being central to

adherence. In particular, personalized medicine replaces learning about the treatment value from

health experience with learning about the treatment value from a diagnostic test. It thereby

changes the therapy from being a so called experience good, for which consumption is necessary

to determine its quality, to a search good, for which it consumption is not necessary to determine

its quality.



                                                                                                    25
            Consider the scenario where a companion diagnostic prior to treatment provides a

potentially noisy signal G =          + } of the personalized value of the treatment (similar to the

provider case discussed in 3.6). However, learning from the diagnostic may be imperfect just as

learning from health experience may be, through a noisy test distributed according to } ∼

     (0,   ~ ).   It is straightforward to show the analog threshold property in optimal stopping with

diagnostics as before; patients will test into treatment with such a diagnostic if it is above a

threshold, G > • and test out of the treatment if they are below it, ≤ • .

            The sign of the normative welfare effect of having access to a companion diagnostic is

clear. A companion diagnostic always raises ex-ante welfare as the patient can always choose not

to use it, and be as well off as without the diagnostic.20 The magnitude of this positive welfare

gain depends on the quality of the diagnostic and is highest with a fully accurate diagnostic.

Consider a fully accurate companion diagnostic represented by                ~   = 0 and thus the diagnostic

reveals the quality fully; G = . In this case the diagnostic is fully informative and true valuers

always adhere to treatment and non-valuers never initiate treatment. Thus, the threshold level of

the diagnostic is the reservation level of quality defining whether a treatment is valuable, • =                 ∗
                                                                                                                     .

True valuers test into treatment and non-valuers test out of it thereby producing an asymmetric

effect on adherence of the two groups. It raises adherence by valuers and lowers it for non-

valuers. The positive welfare effect is maximized by an accurate diagnostic in the sense that

personalized medicine eliminates all ex-post inefficient adherence.

                                ~   = 0 ⇒ @i( ) = 1 & @j( ) = 0 ∀ ⇒ s = 0




20
  It is often argued that the contraction of treatment demand that follows from personalized medicine when patients
test out of treatment will result in lower profits. However, the new combined product with a companion diagnostic
always raises patient welfare so should be able to be sold at higher prices than the treatment alone.
                                                                                                                  26
This implies that an upper bound on the value of personalized medicine is given by the ex-post

efficiency loss s discussed and this bound is obtained for a fully accurate test.21 An implication

of this value of personalized medicine is that for classes where learning about treatment quality

through experience is very costly relative to learning through a companion diagnostic, we would

expect personalized medicine to emerge. This is one explanation of why companion diagnostics

have emerged primarily in oncology where learning through treatment experience may induce

premature mortality. One of the primary benefits of personalized medicine is that it reduces over-

adherence in the treatment classes where learning through experience is costly relative to testing;

this is in stark contrast to the common belief that there is too little adherence overall.

        Although these normative implications of personalized medicine are clear, the positive

implications of how personalized medicine affects adherence behavior are less clear. If we

consider the case of a perfect test, it follows directly that secondary adherence rises with

personalized medicine as everyone testing into therapy know they value it. However, primary

adherence may rise or fall with personalized medicine. This is because some patients that

initially did not adhere may test into therapy, thereby expanding the market for the treatment22.

On the other hand, some patients who adhered may test out of therapy, thereby contracting the

market for the treatment. Thus the overall effect on primary adherence is indeterminate and

depends on the relative sizes of the two groups.23

        For imperfect companion diagnostics, it is straightforward to show that both primary and

secondary adherence may rise or fall with personalized medicine. As opposed to the case with a


21
   We have elsewhere discussed other value aspects of personalized medicine using evidence from COX-2
inhibitors, see Sood et al. (2013).
22
   This is the case for so called “rescue diagnostics” that are developed to test patients out of any side-effects
preventing a drug from getting FDA approval.
23
   This is assuming the indicated population remains the same. Alternatively one could redefine the adherence and
the indicated population based on the diagnostic test.
                                                                                                                     27
fully accurate diagnostic, secondary adherence does not always rise with personalized medicine

for reasons similar to the non-standard price effects on secondary adherence. With an imperfect

test just as with price effects, both the denominator and the numerator of the ratio of secondary

adherence @( )/@(1) are affected by the personalized medicine.



Section 5: Calibrating Adherence Inefficiencies: The Case of Simvastatin
(Zocor)
        In this section we calibrate our model of non-adherence to assess the welfare losses

induced by ex-post inefficient adherence. We show how this is feasible given readily available

data. We consider adherence associated with cholesterol lowering treatments taken by adult

males. More specifically, we consider adult males taking the drug simvastatin (Zocor) as a

cholesterol lowering treatment regime. Our main result is that even though a majority of these

patients do not adhere fully, the welfare loss of over-adherence dominates that of under-

adherence. In particular, the loss due to over-adherence is over 80% larger than the loss due to

under-adherence.

        In our framework, we interpret simvastatin as the unknown treatment while the

alternative is not taking any treatments. Our interpretation assumes that the sole objective of the

treatment is to lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C). The per-period (quarterly)

benefit of simvastatin ℎ represents the patient’s percentage point decline in LDL-C levels

relative to their initial baseline levels. The percentage point decline in LDL-C levels of a patient

in a given period reflects the true personalized treatment effect plus some idiosyncratic shock

according to

                                            ℎ =     +


                                                                                                    28
where     ∼    ( ,     ) and   ∼    (0,     ). Our calibration is for 58 year old males and we assume

that patients expect to live the average life expectancy of 23 years without treatment but longer if

responding to the simvastatin treatment.24

         Patients observe their cholesterol levels through lab tests and update their adherence

decision on a quarterly basis. We assume patients learn their true value of treatment fully after

one year of treatment. Therefore, patients continue with the treatment after a year (hazard rate

goes to zero) if and only if they are true valuers i.e. ( ( , ) > (             ,   ) = 0) for the remainder

of their lives.

         Calibrating our model requires knowledge of the distribution of treatment effects,

( ,     ), how well the symptoms reflect treatment or signal noise (            ), the costs of treatment ( ),

and the utility parameters (3, ). Clinical trial data often provide information on the treatment

quality and noise parameters. In particular, the treatment mean and variance, ( ,                ), is often

directly reported from such trials and individual longitudinal data can be used to estimate the

noise distribution (     ).

         Table 1 summarizes the parameters values used in calibrating the model for simvastatin.

We use clinical trial data on the distribution of effectiveness of simvastatin from (Bays et al.

2004). On average, the simvastatin treatment therapy in the Bays et al. study lowered LDL-C

levels by 37.00% over a quarter relative to no treatment (placebo).25 In the context of our model

this implies 8[ℎ] = 8[ ] =         = 37.00% and ℎ =             = 0.00%. We use simvastatin treatment

cost estimates from Hoadley et al. (2012) who using Medicare Part D data find that the median




24
   We calculate life expectancy according to the 2009 CDC National Vital Statistics Report and the Social Security
Administration.
25
   Patients studied in Bays et al (2004) received dosages of 10-80 mg respectively of simvastatin per day.
                                                                                                                29
out of pocket cost paid by users for a one quarter supply of branded simvastatin was $231.25.26

The health consumption trade-off parameter               represents a patient’s willingness to pay to lower

his cholesterol for one quarter. As described in the Appendix A2, this parameter is calculated

using data on the longevity gains from simvastatin (Jönsson et. al 1996) valued in terms of

dollars using standard value-of-life estimates (Murphy and Topel 2005). We calculate that a

patient is willing to pay one dollar to lower his LDL-C levels by a bit more than a sixth of a

percentage point, 0.17%, per quarter. We calibrate the remaining parameters 3 and                        to match

observed adherence patterns for simvastatin as described in the Appendix. The calibrated health

discount factor is 0.90 which is in-line with the estimates from Moore and Viscusi (1988) and

Viscusi and Moore (1989).27 The noise parameter implies that an adhering patient’s cholesterol

level varies naturally from quarter-quarter with a standard deviation of                  = 7.40%. 28

         Figure 3 below displays the adherence survival function from the calibrated model. We

calculate the survival function by simulating 10 million hypothetical patients using the parameter

values displayed in Table 1. The solid black line reflects the survival function corresponding to

the calibrated model while the solid gray line reflects the observed adherence survival function

as reported in Yeaw et al. (2009). The calibrated survival function exhibits a correlation with the

observed empirical survival function of 0.94.



26
   Hoadely et al. (2012) find that the median 30-day out of pocket cost for branded Zocor was $71 in 2008. We
convert their cost estimates into the cost of a one quarter supply in 2014 by scaling the cost by 3.257 to account for
the quantity and inflation. We account for inflation according to the BLS inflation calculator
[http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm]. We find similar cost estimates using CVS Pharmaceutical data
from GoodRx.com . GoodRx reports estimated cash price of a one month dosage (taken daily) of 20mg simvastatin
Zocor at CVS Pharmacy is $38. Assuming that each patient receives 30mg of simvastatin daily implies the cost of a
one quarter dosage is then $171.
27
   See Moore and Viscusi (1990) for further discussion on estimating discount rates for health outcomes.
28
   Note that in principle, the degree to which health symptoms reveal treatment quality (signal-to-noise ratio) could
be estimated using longitudinal clinical trial data on health outcomes. When such data is available, one would not
need to observe adherence data in order to calibrate the noise distribution, thereby allowing for out-of-sample
predictions about future post-approval adherence behavior from trial data obtained pre-approval.

                                                                                                                    30
               TABLE 1: MODEL PARAMETER VALUES USED IN CALIBRATION
        Parameters                                             Value
        Parameters from the Literature:
         Mean Effectiveness of Simvastatin (Zocor) Therapy ( )                        37.00% per quarter
         SD of Effectiveness of Simvastatin (Zocor) Therapy ( )                       14.80% per quarter
         Cost of Simvastatin (Zocor) Therapy ( )                                      $231.20 per quarter
         Health Consumption Trade-Off ( )                                              0.17% per dollar
        Calibrated Parameters:
         Treatment Noise ( )                                                           7.40% per quarter
         Discount Factor (3 )                                                                0.90
        Notes: The mean and standard deviation of the effectiveness of Simvastatin are from the clinical
        study Bays et al. 2004. Effectiveness measures the percentage point drop in low density lipoprotein
        cholesterol (LDL-C) over one quarter relative to the initial baseline level. We calculate the cost of
        Zocor using the observed median out of pocket cost as calculated in Hoadley et. al (2012). See
        footnote 23 to see how the cost estimate is adjusted for inflation and dosage. The discount factor
        and treatment noise are calibrated to fit the empirical survival function for statin adherence
        estimated in Yeaw et al. (2009). The health consumption trade-off parameter represents a patient’s
        willingness to pay to lower their cholesterol in percentage points. We calculate the health
        consumption trade-off parameter as described in the text using existing value of a statistical life year
        (VSLY) estimates and the longevity benefits of simvastatin.


                      FIGURE 3: CALIBRATED ADHERENCE SURVIVAL FUNCTION




Notes: Figure 3 illustrates the calibrated survival curve corresponding to the parameter values in Table 1 and the
empirical survival curve estimated in Yeaw et al. (2009).
                                                                                                                     31
       Both the observed and calibrated adherence to simvastatin is relatively low; the majority

of patients do not adhere to the treatment in the long run. In particular, the parameter values

imply that the simvastatin treatment is adhered to by only 42.91% of those prescribed in the

long-run. The large degree of non-adherence is driven by the discounting of the fairly modest

longevity effect of the treatment which is discounted substantially because it occurs in the future.

The calibrated discount factor of 0.90, which as discussed is in-line with previous estimates

(Moore and Viscusi 1990), implies that patients are not willing to trade off current consumption

for these small health benefits occurring in the distant future. In addition, the more the patients

discount the future, the less weight patients place on the discussed option value of treatment.

Overall, these simple facts suggest that low adherence to statins seem less puzzling than

commonly discussed in both the economics and public health literatures.

       The calibrated model for simvastatin allows us quantify ex-post inefficient adherence

behavior and separate the inefficiencies driven by over-adherence vs under-adherence. Figure 4

below displays the calibrated survival functions for non-responding and responding simvastatin

users using the parameter values of Table 1. The figure illustrates the overall cumulative effect of

these two types of inefficiencies when the flows are aggregated up and weighted over time.

These two survival functions suggest that over-adherence may be more problematic than under-

adherence. About 42% of true non-valuers still take simvastatin after one quarter. However, as

discussed, over-adherence vanishes as patients learn about treatment value as opposed to under-

adherence that cannot be recovered. In the long run, only about 3.1% of true valuers under-

adhere to the treatment.




                                                                                                      32
                        FIGURE 4: CALIBRATED UNDER-AND OVER -ADHERENCE




Notes: Figure 4 illustrates calibrated survival curves. The non-valuers survival function, @ j ( ), illustrates adherence
for those individuals for whom treatment is not valuable/inefficient. Similarly the valuers survival function, @ i ( ),
illustrates adherence for those individuals for whom treatment is valuable/efficient.



          The calibrated model also allows us to dollarize the welfare losses associated with this

inefficient adherence. Consider a patient adhering to the simvastatin treatment inefficiently
                                                                                             (
which occurs whenever the health benefits do not exceed the cost of care; U                          T . The

associated welfare loss of over-adherence is equal to the cost treatment minus dollarized health

effect.

                                                                                                 1
                       †‡rm ompˆ st__ ‰‡o t Š‹om ŒG omo•Žo = s\ =

An analogous expression applies to those who truly value the new treatment but do not adhere

                                                                                         1
                      †‡rm ompˆ st__ ‰‡o t •Gom ŒG omo•Žo = s] =


                                                                                                                      33
Figure 5 below displays the calibrated welfare losses from over- and under-adherence using

these methods.

                    FIGURE 5: CALIBRATED WELFARE LOSSES FOR S IMVASTATIN




Notes: Figure 5 illustrates the welfare loss due to over and under adherence corresponding to the parameters in
                                                                                   (
Table 1. The loss due to over adherence at each period is calculated as sum of −      across all adhering non-
                                                                                   V
valuers normalized by the total number of patients. The loss due to of under adherence is calculated as the sum of
(
   − across all non-adhering valuers normalized by the total number of patients.
V



         The black bars in Figure 5 represent the average welfare loss per patient in a given

quarter stemming from over-adherence by patients for whom the simvastatin treatment is not

valuable. The gray bars represent the average loss per-patient from under-adherence by patients

for whom the simvastatin treatment is indeed valuable. As discussed, the loss from over

adherence vanishes with time as patients learn that the treatment is not valuable. Since

individuals never re-enter treatment, the loss from under-adherence rises over time but converges

to a steady state level in perpetuity as those who value the treatment eventually stay on. The

initial welfare loss due to over-adherence is $42.18 per patient-quarter but declines to zero as
                                                                                                                     34
non-valuers drop out of treatment. Conversely, the loss due to under-adherence is initially zero as

everyone exhibits primary adherence but is $0.21 per patient-quarter in the long run. In present

value terms, the total loss due to under-adherence is $6.52 per patient and for over-adherence is

$57.87 per patient.29 As discussed in the theoretical analysis, the larger present value effects of

over-adherence steams from that it is front loaded in time as opposed under-adherence that is

back-loaded. The total per capita loss due to inefficient adherence (over-adherence plus under-

adherence) is $64.39. To put these numbers in perspective, a quantity of 94.1m simvastatin

prescriptions were dispensed in the US in 2010 and the total spending on lipid regulators was

$18.7bn (IMS Health 2011). The potential aggregate losses due to inefficient adherence are thus

on the order of billions of dollars. Regardless, the major finding is that over-adherence losses

greatly dominate under-adherence ones for statins, especially in present value terms.



Section 6: Concluding Remarks and Future Research

            Little explicit positive and normative analysis exists in health economics on the dynamic

demand behavior implicit in non-adherence, which is thereby often associated with uninformed

patients. We analyzed the implications for adherence behavior stemming from patients learning

about personalized treatment value. Although providers may be more informed about the

population-wide effects of treatments, patients may be more informed about their own value of

care in terms of how they trade off effectiveness, side effects, costs of care, and compliance. We

derived the optimal stopping problem corresponding to non-adherence under patient learning,

and characterized its observable determinants. The model produces strong normative

implications resulting from such non-adherence, and is used to calibrate the welfare losses


29
     This is calculated using an annual discount factor of 0.90 and assuming that non-adhering patients live 23 years.
                                                                                                                         35
implied for the cholesterol-reducing therapy simvastatin (Zocor). The calibration results suggest

that losses due to over-adherence are over 80% larger than losses from under-adherence, even

though only 43% of patients adhered to the therapy. In addition, we evaluated the efficiency

effects of personalized medicine, a technological advance we argued was explained by the

importance of learning to adherence.

       Our analysis is in contrast to traditional analysis of adherence, which almost uniformly

assumes it should be raised. This traditional view may be interpreted as a special case of our

analysis in which the entire population truly benefits from the treatment but patients misconceive

these benefits of treatment. More precisely, this occurs when the true share of patients who do

not value the treatment is zero ( ( ∗) = 0 ) but prior treatment beliefs are inconsistent with this

( ( ∗) > 0). In this case, factors that raise or lower adherence also raise or lower ex-post

efficiency, and which is often an implicit assumption of much of the existing policy discussions

of adherence. However, when not everyone benefits from treatment, as revealed by the fact that

some patients do not adhere, factors that raise adherence may lower ex-post efficiency, and

factors that lower adherence may raise such efficiency. This broken link between greater

adherence and efficiency is central to assessing the value of adherence interventions under

patient learning, such as personalized medicine.


       We believe the analysis raises a host of important research questions that can be

addressed in future research.

Medical Innovation and Individual vs Aggregate Adherence

        Our analysis predicted that adherence to a drug is decreasing in the quality of available

alternative treatments. This implies that as the number and quality of treatments available to treat

a given disease increases (i.e. through medical innovation) then short-run adherence to a given

                                                                                                    36
individual treatment may fall as patients substitute to other treatments. However, the overall

long-run aggregate adherence to any treatment in the class may well rise with medical

innovation as a heterogeneous patient population segments into treatments more suitable for each

segment. A better understanding of the effects of medical innovation on individual vs aggregate

adherence is needed when such innovation increases the number and quality of available

treatment options.

Behavioral Adherence vs Therapeutic Adherence

       Most of empirical analysis of adherence has centered on the demand for medical products

after they have been prescribed by providers. However, the same type of behavior applies to

behavioral recommendations by providers that usually concerns behavior that improves health

such as weight reduction. Many patients do not adhere to such behavioral recommendations by

providers partly because they bear the costs of adhering which providers do not. Even if they

engage in primary adherence, they later non-adhere by not say following diet or exercise regimes

in the long run. Even though data constraints make it harder to study behavioral adherence, e.g it

does not show up in claims data, more research is needed to understanding differences between

the two forms of adherence.

Pay for Performance and Performance-Based Adherence

       If optimal learning drives adherence, it greatly impacts how various pay for performance

or risk-contracting policies set by payers to affect providers and manufacturers alters care. If

patients do not adhere when a therapy does not perform, reimbursements are not spent on poorly

performing care. Put differently, when patients engage themselves in “pay for performance” as

implied by our analysis, pay for performance reimbursements by payers may have small effects

as payers do not pay for ineffective care when patients do not adhere to it. The patient stopping


                                                                                                    37
rules implied by our analysis mimic on the individual level the population wide pay-for-

performance schemes from payers to manufacturers, under which manufacturers only receive

payment when a therapy performs well at a population level.

External Effects and Non-adherence

           We only considered adherence from the private-choice perspective of the patient.

However, privately optimal adherence may not be socially optimal when adherence behavior

confers external effects. For example, adherence to treatments for infectious diseases such as TB

may involve positive externalities and thus may be inefficiently low when non-infected

individuals benefit from adherence by infected patients. Classes of drugs such as antibiotics or

antiretrovirals raise a similar issue-adherence confers a positive externality by preventing

resistance. Or external effects may operate through insurance premiums when non-adherence

raises the total cost of care through cost offsets (Goldman and Philipson 2007, Chandra et al.

2010). Pigouvian subsidies to stimulate adherence under positive external effects may then be

relevant and may be implemented through lower copays or other methods that raise adherence.

More careful analysis of the role of adherence programs is needed in the context of external

effects.


Selection and the Effects of Adherence on Health

           Medical studies stress the importance of adherence because of the positive impacts on a

patient’s health. For example, many analysts think patients need to be better educated about

treatments for breast cancer given that compliance is poor but the health benefits seem

substantial. However, our analysis directly implies that those that adhere perform better than

those that do not, and thus the adherence effects are overestimated when optimal stopping occurs

because of poor performance. The basic view of the medical community—that patients under-

                                                                                                     38
consume care—needs to be evaluated not from the average experience but from the patient-

specific experience. In addition, standard forms of selection bias evaluating therapies may of

course be present, such as e.g. otherwise healthier patients being the ones that adheres the most.

This selection also affects the optimal targeting of adherence interventions; low levels of

adherence may reveal preferences that imply small effects for adherence interventions.

Insurance Design: Price Discrimination and Adherence

         Future analysis may consider optimal insurance design when patient learning drives

adherence. One direct way in which insurance design may affect adherence is through copays, as

generally recognized in the literature and as implied by the analysis above. When differential

treatment performance differentiates the value of a therapy across the population there is a role

for price discrimination across patients.30 Put simply, both profits and adherence may be raised

by charging low-performing patients lower co-pays and high-performing patients larger co-pays.

More precisely, in our analysis profit maximizing firms would discriminate based on treatment

performance through a pricing function (ℎ ) that is not constant across all treatment experiences

ℎ . However, this essentially amounts to a pricing scheme that involves pay-for-performance on

the patient level which is induced by optimal price discrimination.

         Charging less for low-value care and more for high-value care is in contrast with an

interesting recent health policy literature that exists on so-called value-based insurance design

(VBID). However, to our knowledge, that policy literature does not explicitly discuss the



         30
              For experience goods such as medical treatments, price discrimination over time, as opposed to across

patients, has often been discussed. Optimal policies often reduce prices initially to subsidize learning after which

prices are raised. This is indeed observed for medical technologies through so called free “samples” being offered

initially although the impact of such samples on optimal adherence seems largely unknown.

                                                                                                                       39
optimality criteria that determine whether copays should be set high or low, that is, the definition

of V in VBID. This policy literature is in contrast to the economic analysis of the value of

insurance designs in which the value V is defined as economic efficiency (see Pauly, 1968, and

Zeckhauser, 1970, for copay design for single treatments, and Goldman and Philipson, 2007, for

multiple ones). When value is defined as economic efficiency, the implied VBID is that copays

should be lower for less price-elastic treatments.

Structural Estimation of Trial Attrition to Predict Post-approval Adherence

       The structural model of adherence discussed implies strong relationships between so-

called “real-world” versus clinical trial performance of treatments, sometimes distinguished by

the names efficacy versus effectiveness. However, attrition behavior in clinical trials may stem

from the same type of behavior analyzed here (Philipson and DeSimone 1999). The central

testable empirical implication of that past analysis as well as the adherence analysis here is that

past performance drives current hazard rates into non-adherence. This prediction may be tested

by longitudinal outcomes data in trials and data on both adherence and health outcomes in real-

world settings, the latter of which may become more abundant as data on insurance claims

(measuring adherence) and electronic medical records (measuring performance) are merged.

       Because of this similarity in behavior, under some conditions, one can estimate the

structural parameters from only having attrition behavior from clinical trial data. The parameters

can then be used to predict or forecast out-of-sample post-marketing adherence behavior. In

other words, structural estimation of attrition behavior in trials can allow for counter-factual

predictions of future real-world adherence and effectiveness.

       In summary, we believe more explicit theoretical analysis of non-adherence would better

expand our understanding of this important type of dynamic health care demand. Empirical


                                                                                                      40
testing of explicit theories seems needed before we can make credible normative claims about

the efficiency gains of various private or public interventions aimed at raising adherence.




                                                                                               41
References

American College of Physicians. 1990. “Physicians and the Pharmaceutical Industry.” Annals of
      Internal Medicine, 112:624–626.
Baum, Stephanie. 2013. “Health IT startup claims pillbox app has boosted adherence rate to 81%
      in two months.” MedCity News, January 8, 2013. http://medcitynews.com/2013/01/ health-
      it-startup-claims-pillbox-app-has-boosted-adherence-rate-to-81-in-two-months/
Bays, Harold E., Leiv Ose, Neil Fraser, Diane L. Tribble, Katherine Quinto, Robert Reyes, Amy
       O. Johnson-Levonas, Aditi Sapre, and Steven R. Donahue. 2004. "A Multicenter,
       Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Factorial Design Study to Evaluate the
       Lipid-Altering Efficacy and Safety Profile of the Ezetimibe/Simvastatin Tablet Compared
       with Ezetimibe and Simvastatin Monotherapy in Patients with Primary
       Hypercholesterolemia." Clinical therapeutics 26(11): 1758-1773.
Black, Dennis M., Richard J. Brand, Merwyn Greenlick, Glenn Hughes, and Jacqueline Smith.
       1987. "Compliance to treatment for hypertension in elderly patients: the SHEP pilot
       study." Journal of Gerontology 42(5): 552-557.
Bosworth, Hayden B., Bradi B. Granger, Phil Mendys, Ralph Brindis, Rebecca Burkholder, Susan
      M. Czajkowski, Jodi G. Daniel et al. 2011. "Medication adherence: a call for
      action." American Heart Journal 162(3): 412-42.
Bradt, Russell N., S. M. Johnson, and Samuel Karlin. 1956. "On Sequential Designs for
       Maximizing the Sum of n Observations." The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 27(4):
       1060-1074.
Cardon, James H. and Mark H. Showalter. 2015. “The Effects of Direct-to-Consumer
      Advertising of Pharmaceuticals on Adherence,” Applied Economics: 1-13.
Chan, Tat Y. and Barton H. Hamilton. 2006. “Learning, Private Information and the Economic
       Evaluation of Randomized Experiments.” Journal of Political Economy, 114(6): 997-
       1040.
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight, (2010), “Patient Cost-Sharing and
      Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly”, American Economic Review 100(1): 193–213.
Chernew, Michael E., Mayur R. Shah, Arnold Wegh, Stephen N. Rosenberg, Iver A. Juster,
      Allison B. Rosen, Michael C. Sokol, Kristina Yu-Isenberg, and A. Mark Fendrick. 2008
      "Impact of decreasing copayments on medication adherence within a disease management
      environment." Health Affairs 27(1): 103-112.
Comstock, Jonah. 2013 “GlowCaps now sold through CVS, new randomized control trial
      launches.” MobiHealthNews, March 11, 2013. http://mobihealthnews.com/20750/
      glowcaps-now-sold-through-cvs-new-randomized-control-trial-launches/



                                                                                             42
Dickstein, Michael J. 2014. “Efficient Provision of Experience Goods: Evidence from
       Antidepressant Choice.” http://www.stanford.edu/~mjd/papers/eff_prov_experience
       _goods _mjdickstein.pdf
Engelberg, Joseph, Christopher A. Parsons and Nathan Tefft. 2014. “Financial Conflicts of Interest
      in Medicine.” Working Paper.
Feldman, Ross, Marilyn Bacher, Norman Campbell, Aidan Dover, and Arun Chockalingam. 1998.
      “Adherence to Pharmacologic Management of Hypertension.” Canadian Journal of Public
      Health 89(5): I16-18.
Fernandez, Jose M. 2013. “An Empirical Model of Learning Under Ambiguity: The Case of
      Clinical Trials.” International Economic Review, 54(2): 549-573.
Flack, John M. , Serguei V. Novikov, and Carlos M. Ferrario. 1996. "Benefits of adherence to anti-
        hypertensive drug therapy." European Heart Journal 17(Suppl A): 16-20.
Gittins, John C., Kevin Glazebrook, and Richard Weber. 2011. Multi-armed Bandit Allocation
        Indices, 2nd Edition., Wiley.
Gittins, John C. and David M. Jones. 1974. “A dynamic allocation index for the sequential
        design of experiments”, in J. Gani, K. Sarkadi and I. Vince, eds. Progress in
        Statistics,European Meeting of Statisticians 1972, Vol 1 Amsterdam: North Holland,
        241-266.
Gittins, John C. and David M. Jones. 1979. “A dynamic allocation index for the discounted
        multiarmed bandit problem.” Biometrika 66(3): 561-565.
Goldman, Dana. Geoffrey F. Joyce, and Yuhui Zheng. 2007."Prescription Drug Cost Sharing"
      Journal of the American Medical Association 298(1): 61-69.
Goldman, Dana and Tomas J. Philipson. 2007. “Integrated Insurance Design in the Presence of
      Multiple Medical Technologies.”, American Economic Review 97(2): 427-432.
GoodRx.com. 2014. “Simvastatin Prices.” Accessed May 22, 2014,
     http://www.goodrx.com/simvastatin
Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.”
      Journal of Political Economy 80(2): 223-255
Haynes, R. Brian, K. Ann McKibbon, and Ronak Kanani. 1996. "Systematic review of
      randomised trials of interventions to assist patients to follow prescriptions for
      medications." The Lancet 348(9024 ): 383-386.
Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. 2006. “Lifetime cost effectiveness of simvastatin in
       a range of risk groups derived from a randomised trial of 20536 people.” BMJ: British
       Medical Journal, 333(7579): 1145-1148



                                                                                               43
Hershey, John C., Bruce G. Morton, Jane Braithwaite Davis, and Michael J. Reichgott. 1980
      "Patient Compliance with Antihypertensive Medication." American Journal of Public
      Health 70(10): 1081-1089.
Hoadley, John F., Katie Merrell, Elizabeth Hargrave, and Laura Summer. 2012. "In Medicare Part
      D plans, low or zero copays and other features to encourage the use of generic statins work,
      could save billions." Health Affairs, 31(10): 2266-2275.
IMS Health. 2011. “ The Use of Medicines in the United States: Review of 2010.” Accessed
      May 14, 2014, http://www.imshealth.com/deployedfiles/imshealth/Global/Content
      /IMS%20Institute/Static%20File/IHII_UseOfMed_report.pdf
Jönsson, B., M. Johannesson, J. Kjekshus, A. G. Olsson, T. R. Pedersen, and H. Wedel. 1996.
       "Cost-effectiveness of cholesterol lowering Results from the Scandinavian Simvastatin
       Survival Study (4S)." European Heart Journal, 17 (7): 1001-1007.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. "Job Matching and a Theory of Turnover." The Journal of Political
      Economy 87(5): 972-990.
Lesselroth, Blake J., Patricia J. Holahan, Kathleen Adams, Zhen Z. Sullivan, Victoria L. Church,
       Susan Woods, Robert Felder, Shawn Adams, and David A. Dorr. 2011. "Primary care
       provider perceptions and use of a novel medication reconciliation
       technology." Informatics in Primary Care 19(2): 105-118.
Lien, Hsien-Ming, Mingshan Lu, Ching-To Albert Ma, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2010.
       “Progress and Compliance in Alcohol Abuse Treatment.” Journal of Health Economics.
       29(2): 213-225.
Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. 2012. Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, Third Edition,
      MIT Press.
Mallion, Jean-Michel, Jean-Philippe Baguet, Jean-Philippe Siche, Frederic Tremel, and R. De
       Gaudemaris. 1998. "Compliance, electronic monitoring and antihypertensive
       drugs." Journal of Hypertension. Supplement 16(1): S75-79.
Moore, Michael J. and W. Kip Viscusi. 1988. “The Quantity Adjusted Value of Life.” Economic
      Inquiry, 26(3): 369-388.
Moore, Michael J. and W. Kip Viscusi. 1990. “Models for Estimating Discount Rates for Long-
      Term Health Risks Using Labor Market Data.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 3: 381-
      401.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.” Journal
      of Political Economy 114(5): 871-904.
Nelson, Eugene C., William B. Stason, Raymond R. Neutra, and Harold S. Solomon. 1980
       "Identification of the noncompliant hypertensive patient." Preventive medicine 9(4): 504-
       517.


                                                                                               44
New England Healthcare Institute. 2009. “Thinking Outside the Pillbox: A System-side Approach
      to Improving Patient Medication Adherence to Chronic Disease.” Accessed June 2, 2014,
      http://www.nehi.net/writable/publication_files/file/pa_issue_brief_final.pdf
Pandey, Sandeep, Deepayan Chakrabarti, and Deepak Agarwal. 2007 "Multi-armed bandit
      problems with dependent arms." In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on
      Machine learning, (ACM): 721-728.
Pauly, Mark V. 1968. "The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment." American Economic Review
       58(3): pp. 531-37.
Pedersen, T., Kjekshus, J., Berg, K., & Haghfelt, T. 1994. “Randomised trial of cholesterol
       lowering in 4444 patients with coronary heart disease: the Scandinavian Simvastatin
       Survival Study (4S). The Lancet, 344: 1383-89.
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. 2013. “Current Organizations Funding
      Adherence Research.”, accessed August 5, 2013, http://www.phrma.org/value/ sources-of-
      adherence-research-funding.
Philipson, Tomas J. 1997. "Data Markets and the Production of Surveys." Review of Economic
       Studies 64(1): 47-73.
Philipson, Tomas, and Jeffrey DeSimone. 1997. "Experiments and Subject
       Sampling."Biometrika 84(3): 619-630.
Philipson, Tomas J., and Larry V. Hedges. 1998. "Subject Evaluation in Social Experiments."
       Econometrica 66(2): 381-408.
Powell, Warren B. and Ilya O. Ryzhov. 2012. Optimal Learning. Wiley.
Rusmevichientong, Paat, and John N. Tsitsiklis. 2010. "Linearly parameterized
     bandits." Mathematics of Operations Research 35(2): 395-411.
Seabury, Seth A., Gupta, Charu, Philipson, Tomas J., Henkhaus, Laura E. and the
      PhRMA Medication Adherence Advisory Council. 2014 “Understanding and overcoming
      barriers to medication adherence: A review of research priorities,” Journal of Managed
      Care Pharmacy, in press.
Sood, Neeraj, Tomas J. Philipson and Peter Huckfeldt. 2013. “Quantifying the Value of
       Personalized Medicines: Evidence from COX-2 Inhibitors.” Forum for Health Economics
       & Policy, 16(1): 101-122..
Smith, M.E. Beth, Nancy J. Lee, Elizabeth Haney, Susan Carson, Mark Helfand and Cathy
       Kelley. 2009. Drug Class Review: HMG-CoA Reductase Inhibitors (Statins) and Fixed-
       dose Combination Products Containing a Statin: Final Report Update 5. Oregon Health
       & Science University.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Michael J. Moore. 1989. “Rates of Time Preference and Valuations of the
       Duration of Life.” Journal of Public Economics, 38: 279-317

                                                                                              45
Vollmer, William M., Adrianne Feldstein, David Smith, Joan Dubanoski, Amy Waterbury,
      Jennifer Schneider, Shelley Clark, and Cynthia Rand. 2011. "Use of Health Information
      Technology to Improve Medication Adherence." The American Journal of Managed
      Care 17(12 Spec No.): SP79-87.
Wazana, Ashley. 2000. “Physicians and the Pharmaceutical Industry: Is a Gift Just Ever a Gift?”
     JAMA, 283: 373-380.
Yao, Yi Ching. 2006. “Some results on the Gittins index for a normal reward process.” in H. Ho,
      C. Ing & T. Lai, eds., Time Series and Related Topics: In Memory of Ching-Zong Wei,
      Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Beachwood, OH.
Yeaw, Jason, Joshua S. Benner, John G. Walt, Sergey Sian, and Daniel B. Smith. 2009.
      “Comparing Adherence and Persistence Across 6 Chronic Medication Classes.” Journal
      of Managed Care Pharmacy, 15(9): 728-740
Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff between Risk
      Spreading and Appropriate Incentives." Journal of Economic Theory 2(1): 10-26




                                                                                              46
                                                   Appendix

A1. Multiple Treatments and Partial Adherence on a Single Treatment

             This Appendix generalizes the discussion to the case when the quality of more than one

treatment is unknown to the patient. Instead of two treatment alternatives, one uncertain

treatment and one certain alternative treatment, the more general setting with • uncertain

treatment alternatives is considered. One can think of the • treatments as completely different

treatments or alternatively as different levels of adherence with the same treatment.

             Multiple uncertain treatments involve a so called multi-armed bandit problem in

statistical decision theory. We assume that each of the • treatment alternatives produces a

                                                                                                         •
personalized health benefit which is a function of the treatment quality,                                    , and an idiosyncratic

                  •
noise term            ,

                                                ℎ• =   •
                                                           +    •
                                                                    , ‘ = 1,2, … •

The personalized quality of treatment ‘ is distributed i.i.d. across individuals from the

distribution          •
                          ∼   •
                                  (⋅). As before, each treatment generates utility                   ℎ• ,     •   = ℎ• −              •.


             Patients’ prior belief over the quality at time for treatment ‘ id denoted                                •
                                                                                                                           (⋅ |   •
                                                                                                                                      ) where

     •
         is the history of experienced personal health outcomes on treatment ‘. This formulation

assumes that treatment qualities for a patient are distributed conditionally independently across

the treatment alternatives.31 Further we assume that each patients initial prior reflects the true
                                                       • (⋅)         • (⋅).
distribution of treatment heterogeneity,                        =             Under the maintained assumption that the

prior and shocks are normally distributed,                 •(   )∼      (     •
                                                                                  ,   •)   and   •
                                                                                                     ∼      (0,   •   ), standard




31
  See Pandey et al. (2007), Rusmevichientong and Tsitsiklis (2010) and Dickstein (2014) for a discussion of multi-
armed bandit problems with correlated arms.
                                                                                                                 47
normality results imply that a patient’s posterior distribution is optimally updated according to

the previous equation (1) the single treatment case.

           The patient’s adherence problem now involves selecting the optimal treatment regime

among the • alternatives each period. The value function of a patient adhering to treatment

option ‘ at time is

      1 ℎ• , “ ,       =     ℎ• ,    •   + 3 max<891 ℎ(/( , “      /( ,            :, … , 891 ℎ•/( , “   /( ,   :>

Here, “ , represents the matrix of outcomes across the • different treatments and the vectors

and        represent the patient’s prior and posterior distributions over the • different treatment

alternatives. The previous discussion with a single uncertain treatment (‘ = 1) and a certain

alternative treatment (‘ = 2) corresponds to • = 2 with                       = 0.

           The optimal adherence rule generalizes to selecting the treatment alternative with the

highest Gittins index (Gittins and Jones 1974, Gittins and Jones 1979, Gittins et al. 2011). The

Gittins index, ” • , for a particular treatment ‘ at time corresponds to the level of utility

generated by some hypothetical known alternative treatment for which the patient is indifferent

between treatment and the alternative treatment in the simple two treatment alternative case.32

                 ”•                                                                                ”•
                    = 8c            ℎ•/( ,       + 3 max 7891 ℎ•/ , ℎ          ,      ,   /( :,       ;| d
                1−3                          •                            /
                                                                                                  1−3

The Gittins Index Theorem (Gittins and Jones 1974, Gittins and Jones 1979) shows that in each

period, patients optimally adhere by selecting the treatment alternative with the highest Gittins

index at that time. The Gittin’s Index Theorem essentially reduces the K multi-armed bandit

problem into a set of K single-armed bandit problems.




32
     See Powell and Ryzhov (2012) for a full discussion of Gittins indices.
                                                                                                                     48
Implications for Non-Adherence among Multiple Treatments

       Computing Gittins indices correspond directly to the single armed bandit problem and

optimal stopping rules described for the two treatments govern optimal adherence. Furthermore,

since Gittins indices in the multiple treatment framework are computed using the simple two

treatment framework (with one known treatment alternative), the comparative statics discussed

generalize to the multiple treatment setting. For example, the Gittins index for a particular

treatment ‘ is increasing in the perceived quality of treatment     •
                                                                        while decreasing in the cost of

treatment   •.   Similarly, conditional on the perceived quality of treatment, the Gittins index for

an alternative ‘ is increasing in the variance of treatment quality      •   while decreasing in the

variance of the treatment noise     •   .

Implications Partial Adherence on a Single Treatment

       The multiple-treatment framework allows one to assess behavior involving partial

adherence. Different levels of adherence, such as fractions of prescribed medications taken, can

be thought of as separate treatments in the multiple treatment framework. Consider a patient

facing the option of fully adhering versus partially adhering to a treatment regime. On one hand,

fully adhering to the treatment regime likely generates superior and less noisy health outcomes

relative to partial adherence. Both of these attributes (higher mean and lower treatment noise

variance) make full adherence an attractive alternative relative to partial adherence. On the other

hand, partial adherence is likely at substantially lower cost than full adherence, whether in direct

treatment costs or time costs of compliance. Because of its lower cost and greater variance of

treatment effectiveness, patients may find it optimal to partially rather than fully adhere to




                                                                                                       49
treatment. The general point is that whatever effects that one believes are true for different levels

of adherence can be viewed as multiple treatments with different health outcomes and costs.



A2. Model Calibration

        A calibration of our model requires knowledge of the distribution of treatment effects,

( ,    ), how well the symptoms reflect treatment or signal noise (              ), the costs of treatment ( ),

and the utility parameters (3, ). We pull estimates of the cost and effectiveness of simvastatin

directly from the data. We use a combination of data and economic theory to calculate/calibrate

the remaining parameters ( , 3,          ).

        The health consumption trade-off parameter              represents a patient’s willingness to pay to

lower his cholesterol for one quarter. The value of lowering cholesterol is induced from the value

of the longevity increase it generates. In particular, is parameter is calculated using data on the

longevity gains from simvastatin priced out to dollars using standard value-of-life estimates.

Based on the results from the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (S4)33, Jönsson et. al

(1996) find that simvastatin treatment raised longevity by an estimated 0.377 undiscounted life

years. These estimated longevity effects are in-line with the results from the Heart Protection

Study Collaborative Group (2006) study. This implies that taking simvastatin for an average 58

year old male increases his life expectancy from roughly 81 to 81.377 years.34,35 Standard

existing estimates of the value of a life year at 81 (1@s•–( ) is about $230,000 in 2014 (Murphy




33
   Patients were given 20-40mg of simvastatin daily over a roughly five year period (5.4 years on average). Over the
whole course of the study, simvastatin lowered LDL-C levels by 35% on average (Pederson et al. 1994). These
findings are similar to those in Bays et. al 2004 study.
34
   The average age in S4 study for males was 58 .1 years old (Pederson et al. 1994). The average age in the Bays et
al. (2004) study was 56 years old.
35
   We calculate life expectancy according to the 2009 CDC National Vital Statistics Report and the Social Security
Administration.
                                                                                                                  50
and Topel (2006)).36 Under the assumption that the only benefit of simvastatin is increased
                                                                          (
                                                                          V
longevity, we equate the discounted stream of health benefits                 (expressed in dollars) with the

longevity benefits.
                                                (
                                 ∑   ™× ›
                                     œ    3 . ˜ V      = 3 ™ 1@s•–( × 0.377                                      (2)

The value of lowering cholesterol can then be induced from the value of the longevity increase it

generates. In particular, given our parameter estimates of the parameters , 1@s•–( , and 3 above,

                                                                                              %
the health consumption trade-off parameter satisfying equation (2) is                = 0.17 $ . In other words,

patients are willing to pay one dollar to lower their LDL-C levels by a bit more than a sixth of a

percentage point, 0.17%, per quarter.

         The calibrated parameters in the model are the discount factor 3 and the treatment noise

  . We calibrate 3 and         to match observed adherence patterns for simvastatin. Using claims

data, Yeaw et al. (2009) implicitly estimate the adherence survival function we discussed for the
                                                       %
cases of statins.37 We calibrate 3 and the ratio %) to minimize squared differences between the
                                                         &


calibrated and empirical adherence survival function at each quarter for the first year.38 The

calibrated health discount factor is 0.90 which is line with the estimates from Moore and Viscusi
                                                                         %
(1988) and Viscusi and Moore (1989).39 The calibrated ratio %) is 2.00. This implies that an
                                                                          &




36
   See Figure 2(b) in Murphy and Topel (2006). Since Murphy and Topel’s value of life year estimates are expressed
in USD 2000 we adjust them by a factor of 1.38 to express the estimate in USD 2014 according to the BLS
[http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm].
37
   Although Yeaw et al. examine adherence to all statins, not just simvastatin, studies have shown that any of the
statins available in the US are effective for moderate (up to 35%) LDL-C cholesterol reductions (Smith et al. 2009).
38
   More precisely, we calibrate the values of 3 and / by implementing a grid search over the parameter space
3 ∈ {0.90,0.95,0.99} and / ∈ {0.50,0.75,1.00,1.25,1.50}.
39
   See Moore and Viscusi (1990) for further discussion on estimating discount rates for health outcomes.
                                                                                                                   51
adhering patient’s cholesterol level varies naturally from quarter-quarter with a standard

deviation of       = 7.40%.40




40
   Note that in principle, the degree to which health symptoms reveal treatment quality (signal-to-noise ratio) could
be estimated using longitudinal clinical trial data on health outcomes. When such data is available, one would not
need to observe adherence data in order to calibrate the noise distribution, thereby allowing for out-of-sample
predictions about future post-approval adherence behavior from trial data obtained pre-approval.

                                                                                                                   52
