                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MEASURING THE UNEQUAL GAINS FROM TRADE

                                         Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
                                         Amit K. Khandelwal

                                        Working Paper 20331
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20331


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Andrew Atkeson, Joaquin Blaum, Ariel Burstein, Arnaud Costinot, Robert Feenstra, Juan
Carlos Hallak, Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Nina Pavcnik, Jonathan Vogel and seminar participants at
Brown, Chicago, Cowles, ERWIT, Harvard, NBER ITI, Princeton, Stanford, UCLA, USC, and the
International Growth Centre meeting at Berkeley for helpful comments. We acknowledge funding
from the Jerome A. Chazen Institute of International Business at Columbia Business School. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Pablo D. Fajgelbaum and Amit K. Khandelwal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade
Pablo D. Fajgelbaum and Amit K. Khandelwal
NBER Working Paper No. 20331
July 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. D63,F10,F60

                                             ABSTRACT

Individuals that consume different baskets of goods are differentially affected by relative price changes
caused by international trade. We develop a methodology to measure the unequal gains from trade
across consumers within countries. The approach requires data on aggregate expenditures and parameters
estimated from a non-homothetic gravity equation. We find that trade typically favors the poor, who
concentrate spending in more traded sectors.


Pablo D. Fajgelbaum
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
pfajgelbaum@gmail.com

Amit K. Khandelwal
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 606, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ak2796@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
    Understanding the distributional impact of international trade is one of the central tasks pursued
by international economists. A vast body of research has examined this question through the effect
of trade on the distribution of earnings across workers (e.g., Stolper and Samuelson 1941). A second
channel operates through the cost of living. It is well known that the consumption baskets of high-
and low-income consumers look very different (e.g., Deaton and Muellbauer 1980b). International
trade therefore has a distributional impact whenever it affects the relative price of goods that are
consumed at different intensities by rich and poor consumers. For example, a trade-induced increase
in the price of food has a stronger negative effect on low-income consumers, who typically have
larger food expenditure shares than richer consumers. How important are the distributional effects
of international trade through this expenditure channel ? How do they vary across countries? Do
they typically favor high- or low- income consumers?
    In this paper we develop a methodology to answer these questions. The approach is based on
aggregate statistics and model parameters that can be estimated from readily available bilateral
trade and production data. It can therefore be implemented across many countries and over time.
A recent literature in international trade, including Arkolakis et al. (2012), Melitz and Redding
(2014) and Feenstra and Weinstein (2010), measures the aggregate welfare gains from trade by
first estimating model parameters from a gravity equation (typically, the elasticity of imports with
respect to trade costs) and then combining these parameters with aggregate statistics to calculate
the impact of trade on aggregate real income. We estimate model parameters from a non-homothetic
gravity equation (the elasticity of imports with respect to both trade costs and income) to calculate
the impact of trade on the real income of consumers with different expenditures within the economy.
    The premise of our analysis is that consumers at different income levels within an economy may
have different expenditure shares in goods from different origins or in different sectors. Studying
the distributional implications of trade in this context requires a non-homothetic demand structure
with good-specific Engel curves, where the elasticity of the expenditure share with respect to
individuals’ total expenditures is allowed to vary across goods. The Almost-Ideal Demand System
(AIDS) is a natural choice. As first pointed out by Deaton and Muellbauer (1980a), it is a first-
order approximation to any demand system; importantly for our purposes, it is flexible enough
to satisfy the key requirement of good-specific income elasticities and has convenient aggregation
properties that allow us to accommodate within-country inequality.
    We start with a demand-side result: in the AIDS, the welfare change through the expenditure
channel experienced by consumers at each expenditure level as a result of changes in prices, can
be recovered from demand parameters and aggregate statistics. These aggregate statistics include
the initial levels and changes in aggregate expenditure shares across commodities, and moments
from the distribution of expenditure levels across consumers. The intuition for this result is that,
conditioning on moments of the expenditure distribution, changes in aggregate expenditure shares
across goods can be mapped to changes in the relative prices of high- versus low-income elastic
goods by inverting the aggregate demand. These relative price changes and demand parameters, in

                                                  1
turn, suffice to measure the variation in real income of consumers at each expenditure level through
changes in the cost of living.
    To study the distributional effects of trade through the expenditure channel we embed this
demand structure into a standard model of international trade, the multi-sector Armington model.
This simple supply side allows us to cleanly highlight the methodological innovation on the demand
side.1 The model allows for cross-country differences in sectoral productivity and bilateral trade
costs, and within each sector goods are differentiated by country of origin. We extend this supply-
side structure with two features. First, the endowment of the single factor of production varies
across consumers, generating within-country inequality. Second, consumer preferences are given
by the AIDS, allowing goods from each sector and country of origin to enter with different income
elasticity into the demand of individual consumers. As a result, aggregate trade patterns are driven
both by standard Ricardian forces (differences in productivities and trade costs across countries
and sectors) and by demand forces (cross-country differences in income distribution and differences
in the income elasticity of exports by sector and country).
    In the model, differences between the income elasticities of exported and imported goods shape
the gains from trade-cost reductions of poor relative to rich consumers within each country. We
show how to use demand-side parameters and changes in aggregate expenditure shares to measure
welfare changes experienced by consumers at different income levels in response to foreign shocks.
For example, a tilt in the aggregate import basket towards goods consumed mostly by the rich may
reveal a fall in the import prices of these goods, and a relative welfare improvement for high-income
consumers. In countries where exports are high-income elastic relative to imports, the gains from
trade are relatively biased to poorer consumers because opening to trade decreases the relative
price of low-income elastic goods. Non-homotheticity across sectors also shape the unequal gains
from trade across consumers because sectors vary in their tradeability (e.g., food versus services)
and in the substitutability across goods supplied by different exporters.
    To quantify the unequal gains from trade, we need estimates of the elasticity of individual
expenditure shares by sector and country of origin with respect to both prices and income. A
salient feature of the model is that it delivers a sectoral non-homothetic gravity equation to estimate
these key parameters from readily-available data on production and trade flows. The estimation
identifies which countries produce high or low income-elastic goods by projecting budget shares
within each sector on standard gravity forces (e.g., distance, border and common language) and a
summary statistic of the importer’s income distribution whose elasticity can vary across exporters.2
Consistent with the existing empirical literature, such as Hallak and Schott (2011) and Feenstra
and Romalis (2014), we find that richer countries export goods with higher income elasticities
within sectors. The estimation also identifies the sectors whose goods are relatively more valued by

    1
      For example, the model abstracts away from forces that would lead to distributional effects through changes in
the earnings distribution, as well as differentiated exporters within sectors, firm heterogeneity, competitive effects, or
input-output linkages. Future work could consider embedding the AIDS into models with a richer supply side.
    2
      When non-homotheticities are shut down, the gravity equation in our model corresponds to the translog gravity
equation estimated by Novy (2012) and Feenstra and Weinstein (2010).


                                                            2
rich consumers by projecting sectoral expenditure shares on a summary statistic of the importer’s
income distribution. Consistent with Hallak (2010), our results also suggest non-homotheticities
not only across origin countries but also across sectors.
    Using the estimated parameters, we apply the results from the theory to ask: who are the
winners and losers of trade within countries, how large are the distributional effects, and what
country characteristics are important to shape these effects? To answer these questions we perform
the counterfactual exercise of increasing trade costs so that each country is brought from its current
trade shares to autarky, and compute the gains from trade corresponding to each percentile of the
income distribution in each country (i.e., the real income that would be lost by each percentile
because of a shut down of trade).
    We find a pro-poor bias of trade in every country. On average, the real income loss from closing
off trade is 63 percent at the 10th percentile of the income distribution and 28 percent for the
90th percentile. This bias in the gains from trade toward poor consumers hinges on the fact that
these consumers spend relatively more on sectors that are more traded, while high-income indi-
viduals consume relatively more services, which are among the least traded sectors. Additionally,
low-income consumers happen to concentrate spending on sectors with a lower elasticity of sub-
stitution across source countries. Larger expenditures in more tradeable sectors and a lower rate
of substitution between imports and domestic goods lead to larger gains from trade for the poor
than the rich. While this pro-poor bias of trade is present in every country, there is heterogeneity
in the difference between the gains from trade of poor and rich consumers across countries. In
countries with a lower income elasticity of exports, the gains from trade tend to be less favorable
for poor consumers because opening to trade causes an increase in the relative price of low-income
elastic goods. Similar results appear in counterfactuals involving smaller changes in trade costs
than a movement to autarky; for example, a small reduction in the cost of importing in the food or
manufacturing sectors also exhibits a pro-poor bias. However, trade-cost reductions affecting only
the service sectors (which are relatively high-income elastic) benefits the rich relatively more.
    As we mentioned, our approach to measure welfare gains from trade using aggregate statistics
is close to a recent literature that studies the aggregate welfare gains from trade summarized by
Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014). This literature confronts the challenge that price changes
induced by trade costs are not commonly available by inferring them through the model structure
from changes in trade shares.3 These approaches are designed to measure only aggregate gains
rather than distributional consequences.4 In our setting, we exploit properties of a non-homothetic
demand system that also allows us to infer changes in prices from trade shares and to trace out the
welfare consequences of these price changes across different consumers within countries. We are
motivated by the belief that an approach that is able to quantify the (potentially) unequal gains

    3
      For example, autarky prices are rarely observed in data but under standard assumptions on preferences the
autarky expenditure shares are generally known. The difference between autarky and observed trade shares can then
be used to back out the price changes caused by a counterfactual movement to autarky.
    4
      Two exceptions are Burstein and Vogel (2012) and Galle et al. (2014), which use aggregate trade data to estimate
the effects of trade on the distribution of earnings.


                                                          3
from trade through the expenditure channel for many countries is useful in assessing the implications
of trade, particularly because much of the public opposition towards increased openness stems from
the belief that welfare changes are unevenly distributed.
    Of course, we are not the first to allow for differences in income elasticities across goods in
an international trade framework. Theoretical contributions to this literature including Markusen
(1986), Flam and Helpman (1987) and Matsuyama (2000) develop models where richer countries
specialize in high-income elastic goods through supply-side forces, while Fajgelbaum et al. (2011)
study cross-country patterns of specialization that result from home market effects in vertically
differentiated products. Recent papers by Hallak (2006), Fieler (2011), Caron et al. (2014) and
Feenstra and Romalis (2014) find that richer countries export goods with higher income elasticity.5
This role of non-homothetic demand and cross-country differences in the income elasticity of exports
in explaining trade data is an important motivation for our focus on explaining the unequal gains
from trade through the expenditure channel.
    These theoretical and empirical studies use a variety of demand structures. To our knowledge,
only a few studies have used the AIDS in the international trade literature: Feenstra and Reinsdorf
(2000) show how prices and aggregate expenditures relate to the Divisia index in the AIDS and
suggest that this demand system could be useful for welfare evaluation in a trade context, Feenstra
(2010) works with a symmetric AIDS expenditure function to study the entry of new goods, and
Chaudhuri et al. (2006) use the AIDS to determine the welfare consequences in India of enforcing
the Agreement on Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights.6 Neary (2004) and Feenstra et al.
(2009) use the AIDS for making aggregate real income comparisons across countries and over time
using data from the International Comparison Project. Aguiar and Bils (2015) estimated an AIDS
in the U.S. to measure inequality in total consumption expenditures from consumption patterns.
    A few papers study the effect of trade on inequality through the expenditure channel. Porto
(2006) studies the effect of price changes implied by a tariff reform on the distribution of welfare
using consumer survey data from Argentina, Faber (2013) exploits Mexico’s entry into NAFTA to
study the effect of input tariff reductions on the price changes of final goods of different quality,
and Atkin et al. (2015) studies the effect of foreign retailers on consumer prices in Mexico. While
these papers utilize detailed microdata for specific countries in the context of major reforms, our
approach provides a framework to quantify the unequal gains from trade across consumers over a
large set of countries using aggregate trade and production data. Within our framework we are able
to show theoretically how changes in trade costs map to the welfare changes of individuals in each
point of the expenditure distribution, how to compute these effects using model parameters and
aggregate statistics, and how to estimate the parameters from cross-country trade and production

   5
      See also Schott (2004), Hallak and Schott (2011) and Khandelwal (2010) who provide evidence that richer
countries export higher-quality goods, which typically have high income elasticity of demand. In this paper we
abstract from quality differentiation within sectors, but note that our methodology could be implemented using
disaggregated trade data where differences in the income elasticity of demand may be driven by differences in quality.
    6
      If good-specific income elasticities are neutralized, the AIDS collapses to the homothetic translog demand system
studied in an international trade context by Kee et al. (2008), Feenstra and Weinstein (2010), Arkolakis et al. (2010)
and Novy (2012).


                                                          4
data.
    There is of course a large literature that examines trade and inequality through the earnings
channel. A dominant theme in this literature, as summarized by Goldberg and Pavcnik (2007),
has been the poor performance of Stolper-Samuelson effects, which predict that trade increases
the relative wages of low-skill workers in countries where these workers are relatively abundant, in
rationalizing patterns from low-income countries.7 We complement these and other studies that
focus on the earnings channel by examining the implications of trade through the expenditure
channel.
    The remainder of the paper is divided into five sections. Section 2 uses standard consumer
theory to derive generic expressions for the distribution of welfare changes across consumers, and
applies these results to the AIDS. Section 3 embeds these results in a standard trade framework,
derives the non-homothetic gravity equation, and provides the expressions to determine the gains
from trade across consumers. Section 4 estimates the key elasticities from the gravity equation.
Section 5 presents the results of counterfactuals that simulate foreign-trade cost shocks. Section 6
concludes.


2       Consumers
    We start by deriving generic expressions for the distribution of welfare changes in response to
price changes across consumers that vary in their total expenditures. We only use properties of
demand implied by standard demand theory. In Section 3, we link these results to a standard
model of trade in general equilibrium.

2.1     Definition of the Expenditure Channel
    We study an economy with J goods for final consumption with price vector p = {pj }Jj=1 taken
as given by h = 1, .., H consumers. Consumer h has indirect utility vh and total expenditures xh .
We denote the indirect utility function by v (xh , p). We let sj,h ≡ sj (xh , p) be the share of good
                                                        P  xh 
j in the total expenditures of individual h, and Sj = h       P
                                                                 0 x 0
                                                                       sj,h be the share of good j in
                                                                               h   h
aggregate expenditures.
    Consider the change in the log of indirect utility of consumer h due to infinitesimal changes in
            pj }Jj=1 and in the log of the expenditure level x
log-prices {b                                                bh :8

                                          J
                                          X ∂ ln v (xh , p)           ∂ ln v (xh , p)
                                  vbh =                       pbj +                   x
                                                                                      bh .                          (1)
                                                 ∂ ln pj                 ∂ ln xh
                                          j=1


                                                        pj }Jj=1 and x
The equivalent variation of consumer h associated with {b            bh is defined as the change in
    7
      Several recent studies, such as Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Helpman et al. (2012), Brambilla et al. (2012),
Frias et al. (2012), and Burstein et al. (2013) study different channels through which trade affects the distribution of
earnings such as outsourcing, labor market frictions, quality upgrading, or capital-skill complementarity.
    8
      Throughout the paper we use zb ≡ d ln (z) to denote the infinitesimal change in the log of variable z.


                                                           5
log expenditures, ω
                  bh , that leads to the indirect utility change vbh at constant prices:

                                                ∂ ln v (xh , p)
                                        vbh =                   ω
                                                                bh .                              (2)
                                                   ∂ ln xh

Combining (1) and (2) and applying Roy’s identity gives a well-known formula for the equivalent
variation:9
                                              J
                                              X
                                      ω
                                      bh =          (−b
                                                      pj ) sj,h + x
                                                                  bh .                            (3)
                                              j=1

The first term on the right-hand side of (3) is an expenditure-share weighted average of price
changes. It represents what we refer to as the expenditure effect. It is the increase in the cost of
living caused by a change in prices applied to the the pre-shock expenditure basket. Henceforth, we
refer to ω
         bh as the welfare change of individual h, acknowledging that by this we mean the equivalent
variation, expressed as share of the initial level of expenditures, associated with a change in prices
or in the expenditure level of individual h.
   To organize our discussion it is useful to rewrite (3) as follows:

                                           ω
                                           bh = W
                                                c + ψbh + x
                                                          bh ,                                    (4)

where
                                                    J
                                                    X
                                           c≡
                                           W              (−b
                                                            pj ) Sj ,                             (5)
                                                    j=1

is the aggregate expenditure effect, and

                                              J
                                              X
                                      ψbh ≡           pj ) (sj,h − Sj )
                                                    (−b                                           (6)
                                              j=1


is the individual expenditure effect of consumer h.
    The term W c is the welfare change through the expenditure channel that corresponds to every
consumer either in the absence of within-country inequality or under homothetic preferences. It also
corresponds to the welfare change through the cost of expenditures for a hypothetical representative
consumer. In turn, the term ψbh captures that consumers may be differentially affected by the same
price changes due to differences in the composition of their expenditure basket. It is different
from zero for some consumers only if there is variation across consumers in how they allocate
expenditure shares across goods. The focus of this paper is to study how international trade
                        n oH
impacts the distribution ψbh    .
                                h=1




   9
       See Theil (1975).


                                                       6
2.2       Almost-Ideal Demand
    The Almost-Ideal Demand System (AIDS) introduced by Deaton and Muellbauer (1980a) be-
longs to the family of Log Price-Independent Generalized Preferences defined by Muellbauer (1975).
The latter are defined by the indirect utility function
                                                          "           1/b(p) #
                                                                xh
                                        v (xh , p) = F                             ,                                        (7)
                                                               a (p)

where a (p) and b (p) are price aggregators and F [·] is a well-behaved increasing function. The
AIDS is the special case that satisfies
                                                                                 
                                                J          J X J
                                                X       1 X
                        a (p) = exp α +     αj ln pj +           γjk ln pj ln pk  ,                                       (8)
                                                        2
                                         j=1              j=1 k=1
                                                
                                     XJ
                        b (p) = exp    βj ln pj  ,                                                                        (9)
                                          j=1

                                                     PJ                   PJ                   PJ
where the parameters satisfy the restrictions             j=1 αj   = 1,      j=1 βj      =         j=1 γjk   = 0, and γjk = γkj
for all   j, k.10
    The first price aggregator, a (p), has the form of a homothetic translog price index. It is
independent from non-homotheticities and can be interpreted as the cost of a subsistence basket of
goods. The second price aggregator, b (p), captures the relative price of high-income elastic goods.
For our purposes, a key feature of these preferences is that the larger is the consumer’s expenditure
level xh relative to a (p), the larger is the welfare gain from a reduction in the cost of high income-
elastic goods, as captured by a reduction in b (p) . We refer to a and b as the homothetic and
non-homothetic components of preferences, respectively.
    Applying Shephard’s Lemma to the indirect utility function defined by equations (7) to (9)
generates an expenditure share in good j for individual h equal to:

                                                    J                                         
                                                    X                                   xh
                               sj (p, xh ) = αj +         γjk ln pk + βj ln                                                (10)
                                                                                       a (p)
                                                    k=1

for j = 1, . . . , J. We assume that (10) predicts non-negative expenditure shares for all goods and
consumers, so that the non-negativity restriction is not binding. Since expenditure shares add
up to one, this guarantees that expenditure shares are also smaller than one. We discuss how to
incorporate this restriction in the empirical analysis in Section 4.
    These expenditure shares have two features that suit our purposes. First, the elasticity with


  10
     These parameter restrictions correspond to the adding up, homogeneity, and symmetry constraints implied by
individual rationality, and ensure that the AIDS is a well-defined demand system. No direct-utility representation of
the AIDS exists, but this poses no restriction for our purposes. See Deaton and Muellbauer (1980b).


                                                           7
respect to the expenditure level is allowed to be good-specific.11 Goods for which βj > 0 have posi-
tive income elasticity, while goods for which βj < 0 have negative income elasticity.12 Second, they
admit aggregation: market-level behavior can be represented by the behavior of a representative
consumer. The aggregate market share of good j is Sj = sj (p, x
                                                              e), where x
                                                                        e is an inequality-adjusted
                                                           e = xeΣ , where x ≡ E [xh ] is the mean
mean of the distribution of expenditures across consumers, x
and Σ ≡ E xh ln xxh is the Theil index of the expenditure distribution.13 We can write the
           x         

aggregate shares as
                                                        J
                                                        X
                                           Sj = αj +              γjk ln pk + βj y,                                   (11)
                                                         k=1

where y = ln (x̃/a (p)). Henceforth, we follow Deaton and Muellbauer (1980a) and refer to y as the
adjusted “real” income.

2.3     The Individual Expenditure Effect with Almost-Ideal Demand
    From (10) and (11), the difference in the budget shares of good j between a consumer with
expenditure level xh and the representative consumer is
                                                                       x 
                                                                           h
                                               sj,h − Sj = βj ln               .                                      (12)
                                                                          x
                                                                          e

Consumers who are richer than the representative consumer have larger expenditure shares than
the representative consumer in positive-βj goods and lower shares in negative-βj goods. Combining
(12) with the individual expenditure effect defined in (6) we obtain
                                                              
                                                     J                x 
                                                                        h
                                                    X
                                          ψbh = −      βj pbj  × ln      ,                                          (13)
                                                                       x̃
                                                    j=1
                                                  |    {z      }
                                                            =b̂


where bb is the change in the log of the non-homothetic component b (p). Note that bb/J equals
the covariance between the good-specific income elasticities and the price changes.14 A positive
(negative) value of b̂ reflects an increase in the relative prices of high- (low-) income elastic goods,
leading to a relative welfare loss for rich (poor) consumers.

   11
      We note that the AIDS restricts these elasticities to be constant, thus ruling out the possibility that demand peaks
at intermediate levels of income. Several discrete-choice models of trade with vertically differentiated products, such
Flam and Helpman (1987), Matsuyama (2000), or the multi-quality extension in Section VII of Fajgelbaum et al.
(2011), feature non-monotonic income elasticities. Banks et al. (1997) and Lewbel and Pendakur (2009) develop
extensions of the AIDS that allow for non-constant income elasticities.
   12
      Note that γ’s and β’s are semi-elasticities since they relate expenditure shares to logs of prices and income, but
we refer to them as elasticities to save notation. Note also that although we define xh as the individual expenditure
level, we follow standard terminology and refer to βj as the income elasticity of the expenditure share in good j.
   13
      The Theil index is a measure of inequality which takes the minimum Σ = 0 if the distribution is concentrated
at a single point. In the case of a lognormal  expenditure    distribution
                                                                          with variance σ 2 , it is Σ = 12 σ 2 .
   14                            1
                                   P      1
                                             P        
                                                               1
                                                                 P            PJ
      I.e., COV ({βj } , pbj ) ≡ J j βj − J j 0 βj 0      pj − J j 0 pj 0 =     j=1 pbj βj , where the last equality follows
from the fact that the elasticities {βj } add up to zero.


                                                                  8
    Collecting terms, the welfare change of consumer h is

                                                  c − bb × ln xh + x
                                                              
                                             ω
                                             bh = W                bh .                                               (14)
                                                              x
                                                              e

Given a distribution of expenditure levels xh across consumers, this expression generates the dis-
tribution of welfare changes in the economy through the nexpenditure
                                                                o    channel.
    A useful property of this structure is that the terms W
                                                          c , bb can be expressed as a function of
demand parameters and aggregate statistics. Intuitively, these terms are simply weighted averages
of price changes which can be expressed as a function of changes in aggregate expenditure shares
and in the
        n change
             o   in adjusted real income y after inverting the aggregate demand system in (11).
   Let S, S be vectors with the levels and changes in aggregate expenditure shares, Sj and
           b
Ŝj . We also collect the parameters αj and βj in the vectors {α, β} and define Γ as the matrix
with element γjk in row j, column k. With this notation, the demand system is characterized by
the parameters {α, α, β, Γ}. We choose an arbitrary good n as the numeraire and assume that
expenditure levels are expressed in units of this good. Excluding good n from the demand system,
the aggregate expenditure shares in (11) are represented by

                                        S−n = α−n + Γ−n ln p−n + β−n y,                                               (15)

where S−n is a vector with all expenditure shares but the numeraire and Γ−n denotes that the nth
row and the nth column are excluded from Γ. We write the change in aggregate expenditure shares
from (15) as dS−n = Γ−n pb −n + β−n dy and express the vector of relative price changes as

                                            b −n = Γ−1
                                            p       −n (dS−n − β−n dy) .                                              (16)

Combining with the definition of the aggregate and the individual expenditure effects from (5) and
(6) yields

                                         c = −S0 Γ−1 (dS−n − β−n dy) ,
                                         W                                                                            (17)
                                               −n −n
                                          bb = −β 0 Γ−1 (dS−n − β−n dy) .                                             (18)
                                                 −n −n


These expressions show W
                       c and bb as functions of levels and changes in aggregate shares, the substi-
tution parameters γjk , the income-elasticity parameters βj , and the change in adjusted real income,
dy. Additionally, using that dy = x b̃ − b
                                         a and Shephard’s Lemma allows us to also express dy as
follows:15                                                       −1
                                             b̃ − S−n 0 − yβ 0
                                                 
                                             x              −n Γ−n dS−n
                                        dy =                     −1     .                                            (19)
                                              1 − S−n 0 − yβ−n0
                                                  
                                                                 Γ−n β−n
    Equations (17) to (19) allow us to express the aggregate and individual expenditure effects as

  15                                     ∂ ln a
                                                      = S−n 0 − yβ−n
                                                                  0
                                                                    
                                  a≡
       To derive (19) we use that b             p
                                       ∂ ln p0−n −n
                                                b                      p
                                                                       b −n , where the second line follows from Shephard’s
Lemma. Replacing p                                                    b̃ − â and solving for dy yields (19).
                 b −n from (16) into this expression, using that dy = x


                                                               9
function of the level and changes in aggregate expenditure shares, the parameters {βj } , {γjk }, the
initial level of adjusted real income, y, and the change in income of the representative consumer, x.
                                                                                                   b̃
These formulas correspond to infinitesimal welfare changes and can be used to compute a first-order
approximation to the exact welfare change corresponding to a discrete set of price changes.16
     In deriving this result, we have not specified the supply-side of the economy, and we have
allowed for arbitrary changes in the distribution of individual expenditure levels, {b
                                                                                     xh }. These
demand-side expressions can be embedded in different supply-side structures to study the welfare
changes associated with specific counterfactuals. In the next section, we embed them in a model
of international trade to compute the welfare effects caused by changes in trade costs as function
of observed expenditure shares.


3        International Trade Framework
     We embed the results from the previous section in an Armington trade model. Section 3.1
develops a multi-sector Armington model with Almost-Ideal preferences and within-country income
heterogeneity in Section . Section 3.2 derives the non-homothetic gravity equation implied by the
framework. Section 3.3 presents expressions for the welfare changes across households resulting
from foreign shocks.

3.1      Multi-Sector Model
     The world economy consists of N countries, indexed by n as importer and i as exporter. Each
country specializes in the production of a different variety within each sector s = 1, .., S, so that
there are J = N ×S varieties, each defined by a sector-origin dyad. These varieties are demanded at
different income elasticities. For example, expenditure shares on textiles from India may decrease
with individual income, while shares on U.S. textiles may increase with income. We let psni be the
price in country n of the goods in sector s imported from country i, and pn be the price vector in
                                                                           s . Perfect competition
country n. The iceberg trade cost of exporting from i to n in sector s is τni
implies that psni = τni
                     s ps .
                        ii
     Labor is the only factor of production. Country n has constant labor productivity Zns in sector
s. Assuming that every country has positive production in every sector, the wage per effective unit
of labor in country n is wn = psnn Zns for all s = 1, .., S, and an individual h in country i with zh
effective units of labor receives income of xh = zh × wn . Each country is characterized by a mean z̄n
and a Theil index Σn of its distribution of effective units of labor across the workforce. Therefore,
the income distribution has mean x̄n = wn z̄n and Theil index Σi . Income equals expenditure at
the individual level (and we use these terms interchangeably) and also at the aggregate level due
to balanced trade.

    16
     In assuming that the changes in prices are small, we have not allowed for the possibility that consumers drop
varieties in response to the price changes. When we measure the welfare losses from moving to autarky in the
international trade setup we account for this possibility.


                                                       10
      We assume Almost-Ideal Demand and reformulate the aggregate expenditure share equation
                           s be the value of exports from exporter i to importer n in sector s,
(11) in this context. Let Xni
and let Yn be the total income of the importer. The share of aggregate expenditures in country n
devoted to goods from country i in sector s is

                                                                      S     N
                               s     Xs     s
                                                 XX 0             0
                              Sni   = ni = αni +     γiiss0 ln psni0 + βis yn ,                              (20)
                                      Yn         0 0              s =1 i =1

where an = a (pn ) is the homothetic component of the price index (8) in country n and yn =
ln (x̄n/an ) + Σn is the adjusted real income of the economy. The income elasticity βis is allowed
to vary across both sectors and exporters. The richer is the importing country (higher x̄n ) or
the more unequal it is (higher Σn ), the larger is its expenditure share in varieties with positive
income elasticity, βis > 0. In turn, the parameter αin
                                                    s may vary across exporters, sectors, and

importers, and it captures the overall taste in country n for the goods exported by country i
in sector s independently from prices or income in the importer. These coefficients must satisfy
PN PS         s
                       PN PS        s
   i=1  s=1 βi = 0 and   i=1   s=1 αni = 1 for all n = 1, . . . , N .
                         0
      The coefficient γiiss0 is the semi-elasticity of the expenditure share in good (i, s) with respect
to the price of good (i0 , s0 ). We assume no cross-substitution between goods in different sectors
      0
(γiiss0 = 0 if i 6= i0 ) and, within each sector s, we assume the same elasticity between goods from
different sources (γiiss0 is the same for all i0 6= i for each s, but allowed to vary across s). Formally,
                                             
                                                              1
                                                                      γs     if s = s0 and i = i0 ,
                                                                  
                                             
                                             
                                             − 1−            N
                                       0
                                             
                                γiiss0 =      γs
                                               N                             if s = s0 and i 6= i0 ,         (21)
                                             
                                             
                                                                             if s 6= s0 .
                                             
                                             0

      This structure on the elasticities is convenient because it simplifies the algebra, but it is not
necessary to reach analytic results.17 It allows us to cast a demand system that looks similar to a
two-tier demand system (across sectors in the upper tier and across origins within each sector in
the lower tier) and to relate it to homothetic multi-sector gravity models.18
      Using (21), the expenditure share in goods from origin country i in sector s can be simplified
to
                                                                               N
                                                       "                                #
                              s         s          s                        1 X
                             Sni   =   αni   −γ            ln (psni )     −      ln pni0 + βis yn .
                                                                                     s
                                                                                                             (22)
                                                                            N 0
                                                                                i =1




     17
     The normalization by N in (21) only serves the purpose of easing the notation in following derivations.
     18
     This nesting is a standard approach to the demand structure in multi-sector trade models. For example, see
Feenstra and Romalis (2014) or Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014). Imposing symmetry within sectors also allows
us to compare results to estimates of gravity equations derived under a translog demand system from the literature
(see below).


                                                                      11
The corresponding expenditure share for consumer h in goods from country n in sector s is

                                                                 N
                                               "                          #              
                                                              1 X                   xh
                   ssni,h   =    s
                                αni   −γ   s
                                               ln (psni )   −      ln pni0 + βis ln
                                                                       s
                                                                                        + yn .                                    (23)
                                                              N 0                   x̃n
                                                                       i =1

Adding up (22) across exporters, the share of sector s in the total expenditures of country n is:

                                                            N
                                                            X                                      s
                                                   Sns =               s
                                                                      Sni = αsn + β yn ,                                          (24)
                                                              i=1

where
                                                                          N
                                                                          X
                                                              αsn     =            s
                                                                                  αni ,
                                                                          i=1
                                                                           N
                                                                  s       X
                                                                  β =             βis .
                                                                          i=1

In turn, the share of sector s in total expenditures of consumer h is

                                               N                                      
                                               X                                  s    xh
                                  ssn,h    =         ssni,h   =     αsn   + β yn + ln      .                                      (25)
                                                                                       x̃n
                                               i=1

    Equations (24) and (25) show that the expenditure shares across sectors have an “extended
                                                                                                                              s
Cobb-Douglas” form, which allows for non-homotheticities across sectors through β on top of the
                                                              s
fixed expenditure share αsn . We refer to β in (24) as the “sectoral betas”.19

3.2     Non-Homothetic Gravity Equation
    The model yields a sectoral non-homothetic gravity equation that depends on aggregate data
and the demand parameters. These parameters are the elasticity of substitution γ s across exporters
in sector s and the income elasticity of the goods supplied by each exporter in each sector, {βns }.
Combining (22) and the definition of yn gives
                             s                                  s ps
                                                                                                                    
                            Xni    s                          τni                                        x̄n
                                = αni − γ s ln                       ii
                                                                              +   βis         ln                     + Σn ,       (26)
                            Yn                                τ̄ns p̄s                                 a (pn )

where
                                                                         N
                                                                                    !
                                                                       1 X
                                                   τ̄ns = exp                   s
                                                                           ln (τni )
                                                                       N
                                                                              i=1




  19    s
     If β = 0 for all s (so that non-homotheticities across sectors are shut down), sectoral shares by importer are
constant at Sns = αsn , as it would be the case with Cobb-Douglas demand across sectors.


                                                                          12
and
                                                                N
                                                                           !
                                                 s            1 X      s
                                                p̄ = exp          ln (pii ) .
                                                              N
                                                                       i=1
                                                                                            PN
Income of each exporter i in sector s equals the sum of sales to every country, Yis =                 s
                                                                                                 n=1 Xni .
Using this condition and (26) we can solve for γ s ln (psii /p̄s ). Replacing this term back into (26),
import shares in country n can be expressed in the gravity form:
                                          s
                                         Xni         Ys
                                             = Asni + i − γ s Tni
                                                               s
                                                                  + βis Ωn ,                         (27)
                                         Yn          YW
             PI
where YW =      i=1 Yi   stands for world income, and where

                                             N      
                                             X   Yn0
                     Asni      =    s
                                   αni   −                 αns 0 i ,                                 (28)
                                                     YW
                                             n0 =1
                                   s
                                      X N         s 
                          s      τni           Yn0      τ 0
                         Tni= ln       −            ln ns i ,                                        (29)
                                 τ̄ns          YW       τ̄n0
                                         n0 =1
                                            XN                     
                                   x̄n                Yn0       x̄n0
                         Ωn = ln        + Σn −               ln        + Σn0 .                       (30)
                                   an            0
                                                      YW        an0
                                                              n =1

   The first term in (27), Asni , captures cross-country differences in tastes across sectors or ex-
                                s is constant across importers n. The second term,
porters; this term vanishes if αni                                                    Yis/YW ,   captures
relative size of the exporter due to, for example, high productivity relative to other countries. The
             s , measures both bilateral trade costs and multilateral resistance (i.e., the cost of
third term, Tni
exporting to third countries).
   The last term in (27), βis Ωn , is the non-homothetic component of the gravity equation. It
includes the good-specific Engel curves needed to measure the unequal gains from trade across
consumers. This term captures the “mismatch” between the income elasticity of the exporter
and the income distribution of the importer. The larger Ωn is, either because average income or
inequality in the importing country n are high relative to the rest of the world, the higher is the
share of expenditures devoted to goods in sector s from country i when i sells high income-elastic
goods (βis > 0). If non-homotheticities are shut down, this last terms disappears and the gravity
equation in (27) becomes the translog gravity equation.

3.3   Distributional Impact of a Foreign-Trade Shock
   Using the results from Section 2, we derive the welfare impacts of a foreign-trade shock across
the expenditure distribution. Without loss of generality we normalize the wage in country n to 1,
wn = 1. Consider a foreign shock to this country consisting of an infinitesimal change in foreign
productivities, foreign endowments or trade costs between any country pair. From the perspective
of an individual consumer h in country n, this shock affects welfare through the price changes


                                                                13
 psni }i,s and the income change x
{b                               bh . From (21) and (22), the change in the price of imported relative
to own varieties satisfies:
                                                    s − dS s
                                                  dSni          1
                                                           nn
                              pbsni − pbsnn = −          s
                                                              + s (βis − βns ) dyn .                       (31)
                                                       γ       γ

   Because only foreign shocks are present, the change in income xbh is the same for all consumers
and equal to the change in the price of domestic commodities, x    b̃ = pbsnn = 0 for all h in country
                                                              bh = x
N and for all s = 1, .., S.20 Imposing these restrictions, we can re-write (17) as

                                                cn ≡ W
                                                W    cH,n + W
                                                            cN H,n ,                                       (32)

where
                                                 S X
                                                   N
                                                 X   1 s     s      s
                                      W
                                      cH,n =            S (dSni − dSnn ),                                  (33)
                                                     γ s ni
                                                  s=1 i=1
                                                S X
                                                  N
                                                X   1 s
                                  W
                                  cN H,n      =        S (β s − βis ) dyn .                                (34)
                                                    γ s ni n
                                                  s=1 i=1

Using these restrictions, we can also rewrite the slope of the individual effect in (18) as

                                      S X
                                        N
                                      X   βs            s      s
                              bbn =              i
                                                     (dSnn − dSni + (βis − βns ) dyn ) ,                   (35)
                                                γs
                                      s=1 i=1

and the change in the adjusted real income from equation (19) as
                                      PS      PN  1    s         s y ) (dS s − dS s )
                                        s=1  i=1 γ s (Sni     − βni n     ni     nn
                           dyn =           PS PN 1                                         .               (36)
                                      1−                        s − β s y ) (β s − β s )
                                                              (Sni
                                            s=1    i=1 γ s           i n      n     i


    Expressions (32) to (36) provide a closed-form characterization of the welfare effects of a foreign-
trade shock that includes three novel margins. First, preferences are non-homothetic with good-
specific income elasticities. Second, the formulas accommodate within-country inequality through
the Theil index of expenditure distribution Σn , which enters through the level of yn . Third, and
key for our purposes, the expressions characterize the welfare change experienced by individuals at
each income level, so that the entire distribution of welfare changes across consumers h in country
n can be computed from (14) using:
                                                                    x 
                                                cn − bbn × ln          h
                                           ω
                                           bh = W                          .                               (37)
                                                                      x
                                                                      e

    The aggregate expenditure effect, W
                                      cn , includes a homothetic part W
                                                                      cH,n independent from the
βns ’s. When non-homotheticities are shut down, this term corresponds to the aggregate gains under
  20
    Note that because of the Ricardian supply-side specification there is no change in the relative price across
domestic goods or in relative incomes across consumers.


                                                            14
translog demand.21 The aggregate effect also includes and a non-homothetic part, W
                                                                                 cN H,n , which
adjusts for the country’s pattern of specialization in high- or low-income elastic goods and for the
change in adjusted real income.
   The key term for measuring unequal welfare effects is the change in the non-homothetic compo-
nent bbn . As we have established, bbn < 0 implies a decrease in the relative price of high income-elastic
goods, which favors high-income consumers. To develop an intuition for how observed trade shares
and parameters map to bbn , consider the single-sector version of the model. Setting S = 1 and
omitting the s superscript from every variable, equation (35) can be written as

                                             bbn = 1 σ 2 dyn − dβ̄n ,
                                                                   
                                                      β                                                          (38)
                                                   γ
              PN
where σβ2 =           2
                 i=1 βi ,   and where
                                                         N
                                                         X
                                                 β̄n =         βi Sni .                                          (39)
                                                         i=1

The parameter σβ2 is proportional to the variance of the βn ’s and captures the strength of non-
homotheticities across goods from different origins. The term β̄n is proportional to the covariance
between the Sni ’s and the βi ’s, and measures the bias in the composition of aggregate expenditure
shares of country i towards goods from high-β exporters. The larger is β̄n , the relatively more
economy n spends in goods that are preferred by high-income consumers. Suppose that dβ̄n > 0,
i.e., a movement of aggregate trade shares towards high-βi exporters; if γ > 0 and the aggregate
real income of the economy stays constant (dyn = 0), this implies a reduction in the relative price
of imports from high-βi exporters, and a positive welfare impact on consumers who are richer than
the representative consumer.22
    Equations (32) to (36) express changes in individual welfare as the equivalent variation of a
consumer that corresponds to an infinitesimal change in prices caused by foreign shocks. To obtain
the exact change in real income experienced by an individual with expenditure level xh in country n
between an initial scenario under trade (tr) and a counterfactual scenario (cf ) we integrate (37),23
                                                                                     
                                                                              bcf  tr
                                                         !          − ln
                                     tr→cf        Wncf         xh              n /bn
                                    ωn,h   =                                              ,                      (40)
                                                  Wntr         x̃n

where Wncf /Wntr and bcf  tr
                      n /bn correspond to integrating (32) to (36) between the expenditure shares

    21
       Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) measures the aggregate gains from trade in the U.S. under translog preferences in
a context with competitive effects, and Arkolakis et al. (2010) study the aggregate gains from trade with competitive
effects under homothetic translog demand and Pareto distribution of productivity. The AIDS nests the demand
systems in these papers, but we abstract from competitive effects. With a single sector, the translog term in (33)
becomes W  cH,n = PN 1 Sni (dSni − dSnn ). Under CES preferences with elasticity σ, the equivalent term is 1 Sbnn ,
                     i=1 γ                                                                                    1−σ
which depends on just the own trade share. See Arkolakis et al. (2012).
    22
       At the same time, keeping prices constant, dyn > 0 would imply a movement of aggregate shares to high-
βi exporters (dβ̄n > 0). Therefore, conditioning on dβ̄n , a larger dyn implies an increase in the relative price of
high-income elastic goods.
    23
       An expression similar to (40) appears in Feenstra et al. (2009).


                                                         15
                                                 tr→cf
in the initial and counterfactual scenarios. If ωn,h   < 1, individual h is willing to pay a fraction
     tr→cf
1 − ωn,h   of her income in the initial trade scenario to avoid the movement to the counterfactual
scenario.
     In Section 5 we perform the counterfactual experiment of bringing each country to autarky, and
also simulate partial changes in the trade costs. In each case, we compute (40) using the changes in
expenditure shares that take place between the observed and counterfactual scenarios. For that, we
need the income elasticities {βns } and the substitution parameters {γ s }. The next section explains
the estimation of the gravity equation to obtain these parameters.


4        Estimation of the Gravity Equation
     In this section, we estimate the non-homothetic gravity derived in Section 3.24 Section 4.1
describes the data, and Section 4.2 presents the estimation results.

4.1      Data
     To estimate the non-homothetic gravity equation we use data compiled by World Input-Output
Database (WIOD). The database records bilateral trade flows and production data by sector for
40 countries (27 European countries and 13 other large countries) across 35 sectors that cover
food, manufacturing and services (we take an average of flows between 2005-2007 to smooth out
annual shocks). The data record total expenditures by sector and country of origin, as well as final
consumption; we use total expenditures as the baseline and report robustness checks that restrict
attention to final consumption. We obtain bilateral distance, common language and border infor-
mation from CEPII’s Gravity database. Price levels, adjusted for cross-country quality variation,
are obtained from Feenstra and Romalis (2014). Income per capita and population are from the
Penn World Tables, and we obtain gini coefficients from the World Income Inequality Database
(Version 2.0c, 2008) published by the World Institute for Development Research.25
                                       s
                                      Xni
     The left-hand-side of (27),      Yi ,   can be directly measured using the data from sector s and
exporter i’s share in country n’s expenditures. Similarly, we use country i’s sales in sector s to
            Yis
construct   YW    .
               s in (27) captures bilateral trade costs between exporter i and importer n in sector
     The term Tni
s relative to the world. Direct measures of bilateral trade costs across countries are unavailable so
                                                                  s = dρ Π g j   s
                                                                                          s     −δ s
we proxy them with bilateral observables. Specifically we assume τni   ni j j,ni ˜ni , where dni
stands for distance, ρs reflects the elasticity between distance and trade costs in sector s, the g’s


    24
      In principle, one could obtain the parameters from other data sources, such as household surveys, that record
consumption variation across households within countries. We have chosen to use cross-country data because it is
internally consistent within our framework, and it is a common approach taken in the literature. In Section 5.4, we
explore results that use parameters estimated from the U.S. consumption expenditure microdata.
   25
      The World Income Inequality Database provides gini coefficients from both expenditure and income data. Ideally,
we would use ginis from only the expenditure data, but this is not always available for some countries during certain
time periods. We construct a country’s average gini using the available data between 2001-2006.


                                                         16
are other gravity variables (common border and common language),26 and ˜sni is an unobserved
component of the trade cost between i and n in sector s.27 This allows us to re-write the gravity
equation as
                         s
                        Xni         Ys                   X
                            = Asni + i − (γ s ρs ) Dni +   γ s δjs Gj,ni + βis Ωn + sni ,
                                                                  
                                                                                                                    (41)
                        Yn          YW
                                                                             j
                               PN
where, letting d¯n =       1
                           N     i=1 ln (dni ) ,

                                                                   N                              
                                                       dni           X   Yn0                   dn0 i
                                     Dni = ln                    −                    ln                   .        (42)
                                                       d¯n                       YW            d¯n0
                                                                     n0 =1


and where Gj,ni is defined in the same way as 42 but with gj,ni instead of dni .28 As seen from (45),
because we do not directly observe trade costs we cannot separately identify γ s and ρs . Following
Novy (2012) we set ρs = ρ = 0.177 for all s.29
    The term Ωn in (41) captures importer n’s inequality-adjusted real income relative to the
world. To construct this variable, we assume that the distribution of efficiency units in each
country n is log-normal, ln zh ∼ N µn , σn2 . This implies a log-normal distribution of expenditures
                                           
                                                  h             i2
with Theil index equal to σn2 /2 where σn2 = 2 Φ−1 gini2n +1         . We construct x̄n from total
expenditure and total population of country n. We follow Deaton and Muellbauer (1980a), and
more recently Atkin (2013), to proxy the homothetic component an with a Stone index, for which
we use an = i Sni ln (pnn dρni ), where pnn are the quality-adjusted prices estimated by Feenstra
             P

and Romalis (2014). The obvious advantage of this approach is that it avoids the estimation of
     s , which enter the gravity specification non-linearly and are not required for our welfare
the αni
calculations. The measure of real spending per capita divided by the Stone price index,                        x̄i/ai ,   is
strongly correlated with countries’ real income per capita; this suggests that Ωi indeed captures
the relative difference in real income across countries.
    To measure Asni , we decompose αni
                                    s into an exporter effect α , a sector-specific effect αs , and an
                                                               i
importer-specific taste for each sector εsn :

                                                        s
                                                       αni = αi (αs + εsn ) .                                       (43)
                                           PN
We further impose the restriction              i=1 αi    = 1. Under the assumption (43), the sectoral expenditure


   26
      Since bilateral distance is measured between the largest cities in each country using population as weights, it is
defined when i = n; see Mayer and Zignago (2011). Note that we parametrize trade costs such that a positive effect
of common language and common border on trade is reflected in δjs > 0.
   27
      Waugh (2010) includes exporter effects in the trade-cost specification. The gravity equation (27) would be
                                                                                s
unchanged in this case because the exporter effect would wash out from Tni        in(29).
                                                                                         s  P             ˜s 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          ˜     N      Yn0
   28
      From the structure of trade costs it follows that the error term is ni = −γ s ln ˜ni
                                                                           s
                                                                                            s −  0
                                                                                                n =1 YW     ln ˜ns0 i
                                                                                            n                     n0
                  P                     
                        N          s
where ˜sn = exp N1       0
                        n =1 ln (˜
                                    0
                                   n i )   .
   29
        Below we explore the sensitivity of the results to alternative values of this parameter.


                                                                      17
shares from the upper-tier equation (24) becomes:

                                                                  s
                                                 Sns = αs + β yn + εsn .                                          (44)

This equation is an Engel curve that projects expenditure shares on the adjusted real income.30
Specifically, it regresses sector expenditure shares on sector dummies and the importer’s ad-
justed real income interacted with sector dummies. The interaction coefficients will have the
                                                                 s
structural interpretation as the sectoral betas β .31 Using (28), (43), and (44) we can write
Asni = αi Sns − SW s − βsΩ              s
                           n , where SW is the share of sector s in world expenditures. Combining
this with the gravity equation in (41), we reach the following estimating equation:
         s
        Xni  Ys                                    X
            = i + αi (Sns − SW
                             s
                               ) − (γ s ρs ) Dni +   γ s δjs Gj,ni + βis − αi β̄ s Ωn + sni ,
                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  (45)
        Yn   YW
                                                                 j


    The gravity equation (45) identifies βis − αi β̄ s using the variation in Ωn across importers for
                                                      

each exporter. Using the β̄ s estimated from the sectoral Engel curve in (44) and the αi estimated
from (45) we can recover the βis (which is needed to perform the counterfactuals). Since the market
shares sum to one for each importer, it is guaranteed that i s βis = 0 in the estimation, as
                                                              P P

the theory requires. We cluster the estimation at the importer level to allow for correlation in the
errors across exporters.
    The sectoral gravity equation aggregates to the gravity equation of a single-sector model. Sum-
ming (45) across sectors s gives the total expenditure share dedicated to goods from i in the
importing country n,

                              Xni   Yi              X
                                  =    − (γρ) Dni +   (γδj ) Gj,ni + βi Ωn + ni ,                                (46)
                              Yn    YW
                                                             j

               PS         s ρs ,
                                          PS    s
                                                                     PS    s
where γρ ≡        s=1 γ            βi ≡    s=1 βi ,   and ni ≡       s=1 ni .   We can readily identify (46) as the
gravity equation that would arise in a single-sector model (S = 1). Thus, summing our estimates on
the gravity terms from (45) will match the gravity coefficients from a single-sector model. Likewise,
the sum of the sector-specific income elasticities by exporter s βis estimated from (45) matches
                                                                 P

the income elasticity βi estimated from (46).




   30
      Note that sectoral shares in value added and efficiency units are allowed to vary independently from expenditure
shares depending on the distribution of sectoral productivities Zns and trade patterns. The sectoral productivities are
not estimated and are not needed to perform the counterfactuals.
   31
      The term εsi captures cross-country differences in tastes across sectors that are not explained by differences in
income or inequality levels. As in Costinot et al. (2012) or Caliendo and Parro (2012), this flexibility is needed for
the model to match sectoral shares by importer. This approach to measuring taste differences is also in the spirit of
Atkin (2013), who attributes regional differences in tastes to variation in demand that is not captured by observables.


                                                            18
4.2     Estimation Results
    We begin by estimating the single-sector gravity model in equation (46). This regression ag-
gregates across the sectors in the data, and as illustrated in (46), the baseline multi-sector gravity
equation aggregates exactly to this single-sector gravity equation. The results are reported in Table
1. Consistent with the literature, we find that bilateral distance reduces trade flows between coun-
tries, which is captured by the statistically significant coefficient on Dni . Under the assumption
that ρ = 0.177, the estimate implies γ = 0.24 (=.043/.177).32 The additional trade costs–common
language and a contiguous border term–also have the intuitive signs.
    The table also reports estimates of the 40 βi parameters, one corresponding to each exporter, in
the subsequent rows. The exporters with the highest β’s are the U.S. and Japan, while Indonesia
and India have the lowest β’s. This means that U.S. and Japan export goods that are preferred by
richer consumers, while the latter export goods that are preferred by poorer consumers. To visualize
the β’s, we plot them against the per capita income in Figure 1. The relationship is strongly positive
and statistically significant. We emphasize that this relationship is not imposed by the estimation.
Rather, these coefficients reflect that richer countries are more likely to spend on products from
richer countries, conditional on trade costs. We also note that the β’s are fully flexible, which is
why the coefficients are often not statistically significant, but the null hypothesis that all income
elasticities are zero is rejected.33 Moreover, the finding that a subset are statistically significant is
sufficient to reject homothetic preferences in the data, and is consistent with the existing literature
who finds that richer countries export goods with higher income elasticities.34
    We next report the results for the multi-sector estimation. As noted earlier, the analysis in-
volves estimating the Engel curve in (44), which projects sectoral expenditure shares on adjusted
                                                                                   s
real income across countries. Table 2 reports the sectoral betas, β . Compared to food and manu-
facturing sectors (listed in column 1A), service sectors (listed in column 1B) tend to be high-income
elastic.35 This pattern can be visualized by plotting countries’ expenditure shares in these three
broad categories against their income per capita in Figure 2: the Engel curve for services is posi-
tively sloped, while it is negatively sloped for food and manufacturing.36 These sectoral elasticities

   32
      This estimate is close to the translog gravity equation estimate of γ = 0.167 estimated by Novy (2012). Feenstra
and Weinstein (2010) report a median γ of 0.19 using a different data, level of aggregation and estimation procedure,
so our estimate is in line with the few papers that have run gravity regressions with the translog specification.
   33
      If we reduce the number of estimated parameters by imposing a relationship between income elasticities and
exporter income, we find a positive and statistically significant relationship between the two variables. Specifically, we
can impose that βi = B0 + P   B1 yi , which is similar to how FeenstraPand Romalis (2014) allow for non-homotheticities.
                                                                   1
The theoretical   restriction   i βi = 0 implies that B0 = −B1 N        i yi , transforming this linear relationship to βi =
           1
             P      
B1 yi − N i0 yi0 and reducing the number of income elasticity parameters to be estimated from 40 to 1. If we
impose this to estimate the gravity equation, we find B1 = 0.0057 (standard     P error    of 0.0026). This estimate is very
close to regressing our estimated βi ’s reported in Table 1 on yi − N1
                                                                                         
                                                                                  i0 yi , which yields a coefficient of 0.008
                                                                                       0

(standard error of 0.0035).
   34
      See Hallak (2006), Khandelwal (2010), Hallak and Schott (2011), and Feenstra and Romalis (2014).
   35
      To see this, we aggregate the β¯s into three categories: food includes “Agriculture” and “Food, Beverages and
Tobacco”, manufacturing includes the remaining sectors listed in column 1A of Table 2, and services is comprised of
the 19 sectors in column 1B. The corresponding elasticities for food, manufacturing and services are -0.0343, -0.0410,
and 0.0753, respectively. (Again, the sum of these three broad classifications is zero.)
   36
      This is consistent with the literature on structural transformation; see Herrendorf et al. (2014).


                                                             19
are highly correlated with sectoral elasticities estimated using a different non-homothetic frame-
work on different data by Caron et al. (2014); see Appendix Figure A.1 which plots the two sets of
elasticities against each other.37
     The results of the sectoral gravity equation in (45) is reported in Table 3. Columns 1A and 1B
report the 35 sector-specific distance coefficients, ργ s (where ρ = .177 as before). Recall, these these
coefficients sum to coefficient on distance from the single-sector model (See Table 1). Likewise, the
sector-specific language and border coefficients in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 sum exactly to the
corresponding coefficients in the single-sector estimation.
     We suppress the estimates of {βns } for readability purposes, but recall that                     s
                                                                                                P
                                                                                                    s βi   equals the
exporter income elasticities βi reported in the single-sector gravity equation. Also note that by
                                                      s
construction, n βns equals the sectoral elasticities β displayed in Table 2. To see how βns relate
             P

to exporter income per capita, we aggregate these coefficients to three broad classifications–food,
manufacturing and services–and report the plot in Figure 3. Analogous to the single-sector esti-
mates in Figure 1, we find that the positive relationship between exporter income per capita and
income elasticities holds within sectors as well.


5        The Unequal Gains from Trade
     This section conducts counterfactual analyses to measure the distributional consequences of
trade. Section 5.1 explains how we numerically implement the expressions from Section 3.3. Section
5.2 shows the results of autarky counterfactuals in the single-sector version of our model. Section 5.3
presents the main results: the autarky counterfactuals in the baseline multi-sector model. Section
5.4 presents a series of robustness checks. In Section 5.5, we conduct counterfactuals of partial
changes in foreign trade costs.

5.1      Computing Consumer-Specific Welfare Changes
     To measure the unequal distribution of the gains from trade across consumers, we perform the
counterfactual experiment of changing trade costs. The main results bring consumers in each coun-
try to autarky, and we also simulate partial changes in trade costs. Because we know the changes
in expenditure shares that take place between the observed trade shares and the counterfactual
scenarios, we can use the results from Section 3.3 to measure the welfare change experienced by
consumers at each income level. But before applying these results, a few considerations are in
order.
     First, we highlight that throughout the analysis we take as given the specialization pattern of
countries across goods with different income elasticity. That is, the βns are not allowed to change
in counterfactual scenarios. These patterns could change as trade costs change, but we note that


    37
   Caron et al. (2014) estimate sectoral income elasticities on GTAP data using constant relative income preferences.
We match GTAP sector classifications with WIOD sector classifications to produce the scatter plot.


                                                         20
the direction of the change will depend on what forces determine specialization across goods with
different income elasticity.38
    Second, the restriction to non-negative individual expenditure shares may bind in some in-
                                                                       tr→cf
stances. Therefore, to compute expression (40) for the welfare change ωn,h   of each consumer
h from country n between the initial scenario under trade (tr) and each counterfactual scenario
(cf ), we must first compute consumer-specific reservation prices. Following Feenstra (2010), this
amounts to setting the individual expenditure shares of dropped varieties to zero according to (23),
and substituting reservation prices back into the consumed varieties. We then numerically integrate
equations (32) to (36) between the aggregate expenditure shares for country n in (22) evaluated
at those reservation prices. As this procedure is done for each consumer h separately, we add a
subscript h to the terms in (40) to denote that the aggregate expenditure shares used to construct
the welfare change of each consumer are consumer-specific:
                                                                                        
                                                   cf                         bcf    tr
                                                         !          − ln
                                                  Wn,h         xh              n,h /bn,h
                                    tr→cf
                                   ωn,h   =        tr                                        .                  (47)
                                                  Wn,h         x̃n

We describe these steps formally in Appendix A.
    Finally, we assume, as with the gravity estimation, that the expenditure distribution in country
n is lognormal with variance σn2 . This allows mapping the observed gini coefficient to the Theil
index. Henceforth, we index consumers by their percentile in the income distribution, so that
h ∈ (0, 1). Under the log-normal distribution, the expenditure level of a consumer at percentile h
in country i is ezh σi +µi , where zh denotes the value from a standard normal z-table at percentile h,
and x̃i = eσi +µi . We can therefore re-write (47) as:

                                                    cf
                                                                        !σn (1−zh )
                                                                 bcf
                                                          !
                                      tr→cf
                                                   Wn,h           n,h
                                     ωn,h     =     tr                                  .                       (48)
                                                   Wn,h          btr
                                                                  n,h

                                                             tr→cf
Consumers at percentile h are willing to pay a fraction 1 − ωn,h   of their income under trade to
                                                                       tr→cf
avoid the movement from the trade to the counterfactual scenario when ωn,h   < 1.

5.2    Single-Sector Analysis
    To convey some intuition, we first report results from the single-sector version of the model
using the parameters from Table 1. Figure 4 plots the gains from trade by percentile of the income
                                                                    tr→cf      tr→cf
distribution for all the countries in our data (i.e., it plots 1 − ωn,h   for ωn,h   defined in (48) for
all n and h = {0.01, .., 0.99} when each country is moved to autarky). To facilitate the comparisons
across countries, we express the gains from trade of each percentile as difference from the gains

   38
      If specialization is demand-driven by home-market effects, as in Fajgelbaum et al. (2011), poor countries would
specialize less in low-income elastic goods as trade costs increase. However, if specialization is demand-driven in a
neoclassical environment as in Mitra and Trindade (2005), or determined by relative factor endowments, as in Schott
(2004) or Caron et al. (2014), the opposite would happen. To our knowledge, no study has established the relative
importance of these forces for international specialization patterns in goods with different income elasticity.


                                                          21
of the 50th percentile in each country. The solid red line in the figure shows the average for each
percentile across the 40 countries in our sample.
    The typical U-shape relationship between the gains from trade and the position in the income
distribution implies that poor and rich consumers within each country tend to reap larger benefits
from trade compared to middle-income consumers. The reason for these patterns is intuitive in the
light of the earlier discussion of equation (38) for the change in the relative price of high-income
elastic goods. In a movement to autarky, the change in the relative price of high income-elastic
goods experienced by the representative agent of country n is:
                                            !
                                      bcf
                                       n            1  2  cf               
                                 ln             =      σβ yn − yntr − βn − β̄n .                                     (49)
                                      btr
                                       n            γ

The formula reveals that a key determinant of the bias of trade is the income elasticity of each
country’s exports relative to each country’s imports, captured by βn − β̄n .39 A positive βn − β̄n
implies that expenditures move towards higher income elastic goods in a movement to autarky,
potentially implying a reduction in their relative price. Therefore, for low-income (high-income)
countries which tend to be exporters of low (high) income-elastic goods as shown in Figure 1,
trade openness relatively favors rich (poor) individuals.40 In countries that export products with
intermediate income elasticities, middle-income consumers benefit the least from trade because
their home country already supplies these goods; at the same time, opening to trade supplies both
the rich and poor with products that better match their tastes. This creates a U-shaped pattern
of the gains from trade for the typical country in the single-sector model.

5.3     Multi-Sector Analysis
    We now present the baseline results from the multi-sector model. We first report the aggregate
gains from trade, defined as the gains for the representative agent in each country. Columns 1A
and 1B of Table 4 report the real income loss for the representative consumer in each country.41
We compare these results to a homothetic case by setting βns = 0 for all n and s in the gravity
estimation and re-estimating the remaining parameters; this amounts to estimating a translog
multi-sector gravity equation. The translog gravity estimates are reported in Appendix Table A.1;
the results reveal that the estimated gravity coefficients hardly change under the constraint that
preferences are homothetic (compare Table 3 with Appendix Table A.1). As a result, the aggregate
gains under the translog specification, reported in Columns 2A and 2B of Table 4, are very similar
to the aggregate gains under the non-homothetic AIDS. This suggests that, in our context, non-
   39
      A decomposition of (49) reveals that the second term inside the parenthesis accounts for majority of the variation,
80.7 percent. The first term accounts for only 13.9 percent, and the covariance for the remaining 5.4 percent.
   40
      When the economy is in autarky, all foreign goods are dropped and demand for the domestic variety corresponds
to a single-good AIDS with unitary income elasticity; see Feenstra (2010). However, the parameter βn still enters in
(49) because it measures the difference in relative prices between the actual trade scenario and the autarky prices.
   41
      The aggregate gains from trade in the multi-sector setting are higher than the single-sector case. This is consistent
with Ossa (2015) and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) who show that allowing for sectoral heterogeneity leads
to larger measurement of the aggregate gains from trade in CES environments.


                                                            22
homotheticities do not fundamentally change the estimates of the aggregate gains from trade.42
However, as we discuss next, they have a strong impact on the bias of the gains from trade across
consumers.
    Figure 5 reports the unequal gains from trade with multiple sectors across percentiles using the
parameters from Tables 2 and 3. As before, the figure shows the gains from trade for each percentile
in each country as a difference from the median percentile of each country. Table 5 reports the
absolute gains from trade at the 10th, median, and 90th percentile, as well as for the representative
consumer of each country (which is identical to Column 1 of Table 4).
    There are two important differences between the results under the single- and under the multi-
sector frameworks. First, the relative effects across percentiles are considerably larger. In the
single-sector case from Figure 4, the gains from trade (relative to the median) lie within the -5
percent to 10 percent band across most countries and percentiles, while in the multi-sector case the
range increases to -40 percent to 60 percent. Second, poor consumers are now predicted to gain
more from trade than rich consumers in every country. Every consumer below the median income
gains more from trade than every consumer above the median. On average across the countries in
our sample, the gains from trade are 63 percent at the 10th percentile of the income distribution
and 28 percent at the 90th percentile.
    Why do the results for the multi-sector analysis differ from the single-sector analysis? The
multi-sector model allows for two key additional margins that influence the pro-poor bias of trade:
heterogeneity in the elasticity of substitution {γs } and in the sectoral betas β̄ s . By construction,
                                                                               

if we restricted the {γs } and {βns } to be constant across sectors in the multi-sector estimation, we
would recover the same unequal gains from trade as in the single-sector estimation, and Figure 5
would look identical to Figure 4. To gauge the importance of each of these margins in shaping
the unequal gains, Figure 6 shows the average gains from trade by percentile across all countries
for four models: 1) the single-sector model (which is equal to the solid red curve in Figure 4);
2) a multi-sector model with homothetic sectors that imposes β̄ s = 0 for all s but allows for
                                                                                             1
heterogeneous γ’s; 3) a multi-sector model that imposes symmetric γ’s (γs =                  J γ)   but allows for
non-homothetic sectors; and 4) the baseline multi-sector model that allows for non-homothetic
sectors and sector-specific γ 0 s (which is equal to the solid red curve in Figure 5).
    We find that including non-homotheticities across sectors (i.e., comparing models 1 versus 3
or models 2 versus 4) is crucial for the strongly pro-poor bias of trade. The reason is that low-
income consumers spend relatively more on sectors that are more traded, whereas high-income
consumers spend relatively more on services, which are among the least internationally traded
sectors. Recall from Figure 2 that the income elasticities of the service sectors are higher than
non-service sectors; in addition, the average import share among the service sectors is 6.4 percent
compared to 20 percent and 48 percent for food and manufacturing sectors, respectively. We also

  42
      We note that this statement relies on defining the aggregate gains as those of the representative consumer.
An alternative,
            P which     we do not pursue here, would be to define the aggregate gains as the average change in real
          1      tr→cf
income, H     h ωn,h   xh . This would correspond to the amount of income per capita needed to leave every consumer
indifferent between trade and autarky.


                                                        23
find that including heterogeneity in γs across sectors (i.e., comparing models 1 versus 2, or models
3 versus 4) slightly biases the gains from trade towards poor consumers. The reason is that low-
income consumers concentrate spending on sectors with a lower substitution parameter γs . To see
this, we construct, for each percentile in each country, an expenditure-share weighted average of the
sectoral gammas. Then, we average across all countries and report the results in Appendix Figure
A.2. The figure reveals that higher percentiles concentrate spending in sectors where exporters sell
more substitutable goods. In sum, larger expenditures in more tradeable sectors and a lower rate
of substitution between imports and domestic goods lead to larger gains from trade for the poor
than the rich.
    While the gains from trade are larger for the poor in every country, we also observe cross-country
heterogeneity in the difference between the gains from trade of poor and rich consumers. What
determines the strength in the pro-poor bias of trade? As in the single-sector case the answer lies
in part in the income elasticity of each country’s products vis-à-vis its natural trade partners. In
countries that export relatively low income-elastic goods, such as India, the gains from trade are
relatively less biased to poor consumers. In these countries, opening to trade increases the relative
price of low-income elastic goods (which are exported), or decreases that of high-income elastic
goods (which are imported). This can be seen in Figure 7, which plots the difference between
the gains from trade of the 90th and 10th percentiles against each country’s income elasticity
(βn = s βns ). The difference between the gains from trade of the 90th and 10th percentiles is
       P

more negative in countries with higher income elasticity of exports. However, the income elasticity
of the goods exported by each country is not sufficient to determine the bias of trade, which also
depends on the distribution of expenditures across goods with different income elasticity, as implied
by (35).43

5.4     Robustness
    This subsection examines the robustness of our baseline results to alternative specifications.

                                                  s
5.4.1    Sectoral Income Elasticities β
                                                                                                 s
    The first set of robustness checks examines the robustness of estimating the β using the Engel
curve regression in (44).
    An assumption in our framework is that individual preferences are identical across countries.44
This assumption is standard in models of international trade and in quantitative analyses of these
models. A second assumption, that results from the structure of the price elasticities in (21), is that
relative prices do not affect sectoral expenditure shares in (44) other than through the homothetic
component a(p) (and only so if non-homotheticities are present). As a result, equation (44) for
    43
       If the U.S. and India are excluded from the figure, the relationship remains negative but not significant. This
suggests that although the income elasticity of a country’s products matters, the other terms in (35) also influence
the overall bias of trade.
    44                                                                                                       s
       Note that we do allow for some heterogeneity in preferences across countries through the parameter αin  , which
                           s
is reflected in the term εn of the Engel curve (44).


                                                         24
the aggregate shares has an “extended Cobb-Douglas” form consisting of a constant plus a slope
with respect to income. This property of the model is also similar to the majority of multi-sector
trade models that assume Cobb-Douglas preferences across sectors. Our approach to estimating
the Engel curves using cross-country data is consistent with these assumptions. Under these two
assumptions, the slopes of Engel curves across consumers within a country are the same as the
slopes of the Engel curves that we estimate using aggregate data across countries. This motivates
the following two robustness checks.
    First, we re-estimate the Engel curve slopes from equation (44) using variation over time by
including country-sector fixed effects, rather than just sector fixed effects. This specification controls
for time invariant differences in country characteristics, and in principle, may result in very different
                     s                                    s
estimates of the β parameters.45 However, the β estimated using the specification with country-
sector fixed effects are positively correlated with the baseline estimates (the correlation between
the estimates is 0.68). Figure 8 compares the welfare gains, averaged across countries, using these
alternative sectoral elasticities with the baseline results, resulting in very similar patterns.
    As a second robustness check, we estimate the sectoral elasticities relying on consumer-level
microdata. This check addresses the concern that variation in consumer expenditures within coun-
tries may not be accurately reflected in aggregate expenditures across countries.46 We use the 2013
                                                                                                                 s
U.S. Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) microdata that records expenditures to estimate the β
from the consumer-level version of (44) implied by the model,47

                                                         s
                                          ssn,h = ζns + β ln (xh ) + εsn ,

                         s
where ζns ≡ αs − β ln (an ) and h refers to a household in the CE data. To cleanly map the
categories in the CE with the sectors in the aggregate data, we classify household expenditures
                                                                                         f ood,CE
into three broad categories—food, manufacturers and services.48 We find β                           = −0.057 (s.e.
                mf g,CE                                         service,CE
= 0.00009), β                = 0.0375 (s.e. = 0.0012), and β                 = 0.0197 (s.e.=0.001). Compared
to baseline Engel curves, the microdata reveal a positive income elasticity for manufactures, and
a somewhat flatter (though still positive) income elasticity for services. We then re-estimate the
remaining parameters of the model from the gravity equation in (27) imposing these sectoral betas,
and recompute the gains from trade using the same aggregate data as in the baseline case.
    The results are presented in Figure 8. Consistent with the baseline results, the poorest con-
sumers gain more from trade than the median. The reason is that in both the CE and aggregate
  45
      We use an average of bilateral flows between 1995-1997 as the initial year to smooth out annual shocks.
  46
      For example, Bee et al. (2012) discusses inconsistencies between aggregation of consumer expenditure surveys
and national accounts data in the U.S.
   47
      If the CE recorded expenditures by country of origin and/or prices, it would be possible to use these data to
estimate obtain estimates of βns and/or γ s .
   48
      We use the 2013 quarterly-level summary expenditure files: fmli132.dta, fmli133.dta, fmli134.dta, and
fmli141.dta. We analyze consumption in the current quarter, and construct the categories as follows. Food is
the sum of {foodcq alcbevcq, tobacccq}. Manufactured goods is the sum of {apparcq, cartkncq, cartkucq, othvehcq,
gasmocq, tvrdiocq, otheqcq, predrqcq, medsupcq, houseqcq, misccq}. Services is the sum of {vehfincq, mainrpcq,
vehinscq, vrntlocq, pubtracq, feeadmcq, hlthincq, medsrvcq, sheltcq, utilcq, housopcq, perscacq, readcq, educacq,
cashcocq, perinscq}.


                                                        25
data, the Engel curve on food sectors is negative and has low γ s . The main difference is revealed
at the top of the expenditure distribution. In the baseline results, we generally find that the rich
gain less than the median-income consumer. But when we estimate the sectoral income elasticities
using the the CE data, the average curve bends upward at higher income levels. This is because
manufacturing sectors have a higher income elasticity in the CE data and are also more tradeable
(relative to services). As a result, using sectoral income elasticities from microdata reveals a slightly
different bias of trade relative to the baseline case.

5.4.2    Price Elasticity of Service Sectors and Non-Tradeability

    The second set of robustness checks alter the assumptions on the degree of tradeability of
some of the service sectors in the data. As discussed earlier, the high elasticity parameters γ s in
service sectors partly affect the bias of the unequal gains. These parameters were obtained by first
identifying ρs γ s from the semi-elasticity of trade with respect to distance in the gravity equation
45, and then setting ρs = 0.177 for all sectors. However, one might expect ρs to be higher for some
service sectors that are essentially non-traded, which would lead us to over-estimate the value of
γ s these sectors.49
    We perform two robustness checks to address this concern. In a first robustness check, we
increase the value of ρ by 25 percent to 0.221 for the 12 service sectors that have, on average across
countries, expenditures on imports of less than 10 percent.50 By increasing ρ for these sectors, we
lower their corresponding γ’s by 20 percent. In a second robustness check, we treat these 12 service
categories as non-tradeable. Appendix B shows that the equations (32) to (36) for the welfare
effects of a foreign-trade shock carry over exactly in the presence of non-traded sectors, the only
difference being that these sectors must be excluded from the computations.
    We re-compute the gains from trade in each of these two cases, and compare the results, averaged
across countries, to the baseline result in Figure 9. The three curves are very similar; this reassures
us that the main results are not sensitive to the value of ρ in sectors that plausibly have higher
price elasticities. The high similarity across these cases is not surprising since the sectors affected
by each robustness check features little trade, so that their inclusion in the baseline model does not
considerably affect the computations.

5.4.3    Additional Checks

    Finally, we present additional robustness checks. As noted earlier, the parameter ρ cannot be
separately identified in the data. We therefore re-run the counterfactuals assuming a ρ = 0.221,
or a 25 percent increase from the baseline value. This implies reducing of the estimate of γ, and
as a result, increases the gains from trade according to equation (32). While the welfare estimates
   49
      Anderson et al. (2012) show that geographic barriers are a stronger deterrent of trade of some services trade
than of goods trade.
   50
      These sectors are: electricity, gas and water; construction; motor vehicle sales and maintenance; wholesale trade;
retail trade; hotels and restaurants; telecommunications; real estate; public administration and defense; education;
health; and other personal services.


                                                          26
in levels increase, Figure 10 shows that the relative gains from trade across percentiles are largely
unaffected. The figure also reports the results from setting ρ = 0.133, a 25 percent decrease in the
baseline value, and again the results are qualitatively unchanged. Hence, while ρ affects the level
of the gains from trade predicted by the model, it does not affect the distributional bias.51
    Next, we examine the sensitivity of our analysis by using final rather than total expendi-
tures.52 As mentioned earlier, the WIOD allow us to separate final expenditures from total ex-
penditures, and we use these data to re-estimate the main results. See Appendix Tables A.2 and
A.3 for the parameter estimation results. Figure 11 reports the welfare gains, averaged across
countries, against the baseline results, and the results are similar.
    The last robustness checks implements a more flexible version of the gravity equation in (45)
by replacing Yns/YW with exporter-sector pair fixed effects. This specification is more flexible in that
it does not rely on the full structure of the model. We report the results of the sectoral gravity
                                                                                s
equation in Appendix Table A.4 (the Engel-curve estimates of the β are the same as those reported
in Table 2), and find a correlation of the income elasticities with the baseline coefficients of 0.90.
Figure 11 compares the welfare gains with the baseline results, and once again the message remains
unchanged.

5.5    Partial Changes in Trade Costs
    The welfare changes implied by the trade-to-autarky counterfactual are special in two ways.
First, the magnitude of the shock is larger than what is typically experienced by countries that
enact trade reforms. Second, trade reforms often target specific sectors rather than all sectors at the
same time; as such, the clear pro-poor bias of trade may not be present when a trade liberalization
only affects specific sectors. In this sub-section, we examine the welfare implications of partial
reductions in trade costs involving specific sectors.
                                                                                          s = −5
    We consider a 5 percent reduction in the cost of importing in specific sectors: ∆ ln τni
                                                                              s = 0 otherwise. We
percent for all i 6= n and for all s in some subset of all sectors, and ∆ ln τni
separately simulate the welfare impact of this shock for each country n at a time treating each
country as a small open economy, so that changes in trade costs have a negligible impact on
wages in foreign countries. The change in the price of goods in sector s imported from i relative
to domestically produced goods is then ∆ ln (psni /psnn ) = ∆ ln τni
                                                                  s for all i, s. Feeding these price

changes to the aggregate demand system (20) we find the aggregate shares in the final scenario,
and then follow the steps in Section 5.1 to measure welfare changes by percentile.
    We first compare the welfare change of the representative consumer implied by this shock for
manufacturing sectors with the welfare changes implied by a standard multi-sector Armington trade

  51
      When ρ = 0.133, the aggregate gain from trade, averaged across countries, is 25 percent. When ρ = 0.221, the
average is 37 percent.
   52
      We work with total expenditures as the baseline because separating final expenditures requires taking a stand on
the end use on products (see Dietzenbacher et al. 2013). The most accurate way to account for intermediate inputs
would be to enrich the supply-side structure to account for input-output linkages, but we do not pursue this route
here.


                                                         27
model with Cobb-Douglas preferences across sectors and CES preferences across origins within
sectors (e.g, Ossa 2015).53 Appendix Table A.5 shows that the aggregate gains estimates are very
similar between the two models (correlation of 0.98). The 5 percent reduction in the cost of all
manufacturing imports increases welfare of the representative consumer by between 0.2 percent and
1.3 percent across countries.
     Figure 12 displays three panels that report the average welfare change across countries corre-
sponding to the 5 percent trade cost decrease in the food sectors, the manufacturing sectors, and
the service sectors. Given the smaller shock to prices, the differences in the gains from trade across
percentiles are, of course, smaller than in the case of moving to autarky. A pro-poor bias of trade
still results when sectors within food or manufacturing, which are typically negative-income elastic,
experience a decline in foreign trade costs. Alternatively, when only the service sectors, which are
typically positive-income elastic, experience a decline in the cost of importing, we see an overall
U-shaped pattern, with the very rich gaining relatively more.


6        Conclusion
     This paper develops a methodology to measure the distribution of welfare changes across hetero-
geneous consumers through the expenditure channel for many countries over time. The approach
has broad applicability as it is based on aggregate statistics and model parameters that can be
estimated from readily available bilateral trade and production data. This is possible by using
the AIDS demand structure which allows for non-homotheticities and has convenient aggregation
properties.
     We estimate a non-homothetic gravity equation generated by the model to obtain the key
parameters required by the approach, and identify the effect of trade on the distribution of welfare
changes through counterfactual changes in trade costs. The estimated parameters suggest large
differences in how trade affects individuals along the income distribution in different countries.
The multi-sector analysis reveals that the gains from trade are typically biased towards the poor.
This is because the poor tend to concentrate expenditures in sectors that are more traded, and
because these sectors have lower price elasticities. Heterogeneity in the pro-poor bias of trade is
driven, in part, by a country’s pattern of specialization relative to its trading partners.
     While our goal in this paper is to demonstrate the importance of demand heterogeneity across
consumers for the distributional effects of trade, we believe that a promising avenue lies in integrat-
ing this approach with a richer supply-side structure to measure jointly the impact of trade through
both the expenditure and income channels across consumers. We leave this for future work.
                                                                                                    P               s       s
                                                                                                                   s −αn /(1−σ )
    53
     In this case, the indirect utility of the representative consumer in country n is wn ∗ ΠS    s     (psni )1−σ               ,
         s
where αn   is the expenditure share of country n in sector s and σ s > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across origins
within sector s. The change in real income due to the partial change in trade costs in a subset of sectors s ∈ shocked
                                                              −αsn /(1−σs )
                  s,trade                           s S s,trade
  Q              Snn        P         (1−σ s )∆ ln τni
is s∈shocked        αs
                          + i6=n e                     ni
                                                         αs
                                                                                − 1. The case of going to autarky is nested in
                     n                                  n
                           s
this expression when ∆ ln τni = ∞ for all s and i 6= n. We use the elasticities reported by Ossa (2015) and match
them to the WIOD sector classification to compute the welfare gains.


                                                               28
References
Aguiar, M. A. and M. Bils (2015). Has consumption inequality mirrored income inequality? Amer-
 ican Economic Review, forthcoming.

Anderson, J., C. Milot, and Y. Yotov (2012). How much does geography deflect services trade?
 Technical report, LeBow College of Business, Drexel University.

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2010). Gains from trade under monopolistic
  competition: A simple example with translog expenditure functions and pareto distributions of
  firm-level productivity. Manuscript, available at http://economics.mit.edu/files/5876 .

Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2012). New trade models, same old gains?
  The American Economic Review 102 (1), 94–130.

Atkin, D. (2013). Trade, tastes and nutrition in india. The American Economic Review 103 (5),
  1629–1663.

Atkin, D., B. Faber, and M. Gonzalez-Navarro (2015). Retail globalization and household welfare:
  Evidence from mexico. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Banks, J., R. Blundell, and A. Lewbel (1997). Quadratic engel curves and consumer demand.
  Review of Economics and Statistics 79 (4), 527–539.

Bee, A., B. D. Meyer, and J. X. Sullivan (2012). The validity of consumption data: Are the
  consumer expenditure interview and diary surveys informative? NBER Working Paper 18308.

Brambilla, I., D. Lederman, and G. Porto (2012). Exports, export destinations, and skills. American
  Economic Review 102 (7), 3406–3438.

Burstein, A., J. Cravino, and J. Vogel (2013). Importing skill-biased technology. American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (2), 32–71.

Burstein, A. and J. Vogel (2012). International trade, technology, and the skill premium.
  Manuscript, Columbia University and UCLA.

Caliendo, L. and F. Parro (2012). Estimates of the trade and welfare effects of NAFTA. NBER
  Working Paper 8508.

Caron, J., T. Fally, and J. R. Markusen (2014). International trade puzzles: A solution linking
  production and preferences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (3), 1501–1552.

Chaudhuri, S., P. K. Goldberg, and P. Gia (2006). Estimating the effects of global patent protection
  in pharmaceuticals: A case study of quinolones in india. American Economic Review 96 (5),
  1477–1514.

Costinot, A., D. Donaldson, and I. Komunjer (2012). What goods do countries trade? a quantitative
  exploration of ricardo’s ideas. The Review of Economic Studies 79 (2), 581–608.

Costinot, A. and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2014). Trade theory with numbers: Quantifying the conse-
  quences of globalization. In E. H. Gita Gopinath and K. Rogoff (Eds.), Handbook of International
  Economics, Volume 4 of Handbook of International Economics, pp. 197 – 261. Elsevier.



                                                29
Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980a). An almost ideal demand system. The American Economic
  Review 70 (3), 312–326.

Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980b). Economics and consumer behavior. Cambridge, UK:
  Cambridge University Press.

Dietzenbacher, E., B. Los, R. Stehrer, M. Timmer, and G. de Vries (2013). The construction of
  world input-output tables in the wiod project. Economic Systems Research 25 (1), 71–98.

Faber, B. (2013). Trade liberalization, the price of quality, and inequality: Evidence from mexican
  store prices. Mimeo, University of California at Berkeley.

Fajgelbaum, P., G. M. Grossman, and E. Helpman (2011). Income distribution, product quality,
  and international trade. Journal of Political Economy 119 (4), 721–765.

Feenstra, R. C. (2010). New products with a symmetric aids expenditure function. Economics
  Letters 106 (2), 108–111.

Feenstra, R. C. and G. Hanson (1996). Globalization, outsourcing, and wage inequality. American
  Economic Review 86 (2), 240–245.

Feenstra, R. C., H. Ma, and D. Rao (2009). Consistent comparisons of real incomes across time
  and space. Macroeconomic Dynamics 13 (S2), 169–193.

Feenstra, R. C. and M. B. Reinsdorf (2000). An exact price index for the almost ideal demand
  system. Economics Letters 66 (2), 159–162.

Feenstra, R. C. and J. Romalis (2014). International prices and endogenous quality. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics.

Feenstra, R. C. and D. E. Weinstein (2010). Globalization, markups, and the u.s. price level. NBER
  Working Paper 15749.

Fieler, A. C. (2011). Nonhomotheticity and bilateral trade: Evidence and a quantitative explana-
  tion. Econometrica 79 (4), 1069–1101.

Flam, H. and E. Helpman (1987). Vertical product differentiation and north-south trade. The
  American Economic Review , 810–822.

Frias, J., D. Kaplan, and E. Verhoogen (2012). Exports and within-plant wage distributions:
  Evidence from mexico. American Economic Review 102 (3), 435–40.

Galle, S., A. Rodrıguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2014). Slicing the pie: Quantifying the aggregate and
 distributional effects of trade. Unpublished manuscript, UC Berkeley.

Goldberg, P. K. and N. Pavcnik (2007). Distributional effects of globalization in developing coun-
 tries. Journal of Economic Literature 45 (1), 39–82.

Hallak, J. C. (2006). Product quality and the direction of trade. Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 68 (1), 238–265.

Hallak, J. C. (2010). A product-quality view of the linder hypothesis. Review of Economics and
 Statistics 92 (3), 453–466.


                                                30
Hallak, J. C. and P. K. Schott (2011). Estimating cross-country differences in product quality. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 417–474.

Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M.-A. Muendler, and S. Redding (2012). Trade and inequality: From
  theory to estimation. NBER Working Paper No. 17991.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and Á. Valentinyi (2014). Growth and structural transformation.
  Handbook of Economic Growth 2, 855–941.

Kee, H. L., A. Nicita, and M. Olarreaga (2008). Import demand elasticities and trade distortions.
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4), 666–682.

Khandelwal, A. K. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. Review of Economic Stud-
 ies 77 (4), 1450–1476.

Lewbel, A. and K. Pendakur (2009). Tricks with hicks: The easi demand system. American
  Economic Review 99 (3), 827–63.

Markusen, J. R. (1986). Explaining the volume of trade: an eclectic approach. The American
 Economic Review , 1002–1011.

Matsuyama, K. (2000). A ricardian model with a continuum of goods under nonhomothetic pref-
 erences: Demand complementarities, income distribution, and north-south trade. Journal of
 Political Economy 108 (6), 1093–1120.

Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011, December). Notes on CEPII distances measures: The GeoDist
 database. Working Papers 2011-25, CEPII Research Center.

Melitz, M. and S. Redding (2014). New trade models, new welfare implications. Mimeo, Princeton
 University.

Mitra, D. and V. Trindade (2005). Inequality and trade. Canadian Journal of Economics/Revue
 canadienne d’économique 38 (4), 1253–1271.

Muellbauer, J. (1975). Aggregation, income distribution and consumer demand. The Review of
 Economic Studies 42 (4), 525–543.

Neary, J. P. (2004). Rationalizing the penn world table: true multilateral indices for international
  comparisons of real income. American Economic Review , 1411–1428.

Novy, D. (2012). International trade without ces: Estimating translog gravity. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 89 (2), 271–282.

Ossa, R. (2015). Why trade matters after all. Journal of International Economics.

Porto, G. G. (2006). Using survey data to assess the distributional effects of trade policy. Journal
  of International Economics 70 (1), 140–160.

Schott, P. K. (2004). Across-product versus within-product specialization in international trade.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2), 647–678.

Stolper, W. and P. A. Samuelson (1941). Protection and real wages. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 9 (1), 58–73.


                                                31
Theil, H. (1975). Theory and measurement of consumer demand, Volume 1. Amsterdam, The
  Netherlands: North-Holland Publishing Company.

Waugh, M. (2010). International trade and income differences. American Economic Review 100 (5),
 2093–2124.



A         Appendix to Section 5
     This appendix provides the details to implement the counterfactuals in Section 5.


A.1         Reservation Prices
    The restriction to non-negative individual expenditure shares may bind in the counterfactuals. In these cases,
we find consumer-specific reservation prices that set the individual shares of dropped varieties to zero, and adjust
                                                                         s,j
the remaining individual shares using these reservation prices. Let Nn,h      be the number of varieties not consumed by
                                                   s,j                                                                 n       o
                                                                               s,j
percentile h from country n in sector s at prices pni under scenario j, In,h        be the set of such varieties, and ps,j ni,h
be the reservation prices of consumer h. The notation j may correspond to the initial scenario under trade (j = tr)
or to a counterfactual (j = cf ).
    For each percentile h in country n, we have that ps,j         s,j
                                                          ni,h = pni for all i ∈
                                                                                    s,j
                                                                                 / In,h and ss,j                     s,j
                                                                                               ni,h = 0 for all i ∈ In,h . From
                              s,j           s,j                              s,j            s,j
(23), the reservation prices pni,h for i ∈ In,h and the individual shares sni,h for i ∈  / In,h satisfy:
                                                                              
                                           γs  X
                                                                                                 
                                                              X                      xh
    ss,j
     ni,h   =    s
                αni   −γ   s
                               ln ps,j
                                   ni    +              s,j
                                                    ln pni0 +      ln pni0 ,h  + βis ln
                                                                       s,j                      j
                                                                                             + yn,h   ,       i∈  s,j
                                                                                                               / In,h ,    (A.1)
                                           N    0 s           0  s
                                                                                         x˜n
                                                i ∈I
                                                  / n,h                   i ∈In,h
                                                                        
                                    s
                                                                                           
              s                   γ       X            X            
                                                                          + βis ln xh + yn,h
         0 = αni − γ s ln ps,j
                           ni,h +
                                            ln ps,j
                                                 ni0 +      ln ps,j
                                                                ni0 ,h
                                                                                          j
                                                                                                ,                   s,j
                                                                                                               i ∈ In,h    (A.2)
                                  N     0  s           0  s
                                                                                    x˜n
                                                  i ∈I
                                                    / n,h                  i ∈In,h


                                                         n       o 
                         j
for s = 1, .., S, where yn,h ≡ ln x˜n /ajn,h and ajn,h = a    ps,j
                                                               ni,h     is the homothetic component of the price index.
                                                                                     i,s
Assuming that not every variety in sector s is dropped, (A.2) implies
                                                                                                            
                           s,j
                         N
                                                                                                        
   X s                    n,h
                                         X              N          X             X            xh
        γ ln ps,j
              ni0 ,h =             γs        ln ps,j
                                                 ni0 +
                                                                           s
                                                                          αni0 +        βis0 ln        j
                                                                                                    + yn,h    . (A.3)
                                                                                                            
                               s,j                           s,j 
    s,j                N − N   n,h     0   s           N − N n,h      s,j           s,j
                                                                                                x˜n
 0
 i ∈In,h                              i ∈I
                                         /              n,h        0             0   i ∈In,h        i ∈In,h


Replacing this back into (A.2) gives the reservation prices of the dropped varieties in sector s:
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                      
                     1  s          1        X                       1       X               xh
          ln ps,j                                  s      s
              ni,h =    αni +                    αni0 + βi +                    βis0  ln          j
                                                                                                  + yn,h
                                                                                                          
                                       s,j                              s,j
                     γs                                                                      x˜
                                                                                                           
                                N − Nn,h   0  s,j                N −  Nn,h 0  s,j
                                                                                               n
                                                              i ∈In,h                          i ∈In,h

                                   1          X                
                       +             s,j
                                                        ln ps,j
                                                            ni0 ,
                                                                             s,j
                                                                        i ∈ In,h .                                         (A.4)
                                N − Nn,h     i0 ∈I s
                                                / n,h



A.2         Aggregate Expenditure Shares Used in the Counterfactuals
        n       o
           s,j
     Let  Sni,h      be the expenditure shares that result from evaluating the aggregate-share equation (23) from
                 i,s                                                n      o
country n at the reservation prices for consumer h under scenario j, ps,j
                                                                      ni,h   .54 In the counterfactuals, to measure
                                                                                                  i,s

   54
        We note that these are neither the aggregate shares nor the shares chosen by the representative agent at prices


                                                                                32
                                                                                                               n           o               n           o
                                                                                                                    s,tr                        s,cf
welfare changes by percentile we integrate equations (32) to (36) between                                          Sni,h             and       Sni,h             . To construct
n       o                                                                                                                      i,s                         i,s
   s,j
  Sni,h    we combine (22), (23), and (A.4) to obtain:
                i,s

                                                                            
                                                              ss,j − βis ln xh ,                       i∈  s,j
                                                                                                         / In,h ,
                                                                ni,h
                                                     s,j
                                                    Sni,h   =           x̃n                                                                                             (A.5)
                                                              −β s ln xh ,                                  s,j
                                                                   i   x̃n
                                                                                                        i ∈ In,h .

Equation (A.5) relies on the individual shares ss,j
                                                  ni,h for i ∈
                                                                s,j
                                                             / In,h defined in (A.1). We next explain how to construct
these individual shares in each of the different counterfactual scenarios.


Initial Trade Scenario              For the initial trade scenario (j = tr) we combine (22) and (A.3) to obtain
                                                                                     
                                                                                                           
                                 1        X                          1        X              xh
    ss,tr
             s,tr                               s,tr    s                         s             tr     tr                                                           s,tr
     ni,h = Sni            +      s,tr         Sni0  + βi +         s,tr         βi0  ln     + yn,h − yn ,                                                      i∈
                                                                                                                                                                     / In,h  .
                              N − Nn,h     s,tr                 N − Nn,h       s,tr
                                                                                             x˜n
                                        0 i ∈In,h                           0                 i ∈In,h

                                                                                                                      (A.6)
                        s,tr                         s,tr                                                      s,tr
The aggregate shares Sni     are observed. The set In,h   in (A.6) is determined by iteration: starting from In,h   = ∅, we
        n       o
compute ss,tr
           ni,h    s,tr
                         and if ss,tr                                 s,tr                            tr
                                  ni,h < 0 we include n in the set In,h of the next iteration; since yn,h is not observed,
                            i∈I
                             / n,h

we approximate its value using yntr . It can be shown that this procedure is formally equivalent to evenly redistributing
the shares of varieties predicted to be negative at the actual prices among the remaining varieties within each sector.55


Autarky For the counterfactuals that move consumers to autarky in Sections 5.2 and 5.3, only own-country varieties
                            s,cf
are consumed; this implies In,h  = {i : i 6= n}. Equations (23) and (25) then imply:
                                                                                                           
                                                                            s                xh
                                                    ss,cf
                                                     nn,h     =   αsn + β           ln                    cf
                                                                                                       + yn,h   ,                                                         (A.7)
                                                                                             x˜n
                                                     ss,cf
                                                      ni,h    =   0,   i 6= n.
                                                                                                           s
To measure these individual autarky shares we use the values of βis and β estimated in Section (4.2).   n From  o (24), we
                     s                    cf                                                               s,cf
compute αsn = Sns − β yntr . To compute yn,h  we initially guess its value, then use (A.5) to compute Sni,h      , and then
                                    s,tr       n        o
                                                    s,cf
integrate dyn using (36) between Sni        and Sni,h      starting from the initial condition yntr . These steps yield an
                  cf
updated value of yn,h that is then used as a guess for the next iteration, and the procedure continues until convergence.
                                                       cf
This procedure achieves convergence to the same yn,h       from multiple initial guesses for each percentile-country pair
for all but a handful of cases which are excluded from the figures and tables referenced in Section 5.56


Partial Changes in Trade Costs For the counterfactuals involving partial changes in foreign-trade costs (Section
5.5) we construct individual shares following steps similar to the initial trade scenario using the aggregate final shares




n           o
    ps,j
     ni,h             . These shares result from evaluating equation (23) at the h-specific reservation prices, and they are not
                i,s
restricted to be between 0 and 1.
   55
      We note that these adjustments do    not affect the aggregate predictions of the model: the observed aggre-
                                        s,tr
gate expenditure shares under trade Sni         have a correlation of 0.99 with the aggregate expenditure shares
nP                   o
          xh      s,tr
        P        sni,h resulting from adding up the expenditures shares of each percentile h at the reservation prices
n h o h0 xh0
   s,tr
  pni,h .
     56
    In the baseline multi-sector counterfactual there are 3,960 (=40 countries*99 percentiles) combinations and we
do not obtain convergence in 20 of these cases corresponding to extreme percentiles.


                                                                            33
 s,cf    s,tr     s               s
Sin   = Sin   + ∆Sni . The term ∆Sni can be computed from (22), which implies
                                                               "                   N
                                                                                              #
                                      s                    s             s      1 X
                                    ∆Sni     = −γ                  ∆ ln τni   −      ∆ ln τni0 + βis ∆yn .
                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                          (A.8)
                                                                                N 0
                                                                                     i =1

                                                                                                      h                  PN             i
                               s
                                  − βis yn ) τ̂ni
                                               s                                             s
                                                                                                = −γ s τˆni
                                                                                                         s           1              ˆs 0 +
                      P P
We integrate dyn = − s i (Sni                     (which follows from Shepard’s Lemma) and dSni             −        N     i0 =1   τni
 s
βi dyn (which follows from (A.8)) to obtain ∆yn .



B     Computing Welfare Changes with a Non-Traded Sector
     We derive the welfare results assuming that a subset of sectors are non-traded. Assume that s = N T is a non-
traded sector. We show that equations (32) to (36) for the welfare effects of a foreign-trade shock remain the same
with the only difference being that the non-traded sector is excluded from the expressions.
     In sector s = N T , the preferences of country n are only defined over the variety produced by country n. We
let β N T be the income elasticity corresponding to the non-traded sector. The adding-up constrain then implies
γ N T = 0, β N T = − s6=N T N       s        NT     NT
                                                        = 1 − s6=N T αsn . Letting SnN T be the share of expenditures
                     P       P                                P
                               i=1 βi , and αnn = αn
in non-traded goods, the aggregate expenditure shares (22) in country n are now defined as follows:
                                                  "                            N     s #
                                                               psni
                                                                     
                          s         s         s                             1 X      pni0
                         Sni   =   αni   −γ           ln                  −      ln        + βis yn for s 6= N T ,        (A.9)
                                                                 ˆ
                                                               psnn         N 0        ˆ
                                                                                     psnn
                                                                                i =1

                        SnN T = αN
                                 n
                                   T
                                     + β N T yn .                                                                        (A.10)

In changes, equation (A.9) can be written as:
                                                                       s      s
                                                                     dSni − dSnn   1
                                         p̂sni − p̂snn = −                  s
                                                                                 + s (βis − βns ) dyn .                  (A.11)
                                                                          γ       γ

Additionally, we have that:
                                                                      p̂snn = p̂N T
                                                                                nn = ŵn .                               (A.12)

Since x
      bh = ŵn , the welfare change of consumer h defined in (4) is:

                                                cn − b̂n × ln xh + ŵn .
                                                               
                                           ω
                                           bh = W                                                                        (A.13)
                                                                 x
                                                                 e
where, using (5) and (13), we have
                                                                X X
                                              W
                                              cn =                              psni ) Sni
                                                                              (−b       s
                                                                                           − pbN T NT
                                                                                               nn Sn ,                   (A.14)
                                                               s6=N T     i
                                                                X X
                                                  bn =
                                                  b                           pbsni βis + pbN T NT
                                                                                            nn β   .                     (A.15)
                                                               s6=N T     i


Combining (A.11) to (A.15), and using the normalization of the own wage (ŵn = 0), leads to:
                                                                                                          s
                                                  X X                  s      s                          Sni
                                    W
                                    cn =                            (dSni − dSnn + (βns − βis ) dyn )        ,
                                                               i
                                                                                                         γs
                                              s6=N T
                                          X X βis    s      s
                                     bn =
                                     b
                                                s
                                                  (dSnn − dSni + (βis − βns ) dyn ) ,
                                            i
                                              γ
                                              s6=N T


which correspond to (32) to (35) when all sectors are traded. To characterize welfare changes it remains to solve for




                                                                                34
dy. From Shephard’s Lemma,
                                    X X ∂ ln a s                ∂ ln a N T
                             ân ≡                s
                                                     p̂ni +            p̂ ,
                                                                      T n
                                           ∂ ln p ni         ∂  ln pN
                                                                    n
                                  s6=N T i
                                    X X s                                           
                                                      s
                                =          (Sni − βni   yn ) p̂sni + SnN T − βnN T yn p̂N T
                                                                                        n .
                                     s6=N T   i


Combining this expression with (A.11) to (A.15), using that dyn = ŵn − ân and solving for dyn yields
                                          P            P  1     s       s           s       s
                                              s6=N T   i γs  (Sni  − βni  yn ) (dSni  − dSnn   )
                                dyn =              P        P 1       s       s        s − βs)
                                                                                                 ,
                                              1−   s6=N T     i γs (S ni  − β   y
                                                                              i n ) (β n     i


which corresponds to (36) when all sectors are traded.




                                                                 35
Tables and Figures
                                           Table 1: Gravity Estimates: Single Sector
         Variables                                      (1A)                                             (1B)
         -­‐Distanceni                                 0.043 ***
                                                     (0.005)
         Languageni                                    0.131 ***
                                                     (0.021)
         Borderni                                      0.135 ***
                                                     (0.023)
         Ω 	  X	  
              n	                                                   Ω 	  X	  
                                                                          n	  



         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐USA               0.052 **     	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐POL    -­‐0.001
                                                     (0.022)                                          (0.011)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐JPN               0.028 ***    	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐IDN    -­‐0.023
                                                     (0.008)                                          (0.032)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐CHN               0.008        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐AUT    -­‐0.001
                                                     (0.031)                                          (0.009)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐DEU              -­‐0.015      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐DNK     0.003
                                                     (0.013)                                          (0.009)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐GBR               0.005        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐GRC     0.018 *
                                                     (0.013)                                          (0.009)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐FRA              -­‐0.013      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐IRL    -­‐0.009
                                                     (0.011)                                          (0.013)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐ITA               0.006        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐FIN     0.013
                                                     (0.006)                                          (0.010)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐ESP              -­‐0.004      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐PRT    -­‐0.001
                                                     (0.006)                                          (0.005)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐CAN              -­‐0.017      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐CZE    -­‐0.003
                                                     (0.015)                                          (0.006)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐KOR               0.006        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐ROM     0.003
                                                     (0.012)                                          (0.015)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐IND              -­‐0.048      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐HUN     0.008
                                                     (0.042)                                          (0.012)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐BRA              -­‐0.010      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐SVK     0.005
                                                     (0.017)                                          (0.010)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐RUS              -­‐0.003      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐LUX    -­‐0.012 *
                                                     (0.022)                                          (0.007)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐MEX              -­‐0.029 *    	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐SVN    -­‐0.002
                                                     (0.017)                                          (0.005)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐AUS               0.011        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐BGR     0.004
                                                     (0.012)                                          (0.016)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐NLD              -­‐0.008      	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐LTU     0.004
                                                     (0.009)                                          (0.010)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐TUR               0.006        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐LVA     0.006
                                                     (0.016)                                          (0.009)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐BEL              -­‐0.025 **   	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐EST     0.007
                                                     (0.011)                                          (0.007)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐TWN               0.017        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐CYP     0.016 **
                                                     (0.011)                                          (0.008)
         	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐SWE               0.006        	  	  	  	  	  	  β-­‐MLT    -­‐0.006
                                                     (0.008)                                          (0.010)
         Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  income	  elasticities  0.00
         R2                                                               0.47
         Observations                                                    1,600
         Implied	  γ                                                     0.24
         Notes: Table reports the estimates of the single-­‐sector gravity equation that aggregates the data
         across the 35 sectors. There are 40 income elasticity parameters βi. We assume that ρ=0.177,	  
         and the implied γ={coefficient on -­‐Distanceni}/ρ is noted at the bottom of the table. Standard
         errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  
                                                      Table 2: Engel Curve Estimation: Baseline
Variables                                                               (1A)                                                                                                (1B)
Agriculture                                                       -­‐0.0218 ***                Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply                          -­‐0.0033
                                                                    (0.002)                                                                                             (0.002)
Mining                                                            -­‐0.0080 ***                Construction                                                           -­‐0.0053
                                                                    (0.002)                                                                                             (0.003)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                              -­‐0.0125 ***                Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles                             0.0027 ***
                                                                    (0.003)                                                                                           (0.001)
Textiles                                                          -­‐0.0063 ***                Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade                       0.0010
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.003)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                                        -­‐0.0009 ***                Retail	  Trade                                                        -­‐0.0020
                                                                    (0.000)                                                                                             (0.002)
Wood	  Products                                                  -­‐0.0008                    Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                                           0.0021
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.001)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                                      0.0014 *                    Inland	  Transport                                                    -­‐0.0089 ***
                                                                   (0.001)                                                                                              (0.003)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel                 -­‐0.0056 ***                Water	  Transport                                                     -­‐0.0007
                                                                    (0.002)                                                                                             (0.001)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products                          -­‐0.0046 ***                Air	  Transport                                                       0.0007 *
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                                         -­‐0.0016 *                  Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities                          0.0038 ***
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.001)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                               -­‐0.0027 ***                Post	  and	  Telecommunications                                      0.0012
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.001)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal                     -­‐0.0031                    Financial	  Intermediation                                            0.0280
                                                                    (0.004)                                                                                           (0.018)
Machinery                                                         -­‐0.0028                    Real	  Estate	  Activities                                           0.0095 ***
                                                                    (0.002)                                                                                           (0.003)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment                         -­‐0.0021                    Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                                0.0243 ***
                                                                    (0.003)                                                                                           (0.003)
Transport	  Equipment                                            -­‐0.0033 *                  Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                                      0.0038
                                                                    (0.002)                                                                                           (0.003)
Manufacturing,	  nec                                             -­‐0.0005                    Education                                                              0.0022 **
                                                                    (0.001)                                                                                           (0.001)
                                                                                               Health	  and	  Social	  Work                                        0.0128 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.003)
                                                                                               Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services                        0.0031
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.003)
                                                                                               Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons                   0.0003 **
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.000)
Sector	  FEs	                                                                                 yes
Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  sectoral	  elasticities                              0.00
R-­‐squared                                                                                    0.67
Observations                                                                                 1,400
Notes: Table reports the sectoral income elasticities from the Engel curve equation. It is a regression of importers' sectoral expenditures
shares on the adjusted real income interacted with sector dummies. Sectors "Agriculture" and "Food, Beverages and Tobacco" are the
food sectors, and the remaining sectors in column 1A are the manufacturing sectors; the service sectors are listed in column 1B. The
regression	  also	  includes	  sector	  fixed	  effects.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  
                                                              Table 3: Sectoral Gravity Estimates: Baseline
                                                    -­‐Distance   Language      Border                                                                    -­‐Distance    Language      Border
Variables                                               (1A)        (2A)         (3A)                                                                         (1B)         (2B)         (3B)
Agriculture                                         0.0011 ***    0.0054 ***   0.0049 ***         Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply          0.0012 ***      0.0051 ***   0.0046 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Mining                                              0.0006 ***    0.0016 ***   0.0022 ***         Construction                                              0.0038 ***   0.0135 ***   0.0129 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.001)                                                                   -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                0.0016 ***    0.0061 ***   0.0061 ***         Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles             0.0005 ***      0.0025 ***   0.0022 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Textiles                                            0.0004 ***    0.0012 ***   0.0014 ***         Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade       0.0020 ***      0.0082 ***   0.0072 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                          0.0001 ***    0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***         Retail	  Trade                                        0.0018 ***      0.0060 ***   0.0059 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Wood	  Products                                    0.0002 ***    0.0011 ***   0.0011 ***         Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                           0.0013 ***      0.0037 ***   0.0037 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                       0.0007 ***    0.0020 ***   0.0024 ***         Inland	  Transport                                    0.0008 ***      0.0047 ***   0.0045 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel   0.0008 ***    0.0023 ***   0.0032 ***         Water	  Transport                                     0.0001 ***      0.0002 ***   0.0002 **
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products            0.0013 ***    0.0016 ***   0.0022 ***         Air	  Transport                                       0.0002 ***      0.0004 ***   0.0005 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                           0.0005 ***    0.0010 ***   0.0013 ***         Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities          0.0004 ***      0.0025 ***   0.0024 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                 0.0005 ***    0.0016 ***   0.0016 ***         Post	  and	  Telecommunications                      0.0010 ***      0.0033 ***   0.0034 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal       0.0018 ***    0.0036 ***   0.0042 ***         Financial	  Intermediation                            0.0031 ***      0.0056 ***   0.0064 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Machinery                                           0.0009 ***    0.0015 ***   0.0016 ***         Real	  Estate	  Activities                           0.0031 ***      0.0097 ***   0.0096 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.002)      (0.002)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment           0.0014 ***    0.0014 **    0.0017 ***         Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                0.0027 ***      0.0097 ***   0.0103 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.002)      (0.002)
Transport	  Equipment                              0.0011 ***    0.0019 ***   0.0027 ***         Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                      0.0029 ***      0.0073 ***   0.0078 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Manufacturing,	  nec                               0.0003 ***    0.0009 ***   0.0011 ***         Education                                              0.0011 ***      0.0045 ***   0.0040 ***
                                                    (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                   (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                  Health	  and	  Social	  Work                        0.0017 ***      0.0061 ***   0.0064 ***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                  Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services        0.0018 ***      0.0044 ***   0.0048 ***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                  Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons   0.0001 **       0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Ωn	  x	  Sector-­‐Exporter	  Dummies                                                                                  not	  displayed
Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  income	  elasticities                                                                         0.00
Observations                                                                                                                         56,000
R-­‐squared                                                                                                                             0.40
Notes: Table reports the estimates of the sectoral gravity equation. The results report sector-­‐specific coefficients on (the negative of) distance, language and border in columns 1, 2 and
3, respectively. The sum of these coefficients exactly sum to the corresponding coefficients in Table 1. The table supresses the sector-­‐exporter interaction coefficients to save space, but
recall that the sum of these coefficients across sectors equals sectoral coefficients in Table 2, and the sum of the coefficients for each exporter across sectors equals the country-­‐specific
coefficients	  in	  Table	  1.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  




                                                                                             38
                                                      Table 4: Aggregate Gains from Trade: AIDS vs Translog
            Aggregate	  Gains	   Aggregate	  Gains	   Gains	  at	  Median	   Country	  Import	           Aggregate	  Gains	   Aggregate	  Gains	   Gains	  at	  Median	   Country	  Import	  
Country          (AIDS)               (Translog)              (AIDS)                    Share             Country     (AIDS)                (Translog)              (AIDS)                    Share
                  (1A)                   (2A)                      (3A)                  (4A)                          (1B)                    (2B)                      (3B)                  (4B)
AUS                9%                     8%                      24%                     8%              IRL          40%                     43%                      52%                    32%
AUT               42%                    41%                      56%                    23%              ITA          13%                     12%                      31%                    10%
BEL               50%                    51%                      63%                    28%              JPN           6%                      5%                      24%                     5%
BGR               46%                    45%                      58%                    25%              KOR          16%                     16%                      33%                    11%
BRA                2%                     2%                      20%                     4%              LTU          67%                     64%                      77%                    27%
CAN               29%                    30%                      44%                    16%              LUX          86%                     85%                      89%                    49%
CHN                6%                     7%                      16%                     7%              LVA          36%                     35%                      52%                    22%
CYP               43%                    40%                      57%                    22%              MEX          24%                     24%                      40%                    14%
CZE               50%                    49%                      60%                    26%              MLT          66%                     66%                      75%                    34%
DEU               26%                    26%                      40%                    17%              NLD          28%                     28%                      45%                    21%
DNK               41%                    40%                      54%                    22%              POL          27%                     26%                      42%                    18%
ESP               17%                    16%                      34%                    12%              PRT          27%                     26%                      46%                    17%
EST               50%                    48%                      65%                    27%              ROM          34%                     33%                      49%                    19%
FIN               28%                    26%                      46%                    17%              RUS          16%                     16%                      32%                     9%
FRA               15%                    15%                      29%                    12%              SVK          67%                     64%                      74%                    30%
GBR               14%                    13%                      33%                    12%              SVN          55%                     54%                      66%                    27%
GRC               26%                    24%                      44%                    15%              SWE          29%                     27%                      43%                    19%
HUN               68%                    67%                      76%                    31%              TUR          11%                     11%                      29%                    10%
IDN                5%                     5%                      11%                     8%              TWN          41%                     41%                      56%                    20%
IND                6%                     6%                      10%                     6%              USA           8%                      6%                      37%                     6%
Average           32%                    31%                      46%                    18%
Notes: Table reports gains from trade. The first and third columns repors the gains for the representative agent and median consumer, respectively, using the estimated
parameters from Tables 2 and 3. The second column computes welfare changes using a translog demand system; these parameters are obtained from re-­‐running the
gravity	  equation	  imposing	  βsi=0	  (see	  Appendix	  Table	  A.1).	  The	  fourth	  column	  reports	  the	  aggregate	  import	  share	  for	  each	  country.




                                                                   Table 5: Unequal Gains From Trade: Baseline
                   10th	     50th	      Aggregate	      90th	                        10th	       50th	      Aggregate	      90th	  
Country          percentile Percentile      Gains       Percentile        Country     percentile    Percentile      Gains        Percentile
                    (1A)       (2A)          (3A)          (4A)                          (1B)          (2B)          (3B)           (4B)
AUS                 45%       24%             9%            5%            IRL            67%          52%            40%           38%
AUT                 68%       56%            42%           38%            ITA            52%          31%            13%             8%
BEL                 75%       63%            50%           46%            JPN            46%          24%             6%             2%
BGR                 72%       58%            46%           43%            KOR            53%          33%            16%           12%
BRA                 57%       20%             2%            3%            LTU            87%          77%            67%           63%
CAN                 60%       44%            29%           25%            LUX            91%          89%            86%           85%
CHN                 38%       16%             6%            6%            LVA            70%          52%            36%           32%
CYP                 71%       57%            43%           39%            MEX            65%          40%            24%           21%
CZE                 71%       60%            50%           47%            MLT            83%          75%            66%           64%
DEU                 56%       40%            26%           21%            NLD            61%          45%            28%           24%
DNK                 67%       54%            41%           37%            POL            61%          42%            27%           23%
ESP                 53%       34%            17%           12%            PRT            67%          46%            27%           22%
EST                 79%       65%            50%           46%            ROM            67%          49%            34%           31%
FIN                 64%       46%            28%           23%            RUS            56%          32%            16%           14%
FRA                 45%       29%            15%           11%            SVK            82%          74%            67%           64%
GBR                 54%       33%            14%           10%            SVN            76%          66%            55%           52%
GRC                 63%       44%            26%           21%            SWE            59%          43%            29%           25%
HUN                 84%       76%            68%           65%            TUR            56%          29%            11%             8%
IDN                 24%       11%             5%            4%            TWN            72%          56%            41%           37%
IND                 19%       10%             6%            6%            USA            69%          37%             8%             4%
Average             63%       46%            32%           28%
Notes: Table reports gains from trade for the baseline multi-­‐sector model and uses the parameters reported in Tables 2 and 3. The columns
report welfare changes associated at the 10th, 50th, the representative consumer (taken from column 1 of Table 4), and the 90th
percentiles.	  



                                                                                                                    39
                                                                  Figure 1: βi and GDPPC
                                                                                                            USA



                                     .05
                                                                                                    JPN


                                                                                       CYP     GRC
                                                                                                TWN
                                                                                                   FINAUS
                                                         CHN                       HUN
                                                                                     EST KORITA GBR
                                                                       TUR
                                                                       BGR      LVA SVK         SWE
                                                                      ROM        LTU            DNK
                              βi
                              0




                                                                                 POL  PRT SVN    AUT
                                                                                RUS     CZE ESP
                                                                                       MLT
                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                   IRL
                                                                  BRA
                                                                                              FRA                       LUX
                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                 CAN
                                                IDN                                                   BEL
                                                                            MEX
                                     −.05




                                            IND

                                            8                     9               10                              11          12
                                                                           Log GDP per Capita
                               Figure plots exporter income elasticity against its per capita GDP




                                                  Figure 2: Engel Curves, by Broad Sector Groups
                                .8
Share of Aggregate Expenditures
    .2        .4  0   .6




                                      8                       9                  10                                11              12
                                                                          Log GDP per Capita

                                                                        Food         Mfg            Services
Figure displays Engel curves of expenditure shares in broad sectors against per capita GDP.
See the note in Table 2 for the list of sectors.




                                                                                  40
                                      Figure 3: β by Exporter and Broad Sector Group vs GDPPC



                  .04
                  .02
Beta
                  0
                  −.02




                                         8                    9                 10                  11                12
                                                                         Log GDP per Capita

                                                                       Food    Mfg      Services
Figure plots income elasticities, summed across broad sectors for each country, against per capita GDP.
See the note in Table 2 for the list of sectors.




                                      Figure 4: Distribution of Unequal Gains: Single-Sector Case
                  .15




                                       USA
Gains from Trade Relative to Median
                             .1




                                                                                                                         MEX




                                      TWN
               .05




                                      GRC
                                      TUR    EST

                                      CYP LTU BGR                                                                        CAN
                                      ROM    LVA
                                      CHN
                                        FIN
                                       HUN
                                        JPN
                                         ITA BRA
                                      PRT
                                       AUS
                                       RUS
                                       SVKGBR
                                      KOR    POL                                                                         IND
                                       DNK AUT                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                         BEL
                                           CZEESP
                                           SWE
                                              SVN                                                                  IDN
                                                                                                                   BRA   DEU
                                      NLD
                                              DEU
                                             MEX                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                    MLT LUX
                                        MLT
                                        IRL
                                           FRAIDN
                                              LUX                                                                  ESP RUSNLD
                                              CAN                                                                  KORPOL
                                                                                                                       PRT
     0




                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                     ITA SVN
                                                                                                                         TUR
                                             BEL                                                                   CHN    GBR
                                              IND                                                                  JPNLVACZE
                                                                                                                   LTUROM
                                                                                                                   TWN   DNK
                                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                         SVK
                                                                                                                         BGR
                                                                                                                         EST
                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                          CYP
                                                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                                                   HUN




                                                                                                                         USA
                  −.05




                                        0           .1   .2       .3       .4    .5     .6     .7        .8   .9         1
                                                                          Income Percentile
The deviations are relative to the median individual. The red line is the average across countries.




                                                                              41
                                                                                      Figure 5: Distribution of Unequal Gains: Baseline Case



                                                           .6
                                                                                BRA




                                                                                  USA
                                         Gains from Trade Relative to Median      TUR

                                                                        .4           CHN
                                                                                     JPN
                                                                                    RUS
                                                                                  GBRMEX
                                                                                     AUS
                                                                                 ITA GRC
                                                                                PRT POL
                                                                                      KOR
                                                                                     ESP
                                                                                   FIN
                                                                               ROM
                                                                                FRA   NLD
                                                                                TWN
                                                                                 IRL
                                                                               DEU LVACAN
                                                                               SWE IDN
                                                                               BGR
                                                                                EST
                                                                                AUT
                                                              .2



                                                                                CYP
                                                                               DNK
                                                                                BEL IND
                                                                                SVN   LTU
                                                                                      CZE
                                                                                HUN    MLT

                                                                                      SVK


                                                                                      LUX
                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                            IDNIND
                                                                                                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                                                                                         LUX




                                                                                                                                                                               IRL
                                          −.2




                                                                                                                                                                               HUN
                                                                                                                                                                               MLT
                                                                                                                                                                               SVK

                                                                                                                                                                                POL
                                                                                                                                                                         SVNAUS  BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                 TWN
                                                                                                                                                                            CYP FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                 LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                                                                             ITADNK
                                                                                                                                                                            KOR  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                            EST
                                                                                                                                                                            SWE
                                                                                                                                                                          NLD
                                                                                                                                                                            AUT LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                                                                                                                            GRC
                                                                                                                                                                         PRT
                                                                                                                                                                         FIN
                                                           −.4




                                                                                 0                .1        .2    .3    .4    .5     .6      .7      .8        .9              1
                                                                                                                       Income Percentile
                                          The deviations are relative to the median individual. The red line is the average across countries.




Figure 6: Comparison of Distribution of Unequal Gains, Means across Countries
                                         .4
    Gains from Trade, Relative to Median
 −.4       −.2       0          .2




                                                             0                               .1        .2        .3     .4    .5     .6        .7         .8        .9                 1
                                                                                                                       Income Percentile
                                                                               1 Single−Sector                                      2 Multi−Sector, Homothetic, Asymmetric−γ
                                                                               3 Multi−Sector, Non−Homothetic, Symmetric−γ          4 Multi−Sector (Baseline)

 The deviations are relative to the median individual. Figure shows averages across countries, by percentile.




                                                                                                                           42
Figure 7: Difference in Gains From Trade Between 90th and 10th Percentiles vs βi



                          0
                                                                             LUX

                                                IND
      90−10 Welfare Difference


                                                                                             SVK
                                                                                               HUN
                                                                  IDN              MLT
                         −.2



                                                                                     CZE
                                                                                      SVN LTU
                                                                 BEL           IRL AUT BGR
                                                                                      DNK
                                                                                          CHN CYP
                                                                           FRA
                                                                          DEU            EST
                                                                                        SWE     TWN
                                                                        CAN           ROM
                                                                               NLD POL LVA
                                                                                 ESP    KOR AUS
                                                                                             FIN
           −.4




                                                                                  RUS           GRC
                                                           MEX                           ITA
                                                                                   PRT GBR                JPN
                                                                                        TUR

                                                                              BRA
                          −.6




                                                                                                                           USA

                                               −.05                                       0                               .05
                                                                                          (βi)
      Figure plots the difference in gains from trade between 90th and 10th percentiles against
      the country’s income elasticity




                                                      Figure 8: Varying Sectoral Income Elasticities
                                          .4
       Gains from Trade, Relative to Median
      −.4      −.2      0        .2




                                                0     .1    .2          .3      .4    .5     .6      .7         .8   .9     1
                                                                               Income Percentile

                                                                   Baseline
                                                                   Engel Curves from Within Variation
                                                                   Engel Curves from CE Data
      The deviations are relative to the median individual. Figure shows averages across countries, by percentile.




                                                                                     43
                                          Figure 9: Varying Price Elasticity for Less-Traded Services



                                   .4
Gains from Trade, Relative to Median
 −.2         0          .2




                                          0     .1    .2        .3      .4    .5     .6       .7         .8   .9   1
                                                                       Income Percentile

                                                           Baseline
                                                           Increase ρ for less−traded services sectors
                                                           Remove less−traded services sectors
The deviations are relative to the median individual. Figure shows averages across countries, by percentile.




                                                      Figure 10: Varying the Value of ρ
                                     .4
Gains from Trade, Relative to Median
      −.2        0  −.4     .2




                                          0     .1    .2        .3      .4    .5     .6       .7         .8   .9   1
                                                                       Income Percentile

                                                              Baseline       ρ=0.133       ρ=0.221
The deviations are relative to the median individual. Figure shows averages across countries, by percentile.




                                                                           44
Figure 11: Comparing the Baseline to Final Expenditures or Exporter-Sector Fixed Effects



                                                      .3
                 Gains from Trade, Relative to Median
                −.2    −.1     0       .1       .2




                                                           0        .1          .2          .3          .4    .5     .6                  .7        .8        .9        1
                                                                                                       Income Percentile

                                                                         Baseline               Final Expenditures                 Exporter−Sector FEs
                The deviations are relative to the median individual. Figure shows averages across countries, by percentile.




                                                                         Figure 12: 5% Reduction in Foreign Prices

                                                                                    Food                                             Manufacturing
                                              .002 .004
         Welfare Changes Relative to Median
                                              0
                                              −.002




                                                           0   .1   .2    .3   .4    .5    .6    .7   .8   .9    1   0   .1   .2    .3   .4   .5   .6   .7   .8   .9   1

                                                                               Services
                                              .002 .004
                                              0
                                              −.002




                                                           0   .1   .2    .3   .4    .5    .6    .7   .8   .9    1
                                                                                                           Percentile
                Figure displays the relative welfare gains of 5% decline in foreign trade costs for food, manufacturing, services, and all sectors.




                                                                                                                45
        Appendix Tables and Figures

                                                            Table A.1: Multi-Sector Translog Gravity Equation
                                                          -­‐Distance         Language                 Border                                                                       -­‐Distance          Language              Border
Variables                                                     (1A)              (2A)                  (3A)                                                                              (1B)               (2B)                 (3B)
Agriculture                                              0.0013 ***           0.0049 ***          0.0051 ***            Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply              0.0013 ***           0.0050 ***           0.0046 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Mining                                                   0.0006 ***           0.0016 ***          0.0023 ***            Construction                                                 0.0039 ***         0.0131 ***           0.0128 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.001)                                                                         -­‐(0.001)            (0.002)              (0.002)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                     0.0017 ***           0.0059 ***          0.0061 ***            Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles                 0.0005 ***           0.0024 ***           0.0021 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Textiles                                                 0.0004 ***           0.0011 ***          0.0014 ***            Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade           0.0020 ***           0.0081 ***           0.0071 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                               0.0001 ***           0.0002 ***          0.0002 ***            Retail	  Trade                                            0.0018 ***           0.0059 ***           0.0060 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Wood	  Products                                         0.0002 ***           0.0011 ***          0.0011 ***            Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                               0.0013 ***           0.0037 ***           0.0037 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                            0.0006 ***           0.0020 ***          0.0024 ***            Inland	  Transport                                        0.0009 ***           0.0044 ***           0.0045 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel        0.0008 ***           0.0021 ***          0.0033 ***            Water	  Transport                                         0.0001 ***           0.0002 ***           0.0002 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products                 0.0013 ***           0.0016 ***          0.0023 ***            Air	  Transport                                           0.0002 ***           0.0004 ***           0.0005 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.001)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                                0.0005 ***           0.0010 ***          0.0013 ***            Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities              0.0004 ***           0.0024 ***           0.0023 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.000)              (0.000)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                      0.0005 ***           0.0015 ***          0.0016 ***            Post	  and	  Telecommunications                          0.0010 ***           0.0033 ***           0.0033 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal            0.0017 ***           0.0034 ***          0.0045 ***            Financial	  Intermediation                                  0.0031 ***         0.0056 ***           0.0064 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)                                                                         -­‐(0.001)            (0.001)              (0.001)
Machinery                                                0.0008 ***           0.0014 ***          0.0017 ***            Real	  Estate	  Activities                               0.0029 ***           0.0097 ***           0.0095 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.002)              (0.002)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment                0.0014 ***           0.0013 ***          0.0018 ***            Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                    0.0026 ***           0.0097 ***           0.0102 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.002)              (0.002)
Transport	  Equipment                                   0.0011 ***           0.0018 ***          0.0028 ***            Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                          0.0027 ***           0.0074 ***           0.0078 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.001)             (0.001)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
Manufacturing,	  nec                                    0.0003 ***           0.0009 ***          0.0011 ***            Education                                                  0.0012 ***           0.0044 ***           0.0039 ***
                                                         (0.000)              (0.000)             (0.000)                                                                          (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
                                                                                                                        Health	  and	  Social	  Work                            0.0016 ***           0.0061 ***           0.0063 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
                                                                                                                        Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services            0.0017 ***           0.0045 ***           0.0047 ***
                                                                                                                                                                                   (0.000)              (0.001)              (0.001)
                                                                                                                        Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons 0.0001 ***                 0.0002 ***           0.0002 ***
                                                                                                                                                                             (0.000)                    (0.000)              (0.000)
                                                                                R-­‐squared                                                                      0.38
                                                                                Observations                                                                 56,000
Notes: Table reports the estimates of the multi-­‐sector translog gravity equation, which shuts of non-­‐homotheticities. The results report sector-­‐specific coefficients on (the
negative	  of)	  distance,	  language	  and	  border	  in	  columns	  1,	  2	  and	  3,	  respectively.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  




                                                                                                                    46
                                            Table A.2: Engel Curve Estimates: Final Expenditures
Variables                                                    (1A)                                                                     (1B)
Agriculture                                            -­‐0.0219 ***        Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply          0.0005
                                                         (0.003)                                                                   (0.001)
Mining                                                 -­‐0.0005            Construction                                           -­‐0.0169 **
                                                         (0.000)                                                                     (0.008)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                   -­‐0.0169 ***        Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles             0.0037 ***
                                                         (0.004)                                                                   (0.001)
Textiles                                               -­‐0.0045 ***        Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade       0.0009
                                                         (0.001)                                                                   (0.003)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                             -­‐0.0009 ***        Retail	  Trade                                        0.0012
                                                         (0.000)                                                                   (0.002)
Wood	  Products                                       0.0002               Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                           0.0056 **
                                                       (0.000)                                                                     (0.002)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                          0.0021 ***           Inland	  Transport                                    -­‐0.0083 ***
                                                       (0.000)                                                                       (0.003)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel      -­‐0.0004            Water	  Transport                                     -­‐0.0010
                                                         (0.001)                                                                     (0.001)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products               -­‐0.0013            Air	  Transport                                       0.0005
                                                         (0.001)                                                                   (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                              -­‐0.0003            Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities          0.0017 **
                                                         (0.000)                                                                   (0.001)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                    -­‐0.0001            Post	  and	  Telecommunications                      0.0003
                                                         (0.000)                                                                   (0.001)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal          -­‐0.0004            Financial	  Intermediation                            0.0061 ***
                                                         (0.001)                                                                   (0.002)
Machinery                                              -­‐0.0051 *          Real	  Estate	  Activities                           0.0160 ***
                                                         (0.003)                                                                   (0.004)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment              -­‐0.0040 ***        Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                0.0039 **
                                                         (0.001)                                                                   (0.002)
Transport	  Equipment                                 -­‐0.0031            Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                      0.0082 **
                                                         (0.002)                                                                   (0.003)
Manufacturing,	  nec                                  0.0004               Education                                              0.0044 ***
                                                       (0.001)                                                                     (0.002)
                                                                            Health	  and	  Social	  Work                        0.0246 ***
                                                                                                                                   (0.004)
                                                                            Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services        0.0046
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)
                                                                            Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons   0.0008 ***
                                                                                                                                   (0.000)
Sector	  FEs	                                                                                    yes
Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  sectoral	  elasticities                               0.00
R-­‐squared                                                                                     0.84
Observations                                                                                 1,400
Notes: Table reports the sectoral income elasticities from the Engel curve equation using data on final expenditures. It is a regression of
importers' sectoral expenditures shares on the adjusted real income interacted with sector dummies. The regression also includes sector
fixed	  effects.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  

                                                                       47
                                                                    Table A.3: Sectoral Gravity Estimates: Final Expenditures
                                                                  -­‐Distance   Language      Border                                                                   -­‐Distance    Language      Border
Variables                                                             (1A)        (2A)         (3A)                                                                        (1B)         (2B)         (3B)
Agriculture                                                       0.0009 ***    0.0044 ***   0.0037 ***        Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply          0.0007 ***      0.0032 ***   0.0030 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.000)
Mining                                                            0.0001 ***    0.0004 **    0.0005 ***        Construction                                              0.0065 ***   0.0190 ***   0.0182 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.003)      (0.004)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                              0.0020 ***    0.0071 ***   0.0077 ***        Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles             0.0005 ***      0.0023 ***   0.0022 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Textiles                                                          0.0003 ***    0.0011 ***   0.0015 ***        Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade       0.0021 ***      0.0070 ***   0.0062 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                                        0.0001 ***    0.0002 ***   0.0003 ***        Retail	  Trade                                        0.0023 ***      0.0060 ***   0.0059 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Wood	  Products                                                  0.0001 ***    0.0003 ***   0.0003 ***        Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                           0.0019 ***      0.0056 ***   0.0060 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                                     0.0003 ***    0.0009 ***   0.0013 ***        Inland	  Transport                                    0.0007 ***      0.0036 ***   0.0031 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel                 0.0004 ***    0.0014 ***   0.0023 ***        Water	  Transport                                     0.0000 ***      0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products                          0.0004 ***    0.0010 ***   0.0014 ***        Air	  Transport                                       0.0002 ***      0.0004 ***   0.0004 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                                         0.0001 ***    0.0003 ***   0.0004 ***        Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities          0.0003 ***      0.0014 ***   0.0014 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                               0.0001 **     0.0004 ***   0.0004 ***        Post	  and	  Telecommunications                      0.0009 ***      0.0024 ***   0.0025 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal                     0.0004 ***    0.0013 ***   0.0011 ***        Financial	  Intermediation                            0.0018 ***      0.0049 ***   0.0051 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Machinery                                                         0.0009 ***    0.0013 ***   0.0017 ***        Real	  Estate	  Activities                              0.0042 ***   0.0132 ***   0.0130 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment                         0.0008 ***    0.0013 ***   0.0016 ***        Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                0.0010 ***      0.0041 ***   0.0040 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Transport	  Equipment                                            0.0010 ***    0.0018 ***   0.0031 ***        Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                         0.0055 ***   0.0141 ***   0.0137 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Manufacturing,	  nec                                             0.0004 ***    0.0008 ***   0.0013 ***        Education                                              0.0023 ***      0.0079 ***   0.0075 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                               Health	  and	  Social	  Work                           0.0034 ***   0.0116 ***   0.0116 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
                                                                                                               Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services           0.0025 ***   0.0056 ***   0.0061 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      -­‐(0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                               Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons   0.0001 **       0.0004 ***   0.0003 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Ωi	  x	  Sector-­‐Exporter	  Dummies                                                                             not	  displayed
Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  income	  elasticities                                                                   0.00
R-­‐squared                                                                                                                       0.41
Observations                                                                                                                  56,000
Notes: Table reports the estimates of the sectoral gravity equation using data on final expenditures. The results report sector-­‐specific coefficients on (the negative of) distance, language
and border in columns 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The table supresses the sector-­‐exporter interaction coefficients to save space, but recall that the sum of these coefficients across sectors
equals	  sectoral	  coefficients	  in	  Table	  A.2.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  




                                                                                                          48
                                                        Table A.4: Sectoral Gravity Estimates: Exporter-Sector Fixed Effects
                                                                  -­‐Distance   Language      Border                                                                   -­‐Distance    Language      Border
Variables                                                             (1A)        (2A)         (3A)                                                                        (1B)         (2B)         (3B)
Agriculture                                                       0.0015 ***    0.0065 ***   0.0044 ***        Electricity,	  Gas	  and	  Water	  Supply          0.0017 ***      0.0062 ***   0.0041 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Mining                                                            0.0007 ***    0.0020 ***   0.0019 ***        Construction                                              0.0050 ***   0.0163 ***   0.0112 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Food,	  Beverages	  and	  Tobacco                              0.0020 ***    0.0073 ***   0.0054 ***        Sale,	  Repair	  of	  Motor	  Vehicles             0.0007 ***      0.0029 ***   0.0019 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.000)
Textiles                                                          0.0004 ***    0.0015 ***   0.0012 ***        Wholesale	  Trade	  and	  Commission	  Trade       0.0027 ***      0.0097 ***   0.0062 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.002)      (0.001)
Leather	  and	  Footwear                                        0.0001 ***    0.0002 ***   0.0002 ***        Retail	  Trade                                        0.0023 ***      0.0071 ***   0.0049 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Wood	  Products                                                  0.0003 ***    0.0013 ***   0.0010 ***        Hotels	  and	  Restaurants                           0.0016 ***      0.0044 ***   0.0031 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Printing	  and	  Publishing                                     0.0008 ***    0.0024 ***   0.0021 ***        Inland	  Transport                                    0.0011 ***      0.0055 ***   0.0041 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Coke,	  Refined	  Petroleum,	  Nuclear	  Fuel                 0.0010 ***    0.0028 ***   0.0027 ***        Water	  Transport                                     0.0001 ***      0.0003 ***   0.0002 **
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Chemicals	  and	  Chemical	  Products                          0.0014 ***    0.0023 ***   0.0017 ***        Air	  Transport                                       0.0003 ***      0.0005 ***   0.0004 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Rubber	  and	  Plastics                                         0.0005 ***    0.0013 ***   0.0011 ***        Other	  Auxiliary	  Transport	  Activities          0.0006 ***      0.0029 ***   0.0022 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.000)
Other	  Non-­‐Metallic	  Minerals                               0.0006 ***    0.0019 ***   0.0014 ***        Post	  and	  Telecommunications                      0.0013 ***      0.0040 ***   0.0029 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
Basic	  Metals	  and	  Fabricated	  Metal                     0.0021 ***    0.0046 ***   0.0037 ***        Financial	  Intermediation                               0.0035 ***   0.0072 ***   0.0049 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Machinery                                                         0.0009 ***    0.0018 ***   0.0014 ***        Real	  Estate	  Activities                              0.0038 ***   0.0115 ***   0.0080 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Electrical	  and	  Optical	  Equipment                         0.0016 ***    0.0019 ***   0.0011 **         Renting	  of	  M&Eq	                                   0.0031 ***   0.0118 ***   0.0087 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.000)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.003)      (0.002)
Transport	  Equipment                                            0.0012 ***    0.0024 ***   0.0021 ***        Public	  Admin	  and	  Defence                         0.0033 ***   0.0088 ***   0.0063 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.001)                                                                  -­‐(0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Manufacturing,	  nec                                             0.0003 ***    0.0010 ***   0.0009 ***        Education                                              0.0017 ***      0.0054 ***   0.0036 ***
                                                                  (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)                                                                  (0.000)         (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                               Health	  and	  Social	  Work                        0.0021 ***      0.0073 ***   0.0055 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.000)         (0.002)      (0.001)
                                                                                                               Other	  Community	  and	  Social	  Services           0.0023 ***   0.0055 ***   0.0040 ***
                                                                                                                                                                      -­‐(0.001)      (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                               Private	  Households	  with	  Employed	  Persons   0.0001 **       0.0002 ***   0.0001 **
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.000)         (0.000)      (0.000)
Ωi	  x	  Sector-­‐Exporter	  Dummies                                                                                        not	  displayed
Joint	  F-­‐test	  p-­‐value	  for	  income	  elasticities                                                                              0.00
R-­‐squared                                                                                                                                  0.45
Observations                                                                                                                              56,000
Notes: Table reports the estimates of the sectoral gravity equation that includes sector-­‐exporter pair fixed effects. The results report sector-­‐specific coefficients on (the negative of)
distance, language and border in columns 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The table supresses the sector-­‐exporter linteraction and level coefficients to save space, but recall that the sum of the
interaction coefficients across sectors equals sectoral coefficients in Table 2, and the sum of the coefficients for each exporter across sectors equals the country-­‐specific coefficients in
Table	  1.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  importer.	  Significance	  *	  .10;	  **	  .05;	  ***	  .01.	  




                                                                                                          49
Table A.5: Aggregate Gains from a 5% Decline in Manufacturing Trade Costs, AIDS vs CES
                              AIDS                 CES                                      AIDS                     CES
    Country                    (1A)                (2A)           Country                    (1B)                   (2B)
    AUS                       0.3%                0.3%            IRL                       0.6%                    0.6%
    AUT                       0.8%                0.8%            ITA                       0.4%                    0.4%
    BEL                       0.9%                0.9%            JPN                       0.2%                    0.2%
    BGR                       1.0%                1.0%            KOR                       0.4%                    0.4%
    BRA                       0.2%                0.1%            LTU                       1.0%                    1.0%
    CAN                       0.6%                0.6%            LUX                       0.4%                    0.6%
    CHN                       0.3%                0.3%            LVA                       0.8%                    0.8%
    CYP                       0.7%                0.7%            MEX                       0.6%                    0.6%
    CZE                       1.0%                1.0%            MLT                       0.8%                    1.1%
    DEU                       0.6%                0.6%            NLD                       0.6%                    0.6%
    DNK                       0.6%                0.6%            POL                       0.7%                    0.7%
    ESP                       0.5%                0.5%            PRT                       0.6%                    0.6%
    EST                       1.0%                1.0%            ROM                       0.8%                    0.7%
    FIN                       0.6%                0.6%            RUS                       0.4%                    0.4%
    FRA                       0.4%                0.4%            SVK                       1.2%                    1.2%
    GBR                       0.4%                0.4%            SVN                       1.0%                    1.1%
    GRC                       0.5%                0.5%            SWE                       0.6%                    0.6%
    HUN                       1.3%                1.2%            TUR                       0.4%                    0.4%
    IDN                       0.3%                0.2%            TWN                       0.8%                    0.8%
    IND                       0.3%                0.2%            USA                       0.3%                    0.2%
    Notes: Table reports welfare changes in the multi-­‐sector model from a 5% decline in
    foreign trade costs in the manufacturing sectors. Column 1 reports the results using the
    AIDS demand system, and column 2 reports results from the CES demand system (e.g.,
    Ossa 2015). The elasticities for the CES system are taken from Ossa (2015) and matched
    the	  WIOD	  industry	  classification.	  The	  correlation	  between	  the	  two	  models	  is	  0.99.




                                                          50
               Figure A.1: β̄ s versus Sectoral Income Elasticities from Caron et al. (2014)



                                                                1.4
                    Sectoral Income Elasticity, Caron et al (2014)
                   .6          .8        1          1.2




                                                                      −.02                      −.01               0            .01                         .02                .03
                                                                                                                          s
                                                                                                                Baseline β Estimates

                                                                                                      Food          Manufacturing                Services




                                                                                           Figure A.2: Average γ, by Percentile
                                            .011
                   Weighted−Average Gamma
                         .01        .0105   .0095




                                                                      0                         20                 40                    60                 80                 100
                                                                                                                           Percentile
                   Weighted−average gamma calculated for baseline case
                                                                                         s0 ,adj       0         s0 ,adj
                    av
                                                                                                                           is the expenditure share of percentile h in country n on goods in sector s0 .
                                                                      PN        PS
The figure reports γh    1
                       = N                                                i=1    s0 =1
                                                                                         sn,h      ∗ γ s , where sn,h




                                                                                                                           51
