                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CAPITAL MARKET FINANCING, FIRM GROWTH, FIRM SIZE DISTRIBUTION

                                           Tatiana Didier
                                            Ross Levine
                                        Sergio L. Schmukler

                                        Working Paper 20336
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20336


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




The authors are grateful to Lucas Núñez and Juan Jose Cortina for truly outstanding research assistance.
We received very helpful comments from Eugenia Andreasen, Paco Buera, Roberto Fattal-Jaef, and
participants at presentations held at the XVII Workshop on International Economics and Finance (San
Jose, Costa Rica), the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (Delhi, India), and the World
Bank (Washington, DC). Generous research support came from the World Bank’s Development Economics
Department, Knowledge for Change Program, and the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) Region’s
Chief Economist Office. This paper is part of the work prepared for the Global Development Finance
Report 2015 and the LAC Regional Studies Program of the World Bank. The paper was finished while
Schmukler was visiting the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research or the World Bank.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Tatiana Didier, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Capital Market Financing, Firm Growth, Firm Size Distribution
Tatiana Didier, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 20336
July 2014
JEL No. F65,G15,G30,L25

                                             ABSTRACT

Which firms issue equity and debt in domestic and international markets and what happens to their
assets, sales, and number of employees? To answer these questions, we assemble a new dataset on
firm-level capital raising activity during 1991-2011, which we match with firm attributes for 45,527
listed firms from 51 economies during 2003-2011. We find that only a few of the largest firms issue
securities in the median country. Firms issuing bonds are even larger than those issuing equity. Moreover,
issuers grow much faster than non-issuers, particularly (a) during the year of issuance, (b) among smaller
and younger firms, and (c) in countries with market-based financial systems. Furthermore, the firm
size distribution (FSD) of issuers behaves differently from that of non-issuers. Among issuers, smaller
firms grow faster than larger ones, tightening their FSD; but among non-issuers, larger firms grow
faster than smaller ones, widening their FSD.


Tatiana Didier                                      Sergio L. Schmukler
The World Bank                                      The World Bank
1818 H Street NW                                    MSN MC3-301
MSN I8-808                                          1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC - 20433                              Washington, DC 20433
tdidier@worldbank.org                               Sschmukler@worldbank.org

Ross Levine
Haas School of Business
University of California at Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

In this paper, we address two questions related to capital market development and firm financing

around the world. First, which firms issue debt and equity in domestic and international markets?

Second, what happens to assets, sales, and the number of employees of firms that issue securities

relative to non-issuers? Though very basic, these questions have not been answered using a broad

cross-section of countries over an extensive period of time. We thus assess these questions by

documenting several new patterns concerning capital market financing, firm growth, and the

associated evolution of the firm size distribution (FSD). We also discuss how these findings relate

and contribute to several strands of research in finance and economics.

       To investigate these questions, we assemble a new dataset on firm-level capital market

issuance activity during the period from 1991 through 2011, which we match with data on firm

attributes for 45,527 listed firms from 51 countries over the period from 2003 to 2011. We then

study which firms use securities markets to issue and how they perform during a period of

exceptionally rapid capital market development around the world. For instance, between 1991-1995

and 2006-2011 the stock market capitalization as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP)

rose from 35% to 84% for the median developed country and from 17% to 59% for the median

emerging country. Over the same period, the annual amount raised through equity or corporate

bond offerings as a percentage of GDP almost doubled for the median country.

       We find, first, that for the median country only a small number of large firms issue equity or

bonds, and among these issuing firms a small subset receives the majority of funds raised through

security issuances. Namely, in the median country, about only 20 listed firms per year issue securities

in either their domestic capital market or in an international financial center. Moreover, of these few

issuers, the top-5 firms receive over 66% of the funds raised through bond issuances and over 77%

of the funds raised through equity issuances. We also find that bond issuers are much larger than

                                                  1
equity issuers. The median listed firm that conducts an equity offering is more than twice as large (as

measured by total assets) as the median non-issuing firm. But the median bond-issuing firm is more

than 36 times as large as the median non-issuing firm. Issuers of equity and bonds are larger than

non-issuers at every decile of the FSD; the distribution of issuing firms lies to the right of non-

issuing firms.

        Second, issuers grow faster than non-issuers in terms of assets, sales, and employment. For

example, the median issuer by size experiences asset growth of 12% per annum, while the median

non-issuer grows at 4.5%. Similar patterns are observed for the average sized issuers and non-issuers

and for other deciles of the FSD. Consequently, the FSD of issuing firms moves more to the right

over time than that of non-issuing firms. Moreover, issuers experience a significant boost in assets,

sales, and employment in the year they sell securities.

        Third, the additional average growth of issuers (relative to non-issuers) is not homogeneous

along the FSD. The positive growth gap between issuers and non-issuers is particularly pronounced

among smaller firms. Although firm age and firm size are correlated and younger firms tend to grow

faster than older ones (Cooley and Quadrini, 2001; Albuquerque and Hopenhayn, 2004; Clementi

and Hopenhayn, 2006; Haltiwanger et al., 2013), firm age does not fully explain our results. Smaller,

issuing firms grow faster than larger, issuing ones across the different age groups.

        Fourth, the FSD of issuers and non-issuers behave very differently. Because smaller, issuing

firms grow faster than larger, issuing ones, their FSD tightens. But, among non-issuing firms, larger

firms grow faster than smaller ones; so they experience a widening of their FSD.

        Fifth, the statistics on the median country mask differences across countries. In developed

countries with market-based financial systems (measured using the ratio of total banking claims on

the private sector to equity market capitalization), firms that issue equity are not necessarily larger

than non-issuing firms. Smaller firms issue equity as well. Moreover, the extra growth of issuing

                                                   2
firms relative to non-issuing ones is larger than in developed countries with bank-based financial

systems. In emerging economies, larger equity issuing firms grow faster than smaller equity issuing

ones, contrary to the patterns observed in developed countries.

       These results contribute to several lines of research. First, corporate finance theory provides

predictions on which firms issue securities in general and equity and debt in particular (Harris and

Raviv, 1991; Myers, 2003). For example, Dang et al. (2014) argue that firms will use banks less and

securities markets more when there are smaller information asymmetries between firms and

potential investors. Focusing on debt versus equity, Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers (1984),

Myers and Majluf (1984), and Jensen (1986) indicate that more opaque firms will be more

constrained in issuing equity than debt due to the comparatively intensive information asymmetries

and transactions costs associated with equity issuances. The pecking order view of corporate finance

suggests that more opaque firms will have a greater tendency to tap bond markets before issuing

equity (Myers and Majluf, 1984; Fama and French, 2002; Frank and Goyal, 2003, 2008). Researchers

often use firm size to proxy for transparency as larger firms tend to be older and more thoroughly

researched than smaller firms.

       Our finding that larger firms are more likely to issue securities than smaller firms is

consistent with the view that firm transparency is positively related to the issuance of securities.

However, we also find that, among listed firms, bond issuers tend to be larger than equity issuers. To

the extent that firm size is a proxy for transparency, this finding conflicts with the view that opaque

listed firms tap bond markets before raising additional funds through equity issuances.

       Second, corporate finance theory also provides differing views on why firms issue securities.

The textbook explanation is that firms issue securities to fund positive net present value projects. A

second, not necessarily contradictory, view is that firms issue securities to change their capital

structure. Rather than issuing securities primarily to fund new projects, corporations might do so to

                                                  3
alter debt-equity ratios, replace expensive financing with cheaper funding, reduce free cash flows,

minimize taxes, or change the duration of debt, with corresponding effects on corporate

governance, profits, and risk exposure (Jensen, 1986; Hart, 1995; Graham and Harvey, 2001; Brealey

et al., 2011; Shin and Zhao, 2013; Shin, 2014). Because changes in capital structure might be related

to corporate investment decisions, it is difficult to distinguish between these two motives for issuing

securities.

         Our results suggest that the capital structure is not the only factor that changes when firms

issue securities. In fact, debt and equity issuances are associated with an immediate and enduring

boost in firm size. Issuers grow comparatively rapidly in the year they issue securities and this

growth does not simply represent an increase in corporate assets. Sales and the number of

employees grow, too. Therefore, the issuance of securities is related to changes in the real side of

firms.

         Third, as reviewed by Levine (2005), researchers debate whether and how capital markets

influence economic growth. Although the size of capital markets and the liquidity of secondary stock

markets are positively associated with aggregate growth (Levine and Zervos, 1996, 1998; Demirguc-

Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; Henry, 2000; Beck and Levine, 2004; Bekaert et al., 2005), researchers

have not determined whether the activity in primary markets is associated with growth across a

broad cross-section of countries. Namely, is there a direct connection between a firm issuing

securities and the growth of its assets, sales, and employment?1 Some research suggests that capital

markets foster economic growth by lowering the cost of diversifying and pooling risks (Levine,

1992; Obstfeld, 1994; Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997). Other research stresses that large, liquid

markets increase the expected benefits from researching firms, with positive repercussions on the

1  While in this paper we examine the growth of firm assets, sales, and employment around security issuances, the
literature has studied why firms issue securities and cross-list and the evolution of capital structure and corporate
valuation around these events (Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998; Henderson et al., 2006; Karolyi, 2006; Claessens
and Schmukler, 2007; Gozzi et al., 2008, 2010).

                                                         4
creation and dissemination of information (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980; Holmström and Tirole,

1993). From these perspectives, well-functioning capital markets help listed firms through different

channels, not necessarily through new security issuances.

        Our findings indicate that when firms choose to issue securities they experience a material

boost in assets, sales, and employment relative to listed firms that do not issue securities and relative

to their own performance before issuing. This suggests that there is a direct, positive connection

between capital raising activity and growth at the firm level. Although issuance is not random and

firms might issue when they have growth opportunities, these findings indicate that firms grow

faster when they issue, and that it is not just the availability of well-functioning securities markets

that fosters the growth of listed firms.

        Fourth, a large and rapidly growing literature examines the evolution of the FSD to

understand firm dynamics under the presence of financial (and other) frictions. Whereas early papers

found support for the Gibrat’s law, stating that firm growth is independent of firm size (Simon and

Bonnini, 1958; Mansfield, 1962; Ijiri and Simon, 1964), later work found that smaller firms grow

faster than larger ones (Evans, 1987). More recently, a growing literature finds for individual

countries that (1) smaller and younger firms are more financially constrained, (2) a relaxation of

financial constraints has a larger impact on those firms, and (3) the development of financial systems

is related to the extent of financial constraints, the evolution of the FSD, and firm dynamics (Cabral

and Mata, 2003; Angelini and Generale, 2008; Arellano et al., 2012; Buera et al., 2014; Midrigan and

Xu, 2014).

        Our findings relate to this literature. We examine a much wider array of countries than

previous studies and focus only on listed firms, which tend to be less financially constrained than

non-listed firms and are a more homogeneous group than a sample of all firms. Nevertheless, we

find notable heterogeneity even among listed firms. Whereas previous studies find that smaller firms

                                                   5
grow faster than larger ones, we find that this depends on whether the firms are issuers or non-

issuers. Among issuers, smaller firms grow faster, so that their FSD tends to tighten. But among

non-issuers, larger firms grow faster than smaller firms, so that their FSD tends to become wider.

Our results also emphasize potential connections between financial constraints and the evolution of

the FSD. Our finding that small issuing firms grow faster in terms of assets, sales, and employment

than larger ones is consistent with the view that financial constraints are especially binding on

smaller firms. Moreover, to the extent that issuing securities signals that a firm experiences a

relaxation in financial constraints, then our finding that issuing firms enjoy a boost in growth when

issuing securities is consistent with the view that financial constraints materially constrain the growth

of firms. Furthermore, our finding that the additional growth of issuing firms (vis-à-vis non-issuing

ones) is greater in countries with relatively well-developed capital markets than in other economies is

consistent with the view that market-based financial systems ease constraints on security issuances,

with positive ramifications on the ability of firms to realize their growth opportunities.

        Fifth, a large literature emphasizes that capital market development can expand access to

finance, loosen financing constraints, and disproportionately boost the growth of small, capable

firms (Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2001; Myers, 2003; Stein, 2003; Ayyagari et al., 2013). The

findings in this paper provide qualified support for this view. For most countries, only a few large

firms issue securities and then grow rapidly. Thus, capital market development around the world has

not, in general, involved smaller firms issuing securities to fuel growth. The qualification is that this

finding depends on where firms are located. In developed countries with market-based financial

systems, it is not just larger listed firms that raise capital through equity offerings. This suggests that,

as securities markets across countries develop, the extensive margin among listed firms might

expand, so that smaller firms could participate more in these markets.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3

                                                     6
briefly describes the evolution of capital market development and how many firms use and capture

the capital market activity. Section 4 presents the results on which firms use these markets. Section 5

shows the results on firm performance and the evolution of the FSD. Section 6 explores the

heterogeneity in firm behavior according to the type of securities issued, market of issuance, and

firms’ home market. Section 7 studies the role of firm age. Section 8 concludes.



2. Data

To assess which firms issue securities, the comparative performance of issuing and non-issuing

firms, and the evolution of the size distribution of firms as they issue securities, we assemble a

comprehensive dataset covering firm bond and equity issuances in capital markets around the world

as well as balance sheet information on publicly listed firms. The data on firm capital raising activity

cover the period 1991-2011 and come from the Thomson Reuters Security Data Corporation (SDC)

Platinum database, which provides transaction-level information on new issuances of common and

preferred equity and publicly and privately placed bonds with an original maturity of more than one

year.2 Given that the SDC Platinum database does not collect data on debt issuances with maturities

shorter than one year, the dataset does not cover commercial paper. For offerings in more than one

market, we consider each market a separate issuance. The dataset includes 532,423 security

issuances: 138,968 equity issuances and 393,455 bond issuances. Security issuances are classified as

domestic or international based on the location of the main exchange where the issuances take place

and compared with the issuing firm’s nationality. The dataset includes 411,180 issuances in domestic

markets and 116,811 issuances in foreign markets (4,432 issuances are not possible to be classified

and have been assigned missing values).


2 SDC  Platinum collects data on security issuance mostly from filings with local regulatory agencies and stock exchanges.
These data are augmented with data from other sources such as offering circulars, prospectuses, surveys of investment
banks, brokers, and other financial advisors, news sources, trade publications, and wires.

                                                            7
        To examine the comparative characteristic and performance of issuing and non-issuing

firms, we match the dataset on security issuances from SDC Platinum with 2003-2011 firm-level

balance sheet information from the Orbis (Bureau van Dijk) database. The latter covers publicly

listed companies from 155 economies, providing a rather homogeneous sample of firms. By

omitting unlisted firms, the sample excludes firms that are (a) relatively small and sometimes

informal, (b) likely to have different accounting standards, and (c) less likely to issue in capital

markets. Moreover, because of a lack of coverage of capital raising activity in domestic bond

markets, Canada and the Republic of Korea are not included in the final sample. Firms from

countries with less than 10 issuing firms between 2003 and 2011 are excluded from the final sample

and so are the firms from offshore financial centers. The final matched dataset covers 45,527 firms

from 51 countries. Overall, our matched dataset covers at least 85% of the listed firms in each

country and 479,501 security issuances.3,4

        We classify firms as issuers or non-issuers based on whether they issued equity or bonds at

any point during our sample period. Because firm-level balance sheet information is only available

for the period from 2003 to 2011, we classify a firm as an issuer if it had at least one equity or bond

issuance during that period. We further classify whether firms are equity or bond issuers depending

on whether firms issued any equity or bonds, respectively. If a firm raised capital through equity and

bonds between 2003 and 2011, it is classified both as an equity and as a bond issuer. We also classify

firms as domestic or foreign equity issuers and as domestic or foreign bond issuers, depending on

whether they issued equity or bonds in domestic or foreign markets. Foreign issuers are the firms

that had at least one capital raising issuance in foreign markets between 2003 and 2011. Domestic



3 Appendix Table 1 reports the list of countries and the number of non-issuing and issuing firms from each country
covered in the final matched dataset.
4 The number of security issuances in the matched dataset is smaller than that in the SDC Platinum database because

several firms that issue securities, especially bonds, do not have balance sheet data in Orbis.

                                                        8
issuers comprise firms that issued only in domestic markets.5 Hence, firms that raised capital in both

domestic and foreign markets over the sample period are classified as foreign issuers. The sample of

non-issuing firms is held fixed throughout the paper. Non-issuing firms are those that did not have

any capital raising activity between 2003 and 2011. In the SDC-Orbis data 18,342 firms are issuers

(16,198 firms are equity issuers and 5,134 are bond issuers) and 27,185 are non-issuing firms.

         We classify the countries in the sample into developed and emerging economies following

the World Bank classification of countries. In particular, developed countries are those with a gross

national income (GNI) per capita in 2009 above $12,195 (U.S. dollars). All other countries are

classified as emerging economies. The developed countries are further classified according to their

financial structure—whether they have bank- or market-based financial systems. For emerging

economies, we do not have enough variation to split this group by bank- and market-based financial

systems. However, in additional exercises we classified all countries as bank- or market-based.

Following Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001) we construct a measure of financial structure based on

relative size. The developed countries with an average ratio of total banking claims on the private

sector to equity market capitalization above the sample median are classified as bank-based

economies, while all the other developed economies are classified as market-based ones.6 The final

matched dataset comprises firms from 20 emerging countries and 31 developed countries, of which

16 have bank-based financial systems. Appendix Table 1 reports the list of countries in each of these

categories.

         Our analyses focus on firm size and growth, measured by the level and growth rate of total

5 For robustness, in unreported results, we considered overlapping groups of domestic and foreign issuers. That is,
foreign issuers are the firms that had at least one capital raising issuance in foreign markets between 2003 and 2011,
whereas domestic issuers comprise firms that had at least one capital raising issuance in domestic markets over the same
period. The results are qualitatively similar to the ones reported in the paper.
6 To classify countries, we use data between 2000 and 2003, but these measures tend to be fairly stable over time.

Moreover, several papers show that measures of financial structure based on size are very similar to measures based on
activity, such as the ratio of bank credit to value traded in equity markets. Indeed, Beck and Levine (2002) show that the
correlations between these two measures are over 0.65 and significant at the 1% level. Also see Levine (2002),
Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (2002), Ergungor (2004), and Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2013).

                                                            9
assets (or assets), sales, and the number of employees. Firm assets and sales are measured in

constant 2011 U.S. dollars, using the consumer price index (CPI) to discount nominal values. The

analysis also examines firm age (measured in 2011), firm profitability, and other financial indicators

such as return on assets (ROA), leverage (including bank and other types of financing), and the

maturity profile of liabilities.

        We also match the SDC-Orbis dataset with the SDC Platinum database on mergers and

acquisitions (M&A) to assess whether firms with M&A activity around their capital raisings display a

similar performance than other firms raising capital. This helps us analyze whether the patterns we

uncover are driven by M&A activity and whether the expansion of firms comes from their own

internal growth. To do so, we identify whether issuing firms engage in some M&A activity as the

acquirer firm in the year of the capital raising or the following year. Of the 18,342 issuing firms in

the sample, 8,919 firms conducted an M&A transaction (about 50% of the issuing firms). The results

using the M&A data are mentioned in the text but not reported to save space.

        Although in this paper we use the firm-level data for 2003-2011 due to the wide coverage of

firms by SDC Platinum, we also match the data on security issuances from SDC Platinum with

balance sheet information from the Thomson Reuters Worldscope database. One advantage of the

matched SDC-Worldscope dataset is that it covers a longer time span, including the 1990s.

However, due to the Worldscope coverage, the matched Worldscope dataset contains a smaller set

of firms (38,622 firms) than the matched Orbis dataset and does not include the United States. A

comparison of the sample of firms in Orbis and Worldscope suggests that the Worldscope sample is

biased toward larger firms. As for the results using the M&A data, the results using the Worldscope

data are mentioned in the text but not reported.




                                                   10
3. Capital Market Growth: The Intensive and Extensive Margins

Capital markets have grown markedly since the early 1990s in both developed and emerging

economies (Figure 1). The median developed country’s equity market expanded from an average of

35% of GDP over the period 1991-1995 to an average of 84% over 2006-2011. Even more

pronounced growth patterns are observed in emerging countries, where markets grew from 17% to

59% of GDP over the same period in the median country. Corporate bond markets also grew,

especially in emerging economies where they increased more than 6-fold, albeit from a low base. In

the median developed country, corporate bond markets expanded from an average of 27% of GDP

in 1991-1995 to 41% in 2006-2011. As a comparison, private credit by deposit money banks

increased from 81% to 117% (27% to 36%) of GDP in the median developed (emerging) country

during the same period.

       The expansion in primary capital market activity has also been sizeable (Figure 2, Panel A).

For the median country in our sample, the per annum amount of new equity issuances as a

proportion of GDP almost doubled, from about 0.7% during 1991-1995 to 1.3 % during 2006-2011.

There has also been pronounced growth in the issuance of corporate bonds, especially in the late

2000s. Bond issuances rose from 1.8% of GDP per annum for the median country in the early

1990s to 3.1% in second half of the 2000s. Thus, whether considering market size or primary

activity, the median country has experienced a noticeable expansion of equity and bond markets.

       Capital market growth has been associated mainly with a growth in the intensive margin: a

small number of firms have materially increased their use of capital markets since the 1990s. And

there has not been much of an increase in the extensive margin, in the number of firms issuing

securities. For the median country, the average number of firms issuing equity per year increased

from 18 in the early 1990s to 23 in the late 2000s (Figure 2, Panel B). In the case of bonds, the

average number of firms per annum issuing them in the median country was 27 in the early 1990s

                                                11
and 22 in the late 2000s.7

         Not only do few firms raise funds in capital markets, an even smaller number of firms raise

the bulk of the financing and account for the rapid growth of security issuances. For example, the

amount raised in equity markets per year by the top-5 issuers in the median country remained at

about 80% of the total amount raised over the entire period 1991-2011 (Figure 2, Panel C). The top-

5 bond issuers in the median country captured close to 70% of the total amount raised, with the top-

20 issuers capturing over 90%.

         Although there is cross-country heterogeneity, the patterns described above exist for most

economies. Even for the most developed markets, a small proportion of listed firms raise capital

through equity or bond issuances (Appendix Figure 1). For example, in France, Germany, the

United Kingdom, and the United States less than half of the firms in our sample conducted an

equity offering or sold a bond over the period 2003-11. There is also remarkable skewness across

virtually all countries. Only in Australia, China, Japan, Hong Kong SAR, the United Kingdom, and

the United States is the amount raised by the top-5 equity issuers less than 50% of the total amount

raised in equity markets. Even in other G7 economies like Germany, France, and Italy, the top-5

equity issuers captured 61%, 65%, and 71% of the total amount raised in our sample period,

respectively. The concentration of funds raised by a few large firms in corporate bond markets is

also pronounced across most countries.

         This concentration in capital market activity does not simply reflect concentration in

economic activity.8 Within our sample of listed firms, economic activity is indeed concentrated: the

top-5 firms in sales capture about 45% of the total sales (Figure 3, Panel A). However, capital


7 If we use a 5-year window, instead of examining issuances per year, the total number of firms issuing equity in the
median country increased from 72 in 1991-1995 to 103 in 2006-2011. In the case of bonds, it declined from 87 to 76
firms over the same period.
8 Although Gabaix (2011), di Giovanni and Levchenko (2012), Eaton et al. (2012), and Freund and Pierola (2012) find

that the top firms in a country play a crucial role in aggregate outcomes, we find that the concentration in capital market
financing does not simply involve the same firms that are concentrated in terms of economic activity.

                                                            12
market activity is concentrated in a different set of firms: the top-5 firms in terms of sales actually

capture less than 15% of the total amount raised in capital markets (Figure 3, Panel B). Consistent

with this, the top-5 issuing firms capture 15% or less than the total sales by the firms in our sample

(Figure 3, Panel C). In other words, although capital markets seem to be a source of financing for

relatively few firms, the top issuing firms are not necessarily the top firms in terms of sales.



4. Which Firms Use Capital Markets?

To assess which firms access capital markets, we compare the characteristics of non-issuing firms,

issuing firms, and the different types of issuing firms. We compare (a) firm size (measured by assets

and sales in 2011 U.S. dollars and the number of employees), (b) firm growth (measured by the

growth rate of assets, sales, and employees), (c) firm leverage, (d) the liability structure of firm debt

(measured by the ratio of long-term debt to total firm liabilities), (e) firm profitability (measured by

retained earnings over assets and return on assets, or ROA), and (d) firm age. Besides differentiating

by whether firms issue equity or debt, we also examine whether firms issue equity domestically,

equity in foreign markets, bonds domestically, or bonds in foreign markets. In comparing firm traits

across non-issuing and issuing firms, we use the median across countries of the median firm in any

given country, after obtaining the average over time for each firm. Because for the rest of the paper

we use the matched dataset on capital raisings and balance sheet information, the sample is restricted

to 2003-2011.

        Issuing firms are different from non-issuing firms along many dimensions. Issuers are

typically much larger than publicly listed firms that do not issue stocks or bonds (Table 1). The

median issuer in the median country (of either equity or bonds) has assets of $317 million, while

non-issuers have $100 million in assets. There are also large size differences across firms that issue

equity and bonds and across those that issue securities in domestic and foreign capital markets. The

                                                   13
median bond issuer has assets of $3.7 billion, while the median equity issuer has assets of $256

million, which is more than a 14-fold difference. Moreover, the median firm that issues securities

abroad is much larger than the median firm that sells stocks or bonds in domestic markets. The

median bond issuer in domestic markets has assets of $1.5 billion, whereas the median bond issuer

in foreign markets has assets of $4.9 billion. The results are qualitatively similar when focusing on

either sales or the number of employees rather than assets.9

         Issuing firms also tend to grow much faster than non-issuing firms (Table 1). While the

assets of non-issuing firms grew at a 4.3% a year during the sample period, the assets of equity and

bond issuers grew at 10.5% and 9.4% a year, respectively. As a comparison, for the median country

(Brazil and Bulgaria), the average GDP growth during this period was 3.9%. Furthermore, firms that

issue equity abroad tend to have faster growth rates than those that issue equity in domestic markets

only. The differences in growth rates are also sizeable if we analyze sales and the number of

employees. For example, growth in the number of employees for issuers averaged 4.4% a year, but

only 0.9% for non-issuers between 2003 and 2011.

         Do the differences between issuing and non-issuing firms exist before an issuance takes

place? Or do they primarily emerge as firms issue equity or bonds? To address this, we estimate

Probit models that measure the probability of issuing equity or bonds during the 2005-11 period

based on firm-level attributes in 2004 (firms with capital raising activity only in 2003 and/or 2004

are excluded from these regressions).10 In each regression, we use only one explanatory variable for


9 The median issuing firm tends to be much larger than the median non-issuing firm in virtually all countries. For
example, the assets of the median equity-issuing firm are larger than the assets of the median non-issuing firm in all
countries except in a handful of cases (Australia, France, Japan, Luxembourg, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore,
Sweden, Thailand, and the United Kingdom). For about half of the countries, the median equity issuing firm is at least
2.5 times larger than the median non-issuing firm. In the case of bonds, in all but two countries (Australia and
Luxembourg) the median bond issuer is at least five times as large as the median non-issuer.
10 In unreported results, we estimated Cox proportional hazard models to capture the probability of raising capital

through equity or bonds. The Cox model estimates the determinants of the probability of issuing equity and bonds by
employing all available information up to the year before an issuance takes place. The estimates obtained are consistent
with the ones presented using Probit models.

                                                          14
size and one for growth due to multi-collinearity. All the regressions include country dummies to

control for country-specific effects.11

         Many differences between issuers and non-issuers exist before firms issue securities. The

results show that larger firms and those with higher growth rates are more likely to raise capital in

equity or bond markets (Table 2). Firms with longer-term debt are also more likely to issue.

Although issuing firms are ex ante bigger and faster growing, they tend to be less profitable. 12 With

respect to economic significance, firm size is generally the most important predictor of future capital

raising activity. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the log of assets for the average

firm raises the likelihood of issuing in capital markets by around 18 percentage points.13 A one

standard deviation increase in asset growth is associated with an increase of about 6 percentage

points in the probability of issuing a stock or bond. The results using sales or the number of

employees as a proxy for size are quantitatively and qualitatively similar. Moreover, a one standard

deviation increase in ROA lowers the probability of new capital market activity by about 6

percentage points.

         We also estimate the Probit models for the probability of issuing only equity and the

probability of issuing only bonds in both domestic and foreign markets. The results are qualitatively

similar to the ones obtained by estimating the probability of raising capital in general (Table 2, right

panels). The estimations show that firm size, firm growth, and the longer liability maturity structure

are positively and statistically related to the use of capital market financing, while firm profitability is


11 In unreported results, we used industry dummies to control for sector-specific effects, following the major industry
divisions of the SIC classification at the two-digit level (agriculture, forestry, and fishing; construction; finance,
insurance, and real estate; manufacturing; mining; public administration; retail trade; services; transportation,
communications, and utilities; and wholesale trade). The results are similar to the ones reported here.
12 In unreported results, we explored whether changes in profitability occur around the capital raising activity. We find

that profitability does not increase in the year following an issuance.
13 The estimates reported in Table 2 show the marginal effects on the probability of issuance of a unit change in each

explanatory variable. These variables, however, are in different units, making these effects not directly comparable across
variables. Thus, in the text, we discuss the marginal effects associated with a one standard deviation change in the
explanatory variables.

                                                            15
negatively associated with issuance activity. The main difference between firms issuing equity and

bonds is that the marginal effect of size on the probability of capital raising activity is much higher

for bond issuers than for equity issuers. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the log of

assets raises the likelihood of an issuance by about 3 percentage points for equity issuances and by

about 30 percentage points for bond issuances.

        In sum, as the capitalization of equity and bond markets and the aggregate capital raising

activity increased markedly since the 1990s, we find that throughout our sample (i) only a few firms

issued securities in the median country, and indeed in the vast majority of countries, (ii) of the few

firms that issued securities, only a handful of those accounted for the bulk of the funds raised by

listed firms in capital markets, and (iii) the ones that did issue securities in domestic and foreign

markets tended to be large and fast growing.



5. How Do Assets, Sales, and Employment Evolve for Issuing and Non-issuing Firms?

This section assesses (1) whether issuers grow faster than non-issuers, (2) whether a bump in growth

materializes immediately after a firm issues securities, and (3) how the growth gap between issuers

and non-issuers differs across the full distribution of firm size.

        We begin by estimating four probability density functions that capture the FSD: two for

2003 (one for issuers of either equity or bonds and one for non-issuers) and two analogous ones for

2010. Due to data availability on firm-level balance sheets in Orbis, we focus the rest of the paper on

the 2003-2010 sample. That is, issuing firms that raised capital through equity or bonds only in 2011

are excluded from the analysis henceforth. However, the results are qualitatively similar if we use the

full sample available for 2003-2011.

        As illustrated in Figure 4, three key findings emerge about the FSD when using assets, sales,

or the number of employees to measure firm size. First, the distribution of issuers in 2003 is to the

                                                    16
right of that of non-issuers, indicating that issuing firms are typically larger ex ante than non-issuing

firms. These patterns are consistent with the evidence presented in the previous section that larger

firms are more likely to issue equity and debt securities. Second, the FSD for both issuing and non-

issuing firms shifted to the right from 2003 to 2010, indicating that publicly listed firms typically

grew over this period. Third, the distribution of issuing firms shifted farther to the right than that of

non-issuers, implying that issuing firms grew more than non-issuing ones while they issued

securities. The differences in the FSD are statistically significant based on unreported Kolmogorov-

Smirnov statistics.

         To further assess whether issuing firms are typically larger and faster growing than non-

issuing ones across the distribution of firm sizes, we estimate quantile regressions using differences-

in-differences specifications. More specifically, we use information on firm size for 2003 and 2010

for all firms in the sample, and estimate quantile regressions on a constant, a dummy for issuer

firms, a 2010 dummy variable that takes the value of one for observations in 2010, and a term

interacting these two dummy variables. We estimate these regressions using the log of assets, sales,

or the number of employees as dependent variables.

         The estimated coefficients from the quantile regressions in Table 3 are reported in

exponential form and need to be interpreted as follows. For a given quantile, the constant term

measures the size in 2003 of non-issuing firms. The coefficient on the dummy for whether it is an

issuing firm measures the size of issuers relative to the size of non-issuers in 2003. The coefficient

on the 2010 dummy measures the growth rate of non-issuing firms between 2003 and 2010.14 The

coefficient on the interaction term (the interaction between the dummy for an issuing firm and the

dummy for observations in 2010) measures the growth of issuers relative to non-issuers; therefore, it


14The level of the      quantile of size for non-issuing firms in 2010 can be obtained by multiplying the constant and the
reported coefficient on the 2010 dummy variable. Similar calculations make it possible to recover the levels of the
quantiles for the other distributions.

                                                           17
captures whether the distribution of issuers shifts more to the right than that of non-issuers between

2003 and 2010. Thus, the coefficient on this interaction term is of special interest.

        Consistent with the kernel density estimates, the results of the quantile regressions show that

issuing firms are ex ante larger than non-issuing firms. Importantly, not only are the top firms in the

distribution of issuers larger than the top firms in the distribution of non-issuers, but these

differences also exist at every decile of the distributions, including the bottom ones. That is, the

entire distribution of issuing firms lies to the right of that of non-issuing firms. The results are

statistically significant for all estimates, except for the bottom deciles of the distribution of the

number of employees. These differences are also economically significant. For example, issuing

firms at the 1st decile are larger than non-issuing firms at the same decile of the distribution by 63%

in assets, 24% in sales, and 7% in the number of employees.

        Issuing firms not only start larger than non-issuing firms, but they also grow much faster

than non-issuing firms at all deciles of the distribution. In other words, there is actually ex post

divergence in firm size between issuers and non-issuers. The coefficients on the interacted term are

larger than one and statistically significant for every estimated decile, with the exception of the top

decile of the FSD in all three specifications (assets, sales, and the number of employees), thus

providing evidence that issuing firms grew faster than non-issuing firms over the same period. There

is in fact a sizeable additional shift in the distribution of issuing firms vis-à-vis that of non-issuing

firms between 2003 and 2010, after taking into account the initial differences in size between issuers

and non-issuers. For example, as shown by the estimated interacted term, the ratio of firm size

between issuers and non-issuers at the bottom 1st decile of the distribution of assets increased 115%

over this period; issuing firms were 63% larger than non-issuing firms in 2003 and became 250%

larger by 2010. The implied differential in annualized growth rates is substantial. Non-issuing firms

at the 1st decile of the distribution of assets grew 1.6% per year between 2003 and 2010, whereas

                                                   18
issuing firms at the same decile of the distribution grew 13.3% per year over the same period.

Qualitatively similar differences are estimated for sales and the number of employees.

        Figure 5 plots the growth rate of issuers and non-issuers implied by the regressions for the

different deciles of the distribution of assets, sales, and the number of employees. Table 4 shows the

inter-quantile tests of equality of coefficients and compares the 5th decile with the 1st decile, the 6th

with the 2nd, and so forth. These tests not only provide quantitative evidence on the statistical

differences across deciles, but also capture the monotonicity of these effects.

        For non-issuing firms, there is divergence in the distribution of firm size. The estimated

coefficients on the 2010 dummy variable in Table 3 are larger for higher deciles than for the lower

ones. While one observes growth for all deciles of non-issuing firms, we find faster growth among

the larger non-issuing firms. For example, firms at the 1st decile of the distribution of assets grew

1.6% per year between 2003 and 2010, whereas firms at the 9th decile of the distribution grew 6.4%

per year. The increase in growth rates is more subdued for the distributions based on sales and the

number of employees.

        In contrast, there is convergence in the distribution of firm size among issuing firms. That is,

smaller firms typically grow faster than larger firms. Moreover, the growth rates of issuing firms

actually decrease monotonically with firm size as indicated by the negative inter-decile tests in Table

4. The decline in growth rates is particularly accentuated in the top half of the FSD, with tests

between the 9th and the 5th deciles statistically significant for all three distributions. These differences

in growth rates are in fact quantitatively large. For instance, issuing firms at the 9th decile typically

grew around 52% less than issuing firms at the 5th decile of the distribution of assets between 2003

and 2010.

        These growth patterns imply that the growth differential between issuing and non-issuing

firms is much greater for smaller firms than for larger firms (Figure 5). Namely, issuing firms grow

                                                    19
faster than non-issuing firms at each decile of the distribution of firm size, but the growth gap

between small issuing and non-issuing firms is much larger than the growth gap between large

issuing and non-issuing firms. The negative and statistically significant inter-decile tests (Table 4)

show that this growth differential for issuers relative to non-issuers declines monotonically with firm

size. In fact, as indicated by the interacted coefficients (Table 3), at the 9 th decile the differences in

growth rates between issuing and non-issuing firms are no longer statistically significant.

        The previous estimations of the FSD do not distinguish firms by country (they pool all the

observations) because for most countries very few firms issue securities and the FSD cannot be

estimated at the country level. But to assess whether the patterns we find are driven by country-

specific effects (in particular, by countries growing at different rates), we estimate cross-sectional

regressions of total firm growth between 2003 and 2010 on country fixed effects and a dummy

variable that captures whether the firm is an issuer (Table 5). Analogous to the estimations in Table

3, we split firms into deciles according to their size in 2003 and estimate standard linear regressions

using observations within each decile. The results are consistent with the findings in Table 3. Issuing

firms grew faster between 2003 and 2010 than non-issuing firms. Moreover, the estimated

coefficients for the issuing dummy are typically larger at the lower deciles than at the upper deciles,

indicating convergence in size within issuing firms over time.

        We next assess whether growth rises at the time of issuance. Because the estimations in

Tables 3 and 5 show results for the entire 2003-2010 period, they do not show what happens in the

year when firms actually issue. To do so, we first conduct an event study, computing the growth rate

of issuers versus non-issuers in each year (+/- 3 years) around the time of issuance, grouping firms

by their year of first issuance. The results show that while issuers grow faster than non-issuers before

and after they issue, the growth rate at the time of issuance increases significantly (Figure 6).

        We then pool the groups of firms issuing in different years and estimate panel regressions.

                                                    20
On average, the assets of issuing firms continuously rise over the 7-year window around a capital

raising issue (Table 6, Panel A). Moreover, the average asset growth of issuers is higher than that of

non-issuers, particularly so during the year of issuance: 8.6 percentage points one year before issuing,

22.7 percentage points the year of issuance, and 8.2 percentage points the year after issuance (Table

6, Panel B). This differential growth becomes smaller two and three years before and after issuing.

Similar patterns are obtained when using sales and the number of employees.

        These estimates provide additional evidence on two key features of security issuances. First,

it is not just that fast growing firms are more likely to issue securities. Rather, firm assets, sales, and

employment tend to rise substantially in the year they issue securities. Second, firms do not issue

securities simply to adjust their capital structure. Instead, the estimates in levels and growth rates

show that assets, sales, and employment rise as firms issue securities.

        We conducted a number of additional robustness tests. First, the results presented in this

paper are quantitatively and qualitatively robust to the exclusion of financial and utility firms.

Moreover, the results hold when using only financial and utility firms, suggesting that they do not

behave differently than firms in other industries. Second, the results hold when controlling for M&A

activity. In particular, the results are robust to the exclusion of firms that engage (as acquirer) in an

M&A activity in the year of the capital raising or in the following year. Third, Chinese and Indian

firms represent a relatively large fraction of the sample (about 16%) and the patterns documented in

this paper are similar in these two countries (Didier and Schmukler, 2013). However, the results are

qualitatively similar to the ones reported here when excluding China and India, which indicates that

these countries are not driving the results. Fourth, the results are robust when considering only the

second half of the sample, namely 2006-2010. Fifth, the results are also qualitatively similar to the

ones reported here when using the Worldscope balance sheet database that covers a longer time

span (1995-2011). In particular, we estimated the regressions over three different sample periods

                                                    21
(1995-2011, 1995-2002, and 2003-2011) to verify the robustness of our findings to these different

partitions. Sixth, although the analysis considers both IPO (initial public offerings) and non-IPO

capital raising activity, the results are robust to the exclusion of IPO capital raising activity. Seventh,

the reported estimates from quantile regressions use bootstrapped standard errors with 400

replications clustered at the firm level. The results are robust to the alternative use of more

replications, non-clustered standard errors, and other levels of clustering (country, sector, and

country-sector level).

        Overall, firms that use capital market financing are larger to begin with, grow faster,

especially in the year of issuance, and become larger than non-issuing firms. There is not only

divergence in size between issuing and non-issuing, but also within non-issuing firms, as the growth

rates of non-issuing firms increase with firm size. However, within issuing firms the growth rates

decrease monotonically with firm size, indicating convergence in size among them. Furthermore, the

growth differential between issuing and non-issuing firms is significantly larger for smaller firms.



6. Heterogeneity in Firm Behavior

To provide additional information on the characteristics and performance of issuing firms, we split

these firms by (1) type of securities issued (equity versus bonds), (2) issuing market (domestic versus

foreign), and (3) the level of financial development of the firms’ home market (bank-based

developed countries, market-based developed countries, and emerging countries). In additional tests,

we compared developed versus emerging countries and bank-based versus market-based countries

(pooling developed and emerging countries) and obtained qualitatively similar conclusions. We do

not report those results to reduce the number of tables. For the same reason we provide results

based only on assets, but the findings are robust to using sales or the number of employees.

        For the split between equity and bond financing, we define equity issuers as those firms that

                                                    22
raised capital through equity securities between 2003 and 2010. The issuing firms that raised capital

through just bonds (not equity) between 2003 and 2010 are excluded from this sample. We use an

analogous definition for bond issuers. As in the previous section, the issuing firms with capital

raising activity only in 2011 are also excluded from the sample. The control group of non-issuing

firms is the same in both cases and it is the same as in the previous section, namely, the firms that

did not issue either equity or bonds over the sample period.

        The results show that bond issuers are much larger than equity issuers at all deciles of the

FSD (Table 7, Panels A and B). For example, equity issuers at the 1st decile of the distribution were

17% larger than non-issuers in 2003, whereas bond issuers were 1,391% larger. Moreover, equity-

issuing firms grew relatively faster than bond issuing firms between 2003 and 2010. For example,

after taking into account the initial differences in size between issuers and non-issuers, equity issuers

at the 5th decile of the distribution grew 73% more than non-issuers, whereas bond issuers at the

same decile of the FSD had an expansion in assets of 41% more than non-issuers. These differences

are statistically significant according to unreported tests. In sum, firms that issue equity are smaller

than bond issuers and tend to experience faster growth than bond issuers.

        To assess whether there are differences between domestic and foreign capital raising activity,

we define foreign issuers are the firms that had at least one capital raising issue in foreign markets

between 2003 and 2010. Domestic issuers comprise firms that issued only in domestic markets. The

control group consists of those firms that did not issue equity or bonds in domestic or foreign

markets over the sample period. The results reported here are quantitatively and qualitatively robust

to separately analyzing the patterns for domestic equity issuers, foreign equity issuers, domestic bond

issuers, and foreign bond issuers.

        The core findings that issuers are larger and grow faster than non-issuers hold across

markets (Table 7, Panels C and D). Firms that use domestic capital market financing, be it equity or

                                                   23
bond financing, start out larger and grow faster than non-issuing firms. For instance, the median

firm issuing domestically is twice as large as non-issuers. In contrast, the median firm issuing abroad

is 26 times as large. Despite being considerably larger, firms issuing in foreign markets also typically

grow faster than non-issuing firms. Complementing and reinforcing the previous results, the

differential growth of issuers in foreign markets relative to non-issuers also declines monotonically

with firm size. At the 9th decile, the differences in growth between both equity and bond foreign

issuers and non-issuers are typically no longer statistically significant. Small, foreign issuers grow

faster than small, domestic issuers.

        Next, we examine the characteristics and performance of issuing firms by differentiating the

nature of their home securities markets. Tables 8 and 9 show quantile regressions for equity and

bond issuers for developed and emerging countries separately, the former are also split according to

whether they have bank-based or market-based financial systems.

        In terms of ex ante firm size, equity issuers at the bottom half of the distribution in market-

based developed economies are significantly smaller than non-issuing firms, contrary to the trends

observed in developed bank-based economies. For example, equity-issuing firms at the 1st decile of

the distribution in developed bank-based economies are four times larger than non-issuing firms at

the same decile, while in developed market-based economies equity issuers are 52% smaller than

non-issuing firms.

        There are also some differences in the growth patterns for issuing firms across countries. In

particular, the magnitude of the growth differentials between issuing and non-issuing firms in

market-based developed countries is consistently larger than in developed bank-based economies for

firms of different sizes, especially those at the bottom deciles. In emerging countries, both non-

issuing firms and equity-issuing firms at the top deciles of the distribution typically grow faster than

those at the bottom deciles. These patterns imply a divergence in the FSD for both equity-issuing

                                                  24
and non-issuing firms. Furthermore, the growth differential between equity-issuing and non-issuing

firms is somewhat stable across the different deciles. In the case of bonds, the growth differential

between issuing and non-issuing firms declines with firm size.

        To summarize, there is heterogeneity in firm size and performance around capital raising

activity depending on whether the securities are equity or debt, whether they are issued in domestic

or foreign markets, and whether the firm’s home market is emerging, or a more bank-based or

market-based financial system. First, firms that issue equity are smaller than bond issuers and tend to

experience faster growth than bond issuers. Second, firms that issue securities in foreign markets are

typically much larger than domestic issuers, and small, foreign issuers tend to grow faster than small,

domestic issuers. Thus, firm attributes and performance vary with the location of issuance. Third,

equity issuers at the bottom half of the distribution of firm size in market-based developed

economies are significantly smaller than non-issuing firms, which is the opposite of the patterns

observed in developed bank-based economies. Among listed firms, being large is not a defining

characteristic of equity-issuing corporations in developed economies with highly developed stock

markets. Fourth, the growth differential between issuers and non-issuers in developed market-based

economies is consistently larger than the growth gap in developed bank-based countries. And in

emerging economies larger equity issuing firms grow faster than smaller issuing firms, contrary to

the patterns observed in developed countries.




7. The Role of Firm Age

The results presented above suggest that (1) firms that issue securities tend to be larger than those

that do not, (2) issuers tend to grow faster than non-issuers, and (3) smaller issuing firms grow faster

than larger issuing firms, indicating that the FSD of issuing firms tends to converge over time. In

this section we assess whether these results simply reflect firm age, because size, age, and the degree
                                                  25
to which firms issue securities are correlated and because the median issuing firm (in the median

country) is typically younger than the median non-issuing firm (Table 1).

         We explore the degree to which firm age accounts for our results in two ways. To capture its

average effect, we first estimate panel regressions of firm size in 2003 and 2010 and cross-sectional

regressions of firm growth between 2003 and 2010, both on age and issuance activity as explanatory

variables. Second, we assess whether the evolution of the FSD for issuing and non-issuing firms

differs across three firm age groups: young firms (10 years or younger in 2011), mature firms (11-30

years in 2011), and old firms (older than 30 years in 2011).15

         After controlling for firm age, Table 10 indicates that our core results hold: issuing firms

start out larger and grow faster than non-issuing firms. Moreover, the results in Panels A and B for

the three proxies for firm size (assets, sales, and the number of employees) are quantitatively similar

to those reported in the last columns of Tables 3 and 5, respectively. These patterns hold on average

for both equity and bond issuers in bank-based and market-based developed countries and in

emerging economies.

         Our findings regarding the FSD are qualitatively robust to the split of the sample by firm age

(Table 11). The estimated coefficients on the issuer dummy show that issuing firms are ex ante

larger than non-issuing firms for firms in all age groups. The results are statistically significant for all

estimates across all deciles. Issuing firms are not only larger to start with, but they also grow faster

than non-issuing firms across the three age groups. Also consistent with our previous findings, the

regressions show as well that while non-issuing firms of all ages expanded between 2003 and 2010,

their growth rates increased with firm size, especially for young and mature firms. In contrast, within


15The results are robust to the use of other thresholds on firm age. In particular, we obtained qualitatively similar results
with the following splits: (i) based on the deciles of the firm age distribution (17 years and younger, 18-32 years, more
than 32 years in 2011); (ii) balanced split of firms into three groups (18 years and younger, 19-40 years, more than 40
years in 2011); (iii) 15 years and younger, 16-25 years, more than 25 years in 2011; (iv) 10 years and younger, 11-20 years,
more than 20 years in 2011.

                                                            26
issuing firms, smaller firms typically grew faster than larger firms. Hence, these results indicate that

there is some divergence in the distributions of firm size for non-issuing firms and convergence for

issuing firms. These patterns are observed for young, mature, and old firms.

        In addition, the growth differential between issuing and non-issuing firms declines with firm

age. The growth differential for younger firms is larger than that for mature firms, which in turn is

larger than that for old firms. For example, the growth differential between issuing and non-issuing

firms in the 1st decile of the distribution of young firms is 36 percentage points per year between

2003 and 2010, whereas the differential in the same decile of the distribution of mature and old

firms is 10 and 4 percentage points per year, respectively. The estimations show that, controlling for

firm size, firm age and growth are negatively associated, especially for issuing firms, as younger firms

typically expanded faster than older ones between 2003 and 2010.

        Overall, our results show that even after controlling for age, firms that use capital market

financing are larger to begin with and grow faster than non-issuing firms. There is not only

divergence in size between issuing and non-issuing, but also within non-issuing firms across firms in

the three age groups. Within issuing firms the growth rates decrease with firm size. Furthermore, the

growth differential between issuing and non-issuing firms is significantly larger for smaller firms

across firms of all age groups. These patterns suggest that smaller firms (after controlling for age)

and younger firms (after controlling for size) tend to grow faster after issuing securities than larger

and older firms.



8. Conclusions

During the boom in capital market activity around the world that started in the 1990s, which firms

accessed those markets and how did they perform? Using a new dataset on firm-level capital raising

activity and balance sheet information, this paper shows that relatively few firms use equity and

                                                  27
bond markets to obtain financing. The data on capital raising activity show that, for the median

country, only around 20 firms per country per year issue equity or bonds, and not many firms do so

even in developed countries. Moreover, the capital raising activity is concentrated in large, fast-

growing firms, with the top-5 issuers capturing 66%-93% of the activity. In particular, the assets of

issuing firms grew on average at 12% per year between 2003 and 2010, while those of non-issuers

grew at 4% per year. During the year of issuance, firms tend to grow at a much more rapid rate

relative to other years, and relative to non-issuing firms. As a consequence of the faster growth, the

FSD of issuing firms shifts to the right of the FSD of non-issuing firms (issuing firms become

larger). While there is divergence between issuing and non-issuing firms, there is convergence within

issuing firms because smaller firms grow faster than larger ones. Among non-issuing firms, however,

there is divergence as growth rates increase with firm size.

        The findings in this paper indicate that the expansion of primary market activity is much less

widespread than some might infer from, for example, simply observing the large increases in market

capitalization around the world. Capital markets have not been a significant source of financing for

the majority of listed firms. The few, large firms that typically issue equity and bonds across most

economies tend to grow faster than non-issuers. And among issuing firms, the smaller firms are the

ones that experience the largest boost in growth.

        There are some notable differences across countries depending on the degree of economic

and capital market development. Whereas in most countries issuing firms are larger than non-issuing

firms, in market-based developed economies relatively smaller firms also issue equity. Moreover, the

growth differential between issuers and non-issuers is systematically larger across all firm sizes in

market-based developed economies than in other developed countries. This is consistent with the

view that the benefits of using capital markets are greater in countries where capital markets play a

larger role and that better developed markets are associated with a wider array of firms accessing and

                                                    28
benefitting from the services provided by those markets.

        The findings in this paper shed new light on debates concerning the mechanisms through

which capital markets influence firm growth. We find a strong, positive association between firms

issuing securities and firm growth. It is not just that firms grow faster in economies with better

functioning capital markets. Rather, we find that within an economy, issuers (especially smaller ones)

grow much faster than non-issuers. This evidence does not reject theories that predict that firms do

not need to sell securities to reap the benefits of better capital markets, but it does establish that

there is a strong positive relation between issuance and firm growth across a wide array of

economies. Future research needs to identify the degree to which supply side factors (such as

improvements in capital markets that relax financing constraints) drive the positive association

between capital raising and firm growth.

        The findings in this paper also suggest that capital market financing is not just associated

with changes in corporate capital structure. Assets, sales, and the number of employees expand as

firms sell equity or bonds, so firms are not merely using the issuance of securities to alter debt-equity

ratios or to replace internal financing or bank lending. Moreover, the fact that firms expand not only

in terms of assets but also in terms of sales and the number of employees suggests that their growth

is not just related to a balance sheet expansion.




                                                    29
References
Acemoglu, D., Zilibotti, F., 1997. Was Prometheus unbound by chance? Risk, diversification, and
  growth. Journal of Political Economy 105(4), 709-51.
Albuquerque, R., Hopenhayn, H.A., 2004. Optimal lending contracts and firm dynamics. Review of
  Economic Studies 71(2), 285-315.
Angelini, P., Generale, A., 2008. On the evolution of firm size distributions. American Economic
  Review 98(1), 426-438.
Arellano, C., Bai, Y., Zhang, J., 2012. Firm dynamics and financial development. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 59(6), 533-549.
Ayyagari, M. Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, M., 2013. Financing in developing countries. In
  Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Vol. 2A, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz
  (eds.), 683-757. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Beck, T., Levine, R., 2002. Industry growth and capital allocation: does having a market- or bank-
  based system matter? Journal of Financial Economics 64(2), 147-180.
Beck, T., Levine, R., 2004. Stock markets, banks, and growth: panel evidence. Journal of Banking
  and Finance 28(3), 423-442.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., Lundblad, C., 2005. Does financial liberalization spur economic growth.
  Journal of Financial Economics 77(1), 3-55.
Brealey, R., Myers, S., Allen, F., 2011. Principles of Corporate Finance, Global Edition. New York:
  McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Buera, F., Fattal-Jaef, R., Shin, Y., 2014. Anatomy of a credit crunch: from capital to labor markets.
  UCLA and Washington University, mimeo.
Cabral, L., Mata, J., 2003. On the evolution of the firm size distribution: facts and theory. American
  Economic Review 93(4), 1075-1090.
Claessens, S., Schmukler, S., 2007. International financial integration through equity markets: which
  firms from which countries go global? Journal of International Money and Finance 26(5), 788-813.
Clementi, G.L., Hopenhayn H.A., 2006. A theory of financing constraints and firm dynamics.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1), 229-265.
Cooley, T., Quadrini, V., 2001. Financial markets and firm dynamics. American Economic Review
  91(5), 1286-1310.
Dang, T., Gorton, G., Holmström, B., Ordoñez, G., 2014. Banks as secret keepers. Columbia, Yale,
  MIT, and University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Feyen, E., Levine, R., 2013. The evolving importance of banks and securities
  markets. World Bank Economic Review 27(3), 476-490.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R. (eds.), 2001. Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-
  country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, finance, and firm growth. Journal of Finance 53(6),
  2107-2137.
Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 2002. Funding growth in bank-based and market-based
  financial systems: evidence from firm-level data. Journal of Financial Economics 65(3), 337-363.



                                                 30
Didier, T., Schmukler, S., 2013. The financing and growth of firms in China and India: evidence
   from capital markets. Journal of International Money and Finance 39(c), 111-137.
di Giovanni, J., Levchenko, A., 2012. Country size, international trade, and aggregate fluctuations in
   granular economies. Journal of Political Economy 120(6), 1083-1132.
Eaton, J., Kortum, S., Sotelo, S., 2012. International trade: linking micro and macro. NBER Working
   Paper No. 17864.
Ergungor, O.E., 2004. Market- versus bank-based financial systems: do rights and regulations really
   matter? Journal of Banking and Finance 28(12), 2869-2887.
Evans, D.S., 1987. The relationship between firm growth, size, and age: estimates for 100
   manufacturing industries. Journal of Industrial Economics 35(4), 567-81.
Fama, E., French, K.R., 2002. Testing trade-off and pecking order predictions about dividends and
   debt. Review of Financial Studies 15(1), 1-33.
Frank, M.Z., Goyal, V.K., 2003. Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure. Journal of
   Financial Economics 67(2), 217-248.
Frank, M.Z., Goyal, V.K., 2008. Trade-off and pecking order theories of debt. In Handbook of
   Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance. Vol. 2, E. Eckbo (ed.), 135-202. Amsterdam:
   Elsevier.
Freund, C., Pierola, M.D., 2012. Export superstars. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
   6222.
Gabaix, X., 2011. The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79(3), 733-772.
Gibrat, R., 1931, Les Inegalites Economiques. Paris: Librairie du Recueil Sirey.
Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2008. Internationalization and the evolution of corporate
   valuation. Journal of Financial Economics 88(3), 607-632.
Gozzi, J.C., Levine, R., Schmukler, S., 2010. Patterns of international capital raisings. Journal of
   International Economics 80(1), 45-57.
Graham, J., Harvey, C., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from the field.
   Journal of Financial Economics 60(2), 187-243.
Grossman, S.J., Stiglitz, J.E., 1980. Stockholder unanimity in making production and financial
   decisions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(3), 543-66.
Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R., Miranda, J., 2013. Who creates jobs? Small versus large versus young.
   Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 347-361.
Harris, M., Raviv, A., 1991. The theory of capital structure. Journal of Finance 46(1), 297-355.
Hart, O., 1995. Firms Contracts and Financial Structure. New York: Oxford University Press.
Henderson, B.J., Jegadeesh, N., Weisbach, M.S., 2006. World markets for raising new capital. Journal
   of Financial Economics 82(1), 63-101.
Henry, P.B., 2000. Stock market liberalization, economic reform, and emerging market equity prices.
   Journal of Finance 55(2), 529-564.
Holmström, B., Tirole, J., 1993. Market liquidity and performance monitoring. Journal of Political
   Economy 101(4), 678-709.
Ijiri, Y., Simon, H.A., 1964. Business firm growth and size. American Economic Review 54(2), 77-
   89.

                                                 31
Jensen, M.C., 1986. Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers. American
  Economic Review 26(1) 323-329.
Jensen, M.C., Meckling, W.H., 1976. Theory of the firm: managerial behavior, agency costs and
  ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3(4), 305-360.
Karolyi, A., 2006. The world of cross-listings and cross-listings of the world: challenging
  conventional wisdom. Review of Finance 10(1), 99-152.
Levine, R., 1992. Financial structures and economic development. World Bank Policy Research
  Working Paper Series No. 849.
Levine, R., 2002. Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better? Journal of Financial
  Intermediation 11(4), 398-428.
Levine, R., 2005. Finance and growth: theory and evidence. In Handbook of Economic Growth.
  Vol. 1A, P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (eds.), 865-934. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1996. Stock market development and long-run growth. World Bank
  Economic Review 10(2), 323-39.
Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets, banks, and economic growth. American Economic
  Review 88(3), 559-586.
Mansfield, E., 1962. Entry, Gibrat’s law, innovation, and the growth of firms. American Economic
  Review 52(5), 1023-1051.
Midrigan, V., Xu, D., 2014. Finance and misallocation: evidence from plant-level data. American
  Economic Review 104(2), 422-58.
Mitton, T., 2008. Institutions and concentration. Journal of Development Economics 86(2), 367-
  394.
Myers, S.C., 1984. The capital structure puzzle. Journal of Finance 39(3), 575-592.
Myers, S.C., 2003. Financing of corporations. In Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Vol. 1A,
  G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), 215-253. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Myers, S.C., Majluf, N.S., 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
  information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13(2), 187-221.
Obstfeld, M., 1994. Risk-taking, global diversification, and growth. American Economic Review
  84(5), 1310-1329.
Simon, H.A., Bonini, C.P., 1958. The size distribution of business firms. American Economic
  Review 48(4), 607-617.
Shin, H.S., 2014. Complexity and funding stability. Presentation at the OFR-FSOC Third Annual
  Conference.
Shin, H.S., Zhao, L.Y., 2013. Firms as surrogate intermediaries: evidence from emerging economies.
  Princeton University, mimeo.
Stein, J.C., 2003. Agency, information, and corporate investment. In Handbook the Economics of
  Finance. Vol. 1A, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), 111-165. Amsterdam: Elsevier.




                                                 32
                                         FIGURE 1. SIZE OF FINANCIAL SYSTEMS
This figure shows claims on the private sector (credit) by deposit money banks (and other financial institutions), domestic equity
market capitalization, and private bond market capitalization as a percentage of GDP between 1991 and 2011. The measures for
each type of financial market are calculated as the median across countries of the average across years for each country. The data
source is the Financial Development and Structure database of the World Bank.

                                                      A. Developed Economies
               120%                         117%
                                     107%

               100%

                              84%                                                  84%
                       81%
               80%                                                         75%

                                                                     64%
    % of GDP




               60%

                                                                                                                      41%
                                                           35%                                                 38%
               40%
                                                                                                        31%
                                                                                                  27%

               20%


                0%
                      Bank Claims on Private Sector        Equity Market Capitalization       Bond Market Capitalization


                                                      B. Emerging Economies
               100%

               90%

               80%

               70%
                                                                                   59%
               60%
   % of GDP




               50%

               40%                           36%                           37%
                              30%
               30%     28%            25%                            27%

               20%                                          17%
                                                                                                                       14%
                                                                                                                 9%
               10%                                                                                       5%
                                                                                                  2%
                0%
                      Bank Claims on Private Sector        Equity Market Capitalization           Bond Market Capitalization

                                         1991-1995       1996-2000     2001-2005      2006-2011
                                                                                    FIGURE 2. ISSUANCE ACTIVITY
This figure shows in panel A the median amount raised in equity and bond markets as a percentage of GDP. Panel B shows the
median number of issuing firms per year in equity and bond markets. Panel C shows the median amount raised by the top-5, top-
10, and top-20 issuers as a percentage of the total amount raised. All the measures are calculated as the median across countries of
the average across years by country. The data on bonds for China and India are available only for the period 2000-2011.


                                                                                                  A. Amount Raised
                                       3.5%

                                       3.0%

              % of GDP                 2.5%

                                       2.0%

                                       1.5%

                                       1.0%

                                       0.5%
                                                           0.7%        1.2%         0.9%            1.3%                          1.8%            2.7%            2.7%             3.1%
                                       0.0%                                         2001-2005




                                                                                                                                                  1996-2000



                                                                                                                                                                  2001-2005
                                                           1991-1995



                                                                       1996-2000




                                                                                                     2006-2011




                                                                                                                                   1991-1995




                                                                                                                                                                                   2006-2011
                                                                       Equity Markets                                  .                          Bond Markets

                                                                                            B. Number of Issuing Firms
                                                      30


                                                      25


                                                      20
                                  Number of Issuers




                                                      15


                                                      10


                                                       5

                                                            18          19            10               23                             27              21              16               22
                                                       0
                                                                                     2001-2005



                                                                                                      2006-2011




                                                                                                                                                                     2001-2005



                                                                                                                                                                                       2006-2011
                                                           1991-1995



                                                                        1996-2000




                                                                                                                                     1991-1995



                                                                                                                                                     1996-2000




                                                                        Equity Issuers                                     .                           Bond Issuers

                                                                         C. Concentration in Equity and Bond Markets
                                                                       Amount Raised by the Top-5, Top-10, and Top-20 Issuing Firms
                                  100%                                              1%
                                                           8%          7%           6%                7%
                                                                                                                                   10%             12%              11%               11%
                                         90%
                                                           14%         13%                          14%
                                         80%                                                                                       16%                              18%
                                                                                                                                                   19%                                21%
       % of Total Amount Raised




                                         70%

                                         60%

                                         50%
                                                                                    93%                                                                                                             debt
                                         40%               77%         78%                          78%
                                                                                                                                   70%                                                              debt
                                                                                                                                                   66%              69%               66%
                                         30%                                                                                                                                                        debt
                                                                                                                                                                                                    debt
                                         20%

                                         10%                                                                                                                                                        equity
                                                0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                    equity
                                                                                                                                                                                                    equity
                                                                                                      2006-2011




                                                                                                                                                                       2001-2005
                                                           1991-1995



                                                                       1996-2000



                                                                                     2001-2005




                                                                                                                                      1991-1995



                                                                                                                                                      1996-2000




                                                                                                                                                                                        2006-2011




                                                                                                                                                                                                    equity


                                                                       Equity Markets                                      .                          Bond Markets

                                                                                                 Top-5            Top-10       Top-20
                                          FIGURE 3. CONCENTRATION IN SALES AND AMOUNT RAISED
This figure shows in panel A the median concentration in sales for the top-5, top-10, and top-20 firms (using sales per year to define
the top firms). Panel B shows the median concentration in the amount raised in capital markets by the same set of top firms as in
panel A. Panel C shows the median concentration in sales for the top-5, top-10, and top-20 issuing firms (using amount raised per
year to define the top issuers). All the measures are calculated as the median across countries of the average across years by country.


                                                 A. Concentration in Sales by the Top Firms in Sales
                                                    Amount Sold by the Top-5, Top-10, and Top-20 Firms
                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%
                                                15%
                                   70%                                           15%                            16%
         % of Total Sales




                                   60%
                                                17%
                                                                                 16%                            15%
                                   50%

                                   40%

                                   30%
                                                49%
                                                                                 45%                            44%
                                   20%

                                   10%

                                    0%
                                              2003-2005                     2006-2008                        2009-2011

                                          B. Concentration in the Amount Raised by the Top Firms in Sales
                                                  Amount Raised by the Top-5, Top-10, and Top-20 Firms
                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%

                                   70%
        % of Total Amount Raised




                                   60%

                                   50%

                                   40%

                                   30%           6%

                                   20%          12%                                                             7%
                                                                                 9%
                                   10%                                           4%                             10%
                                                15%
                                                                                 9%                             7%
                                    0%
                                              2003-2005                     2006-2008                        2009-2011


                                                C. Concentration in Sales by the Top Issuing Firms
                                                Amount Sold by the Top-5, Top-10, and Top-20 Issuing Firms
                                   100%

                                   90%

                                   80%

                                   70%

                                   60%
          % of Total Sales




                                   50%

                                   40%

                                   30%

                                   20%
                                                                                                                3%
                                   10%                                           3%                             5%
                                                15%
                                                                                 9%                            10%
                                    0%
                                             2003-2005                      2006-2008                        2009-2011
                                                               Top-5    Top-10     Top-20
                                         FIGURE 4. FIRM SIZE DISTRIBUTION
This figure shows the estimated kernel distributions for firm size for issuing and non-issuing firms in 2003 and 2010. Panel A uses
the log of total assets as a proxy for size, whereas panels B and C use the log of sales and the log of the number of employees,
respectively. Issuing firms are those that raised capital through equity or bonds between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued equity or
bonds only in 2011 are excluded from this figure. Non-issuers are the other firms in our sample. Only firms with data in both 2003
and 2010 are included in this figure. The kernel type used is a Gaussian with a band-width of 1.5.

                                                         A. Total Assets




                                                             B. Sales




                                                   C. Number of Employees
                                   FIGURE 5. QUANTILE REGRESSION ESTIMATES
This figure shows the total growth rates between 2003 and 2010 implied by the estimated quantile regression coefficients for each
decile of the distribution of firm size. Dashed lines represent confidence intervals at the 95% statistical confidence level. Issuing
firms are those that raised capital through equity or bonds between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded
from this figure. Non-issuers are the other firms in our sample.

                                                                      A. Total Assets

                                    200%

                                    180%

                                    160%

                                    140%
          Total Growth 2003-2010




                                    120%

                                    100%

                                     80%

                                     60%

                                     40%

                                     20%

                                      0%
                                            1st   2nd       3rd       4th          5th           6th        7th    8th    9th
                                                                                  Decile



                                                                            B. Sales
                                    200%

                                    180%

                                    160%

                                    140%
          Total Growth 2003-2010




                                    120%

                                    100%

                                     80%

                                     60%

                                     40%

                                     20%

                                      0%
                                            1st   2nd       3rd       4th         5th           6th        7th    8th    9th
                                                                                 Decile



                                                                  C. Number of Employees

                                    100%
                                    100%

                                    80%
                                    80%
                        2003-2010




                                    60%
                                    60%
                     2003-2010




                                    40%
                                    40%
                 Growth
        Total Growth




                                    20%
                                    20%
      Cumulative




                                     0%
                                     0%

                                     -20%
                                    -20%

                                     -40%
                                    -40%
                                            1st
                                            1st   2nd
                                                  2nd      3rd
                                                           3rd       4th
                                                                     4th          5th
                                                                                  5th          6th
                                                                                               6th        7th
                                                                                                          7th     8th
                                                                                                                  8th    9th
                                                                                                                         9th
                                                                                 Decile
                                                                                Quantile

                                                        Growth of
                                                        Growth of Non-issuers
                                                                  Non-issuers              Growth of
                                                                                           Growth of Issuers
                                                                                                      Issuers
                                               FIGURE 6. EVENT STUDIES
This figure shows the difference (in percentage points, p.p.) in the average annual growth rate of total assets for issuers relative
to non-issuers for the 2003-2010 period. Time 0 represents the year of the first issuance for issuing firms. Issuing firms are
those that raised capital through equity or bonds between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from
this figure. Non-issuers are the other firms in our sample.

                                                                          A. 2004-2006 Issuers vs. Non-issuers
                                               35

                                               30
   Diff. Average Growth Rate per Year (p.p.)




                                               25

                                               20

                                               15

                                               10

                                                5

                                                0
                                                    -3              -2           -1               0           1           2                  3
                                               -5
                                                                                                Time
                                                         First Issuance          2004 Issuers          2005 Issuers           2006 Issuers


                                                                          B. 2007-2009 Issuers vs. Non-issuers

                                               35

                                               30
   Diff. Average Growth Rate per Year (p.p.)




                                               25

                                               20

                                               15

                                               10

                                                5

                                                0
                                                    -3              -2          -1               0           1        2                  3
                                               -5
                                                                                                Time
                                                         First Issuance         2007 Issuers           2008 Issuers       2009 Issuers
                                                                                              TABLE 1. FIRM CHARACTERISTICS
This table reports the median firm attributes for the 2003-2011 period. The firm attributes are calculated as the median across countries of the median firm per country. The firm-level data are averages across time per firm. The
table also reports the statistical significance of median tests for each group (in the different columns) vs. non-issuers (in the first column). Issuing firms are those with at least one capital raising issuance between 2003 and 2011.
Non-issuing firms are those that did not issue during this period. Firms classified as domestic issuers did not have any issuances abroad. Firms classified as foreign issuers could also have domestic issuances. Total assets and sales
are reported in thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.
                                                                                                                                            Domestic Equity            Domestic Bond           Foreign Equity          Foreign Bond
                                                   Non-issuers             Issuers            Equity Issuers          Bond Issuers             Issuers                    Issuers                  Issuers                Issuers
Total Assets                                            99,823             316,528   ***        255,701 ***            3,685,394 ***            230,066 ***              1,487,168 ***            318,051 ***           4,905,160 ***
Sales                                                   73,700             132,457   ***        114,015 **             1,011,641 ***            120,982 ***                531,643 ***            105,485 **            1,466,253 ***
Number of Employees                                        327                 705   ***             470 ***               3,080 ***                474 ***                  2,029 ***               1,300 ***              4,746 ***
Asset Growth                                            4.31%               9.29%    ***         10.48% ***               9.43% ***             10.05% ***                 10.09% ***              11.04% ***              8.87% ***
Sales Growth                                            5.48%               9.37%    ***          9.48% ***               8.68% ***              9.07% ***                  9.45% ***              11.80% ***              7.44% ***
Employee Growth                                         0.87%               4.44%    ***          4.97% ***               4.18% ***              4.56% ***                  3.73% ***               6.46% ***              4.25% ***
Leverage                                               49.36%              55.33%    ***         54.18% ***              60.55% ***             54.35% ***                 61.50% ***              53.66%                 60.40% ***
Long-term Debt/Total Liabilities                       14.75%              22.48%    ***         21.50% ***              36.29% ***             20.01% ***                 33.26% ***              19.96% ***             39.53% ***
Retained Earnings/Total Assets                          5.56%               6.05%    **           4.42% **                8.64% **               4.38% **                   9.01%                   3.65%                 10.45% **
ROA                                                     3.66%               3.59%                 3.06% **                4.00%                  3.07% **                   3.46%                   2.86% **               3.61%
Firm Age (in 2011)                                          26                  20   ***              19 ***                  32                     19 ***                     25                      17 ***                 35

Number of Firms                                           27,185            18,342                 16,198                   4,877                   14,849                     3,192                  1,349                  1,859
Percentage of Total Firms                                59.71%            40.29%                 35.58%                  10.71%                   32.62%                     7.01%                  2.96%                  4.08%
No. of Observations for Total Assets                     191,616           133,869                116,268                  40,059                  106,712                    25,936                  9,556                 15,347
                                                                                                  TABLE 2. PROBABILITY OF CAPITAL RAISING ACTIVITY
This table shows the marginal effects of Probit estimates of the probability of capital raising activity during the 2005-2011 period as a function of firm attributes in 2004. The first three columns use different measures for firm size and growth. Issuing firms that only
issued in 2003 and/or 2004 are dropped from the sample in this table. Total assets and sales are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                              Domestic Equity           Domestic Bond            Foreign Equity            Foreign Bond
                                                   All Issuers              All Issuers              All Issuers            Equity Issuers            Bond Issuers               Issuers                   Issuers                   Issuers                  Issuers

Proxy for Firm Size and Growth                     Total Assets                 Sales            Number of Employees           Total Assets             Total Assets              Total Assets             Total Assets             Total Assets              Total Assets

Independent Variables
 Size                                                  0.0660     ***            0.0502    ***            0.0461    ***            0.0105     ***            0.0739    ***            0.0305     ***           0.0633     ***           0.0058     ***            0.0299     ***
                                                       [0.002]                   [0.002]                  [0.003]                  [0.002]                   [0.002]                  [0.002]                  [0.002]                  [0.001]                   [0.002]
 Growth                                                0.0010     ***            0.0005    ***            0.0009    ***            0.0010     ***            0.0003    ***            0.0009     ***           0.0006     ***           0.0002     ***            0.0001     ***
                                                       [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]
 Leverage                                              0.0002     **             0.0000                  -0.0001                   0.0000                    0.0001    ***            0.0001     *             0.0001     **           -0.0001     *              0.0001     ***
                                                       [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]
 Long-term Debt/Total Liabilities                      0.0025     ***            0.0037    ***            0.0046    ***            0.0021     ***            0.0013    ***            0.0024     ***           0.0015     ***           0.0001                    0.0008     ***
                                                       [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]
 ROA                                                  -0.0040     ***           -0.0037    ***           -0.0039    ***           -0.0036     ***           -0.0018    ***           -0.0036     ***          -0.0025     ***          -0.0006     ***           -0.0003
                                                       [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]

Country Dummies                                           Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes

No. of Observations                                    16,177                    15,290                   10,840                   16,177                   15,966                    14,430                   10,462                     8,551                   10,009
Predicted Probability                                  43.3%                     43.8%                    46.5%                    33.9%                    18.4%                     35.0%                    17.6%                      5.0%                    10.5%
                                                                                                     TABLE 3. QUANTILE AND MEAN REGRESSIONS
This table reports quantile and mean regressions of firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, and an interaction term of these two dummies. The table also shows the average annual growth rates implied by these
estimates for issuing and non-issuing firms. The dependent variable pools the data on firm size at two points in time (2003 and 2010) for all firms with data in both years. Issuing firms are those that raised capital through equity or bonds between 2003 and 2010.
Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. Panel A uses total assets as a proxy for firm size, panel B uses sales, and panel C uses the number of employees. Total assets and sales are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars; number of employees is
in logs. All coefficients are reported in exponential form. Standard errors, shown in brackets, are bootstrapped (using 400 replications) and clustered at the firm-level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                                                                            A. Total Assets
                                                                                                                                           Quantile Regressions                                                                                              Mean
                                                                1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile          4th Decile        5th Decile       6th Decile                   7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile          Regression
Constant                                                           3,517 ***           6,607 ***          15,067 ***           32,302 ***        64,710 ***     119,101 ***                  207,537 ***          386,444 ***          893,746 ***          55,443 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                        [51]              [154]                [493]                [940]           [1,542]         [2,894]                      [4,370]              [8,202]             [24,998]             [1,083]
Issuer Dummy                                                       1.631 ***           2.919 ***            3.154 ***            3.349 ***         3.532 ***       4.031 ***                    4.915 ***            6.318 ***            9.468 ***           3.806 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)               [0.085]             [0.137]              [0.172]              [0.153]           [0.146]         [0.165]                      [0.195]              [0.271]              [0.573]             [0.138]
2010 Dummy                                                         1.118 ***           1.202 ***            1.253 ***            1.340 ***         1.362 ***       1.346 ***                    1.398 ***            1.480 ***            1.543 ***           1.340 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)              [0.021]             [0.040]              [0.059]              [0.057]           [0.050]         [0.050]                      [0.050]              [0.045]              [0.067]             [0.013]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                          2.145 ***           2.056 ***            1.936 ***            1.768 ***         1.620 ***       1.575 ***                    1.384 ***            1.245 ***            1.091               1.621 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)               [0.153]             [0.145]              [0.150]              [0.121]           [0.096]         [0.092]                      [0.083]              [0.078]              [0.091]             [0.027]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                     1.6%                 2.7%                 3.3%                 4.3%                 4.5%                 4.3%                 4.9%                 5.8%                 6.4%                 4.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                        13.3%                13.8%                13.5%                13.1%                12.0%                11.3%                 9.9%                 9.1%                 7.7%                11.7%

No. of Observations                                              47,596               47,596               47,596               47,596               47,596               47,596               47,596               47,596              47,596               47,596
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.09
                                                                                                                                B. Sales
                                                                                                                                             Quantile Regressions                                                                                            Mean
                                                                1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile           4th Decile         5th Decile       6th Decile                 7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile          Regression
Constant                                                           4,087 ***         14,039 ***           27,785 ***           49,968 ***          82,380 ***     134,784 ***                226,677 ***          396,938 ***          905,572 ***          66,412 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                      [251]               [522]                [962]              [1,586]             [2,279]         [4,111]                    [5,843]             [11,139]             [30,594]             [1,694]
Issuer Dummy                                                       1.240 **            1.300 ***            1.523 ***            1.755 ***           2.099 ***       2.491 ***                  3.136 ***            3.818 ***            4.903 ***           2.247 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)               [0.119]             [0.077]              [0.081]              [0.089]             [0.108]         [0.118]                    [0.149]              [0.197]              [0.301]             [0.092]
2010 Dummy                                                         1.275 ***           1.342 ***            1.492 ***            1.473 ***           1.536 ***       1.515 ***                  1.461 ***            1.461 ***            1.422 ***           1.425 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)              [0.108]             [0.070]              [0.069]              [0.068]             [0.061]         [0.063]                    [0.050]              [0.057]              [0.074]             [0.020]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                          1.954 ***           1.806 ***            1.572 ***            1.586 ***           1.413 ***       1.319 ***                  1.198 ***            1.161 **             1.057               1.465 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)               [0.248]             [0.152]              [0.116]              [0.112]             [0.097]         [0.084]                    [0.075]              [0.084]              [0.096]             [0.032]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                     3.5%                 4.3%                 5.9%                 5.7%                 6.3%                 6.1%                 5.6%                 5.6%                 5.2%                 5.2%
Average Growth of Issuers                                        13.9%                13.5%                13.0%                12.9%                11.7%                10.4%                 8.3%                 7.8%                 6.0%                11.1%

No. of Observations                                              31,404               31,404               31,404               31,404               31,404               31,404               31,404               31,404              31,404               31,404
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.05

                                                                                                                    C. Number of Employees
                                                                                                                                      Quantile Regressions                                                                                                   Mean
                                                                1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile      4th Decile       5th Decile       6th Decile                        7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile          Regression
Constant                                                              28 ***              91 ***              175 ***         290 ***           456 ***         718 ***                         1,121 ***            1,897 ***            4,057 ***             390 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                    [1.812]             [3.215]              [4.527]         [7.205]         [12.360]         [16.001]                          [31.407]             [59.715]            [158.317]             [9.298]
Issuer Dummy                                                       1.071               1.000                1.183 ***       1.483 ***         1.871 ***       2.315 ***                         2.927 ***            3.637 ***            4.962 ***           2.037 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)               [0.087]             [0.061]              [0.069]         [0.070]           [0.112]         [0.122]                           [0.142]              [0.217]              [0.382]             [0.084]
2010 Dummy                                                         0.893               0.989                1.000           1.045             1.018           1.014                             1.051                1.070 *              1.143 **            1.021 *
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)              [0.091]             [0.056]              [0.043]         [0.036]           [0.039]         [0.037]                           [0.039]              [0.043]              [0.066]             [0.012]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                          1.680 ***           1.611 ***            1.609 ***       1.485 ***         1.469 ***       1.448 ***                         1.342 ***            1.251 ***            1.087               1.417 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)               [0.225]             [0.150]              [0.138]         [0.105]           [0.122]         [0.109]                           [0.095]              [0.100]              [0.117]             [0.026]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                     -1.6%                -0.2%                 0.0%                0.6%                 0.3%                 0.2%                 0.7%                 1.0%                 1.9%                 0.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                          6.0%                 6.9%                 7.0%                6.5%                 5.9%                 5.6%                 5.0%                 4.3%                 3.1%                 5.4%

No. of Observations                                              24,996               24,996               24,996               24,996               24,996               24,996               24,996               24,996              24,996               24,996
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.04
              TABLE 4. TOTAL GROWTH DIFFERENTIAL AND INTER-QUANTILE EQUALITY TESTS
This table reports the total growth differential between selected deciles (in percentage points) implied by the coefficient estimates shown in
Table 3, separately for non-issuing firms, issuing firms, and the relative growth between issuing and non-issuing firms. The table also
reports the statistical significance of inter-quantile equality tests. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively. D1 denotes the 1st decile, D2 the 2nd decile, and so forth.

                                                 A. Total Assets (Percentage Points)
                                          D5-D1             D6-D2            D7-D3                       D8-D4                D9-D5
Growth of Non-issuers                       24.4 ***          14.4 ***         14.5 **                     14.0 **              18.1 ***
Growth of Issuers                          -19.2             -35.0 **         -49.1 ***                   -52.7 ***            -52.3 ***
Growth of Issuers Minus
                                           -52.5 ***            -48.1 ***            -55.2 ***             -52.3 ***            -52.9 ***
Growth of Non-issuers


                                                    B. Sales (Percentage Points)
                                          D5-D1             D6-D2           D7-D3                        D8-D4                D9-D5
Growth of Non-issuers                       26.1 **           17.3 **          -3.1                        -1.2                -11.4
Growth of Issuers                          -32.2             -42.7 ***       -59.5 ***                    -63.9 ***            -66.5 ***
Growth of Issuers Minus
                                           -54.1 ***            -48.7 ***            -37.4 ***             -42.5 ***            -35.6 ***
Growth of Non-issuers


                                          C. Number of Employees (Percentage Points)
                                          D5-D1         D6-D2           D7-D3                            D8-D4                D9-D5
Growth of Non-issuers                      12.5            2.5             5.1                              2.5                 12.5 *
Growth of Issuers                          -0.5          -12.5           -19.9 *                          -21.3 **             -25.2 **
Growth of Issuers Minus
                                           -21.1                -16.3                -26.7 **              -23.4 **             -38.2 ***
Growth of Non-issuers
                                                                                          TABLE 5. 2003-2010 GROWTH AS A FUNCTION OF INITIAL SIZE
This table reports mean regressions of total firm growth between 2003 and 2010 on a dummy that equals one for companies that issued between 2003 and 2010, and zero otherwise. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. The regressions are
estimated separately for each decile of the distribution of firm size according to their size in 2003. The deciles are calculated by pooling all countries together. Mean regressions for the whole sample of firms are reported in the last column of each panel. Robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                                                                           A. Total Assets
                                                                                                                                  Inter-decile Range
                                              <1st               1st-2nd             2nd-3rd              3rd-4th             4th-5th            5th-6th                6th-7th              7th-8th              8th-9th                >9th             All Firms
Issuer Dummy                                  1.233 ***            0.820 ***           0.695 ***            0.495 ***           0.453 ***         0.550 ***               0.460 ***            0.401 ***            0.300 ***            0.168 ***           0.483 ***
                                            [0.160]              [0.105]             [0.081]              [0.058]             [0.047]           [0.041]                 [0.037]              [0.032]              [0.030]              [0.034]             [0.017]

Country Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes

No. of Observations                           2,379               2,380                2,380                2,380                2,380               2,380                2,380                2,380               2,380                2,379               23,798
R-squared                                      0.20                0.16                 0.13                 0.12                 0.14                0.16                 0.16                 0.18                0.21                 0.21                 0.09

                                                                                                                                B. Sales
                                                                                                                                   Inter-decile Range
                                              <1st               1st-2nd             2nd-3rd              3rd-4th              4th-5th            5th-6th               6th-7th              7th-8th              8th-9th                >9th             All Firms
Issuer Dummy                                  1.429 ***            0.652 ***           0.463 ***            0.560 ***            0.435 ***         0.429 ***              0.392 ***            0.303 ***            0.229 ***            0.041               0.436 ***
                                            [0.157]              [0.080]             [0.069]              [0.058]              [0.056]           [0.049]                [0.043]              [0.040]              [0.042]              [0.035]             [0.021]

Country Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes

No. of Observations                           1,569               1,571                1,570                1,571                1,570               1,570                1,571                1,570               1,570                1,570               15,702
R-squared                                      0.13                0.08                 0.07                 0.14                 0.11                0.13                 0.15                 0.16                0.17                 0.17                 0.06

                                                                                                                    C. Number of Employees
                                                                                                                              Inter-decile Range
                                              <1st               1st-2nd             2nd-3rd              3rd-4th         4th-5th            5th-6th                    6th-7th              7th-8th              8th-9th                >9th             All Firms
Issuer Dummy                                  0.518 ***            0.398 ***           0.282 ***            0.292 ***       0.263 ***         0.335 ***                   0.317 ***            0.370 ***            0.208 ***            0.190 ***           0.290 ***
                                            [0.097]              [0.067]             [0.059]              [0.060]         [0.055]           [0.056]                     [0.047]              [0.047]              [0.046]              [0.065]             [0.019]

Country Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes

No. of Observations                           1,233               1,251                1,263                1,251                1,250               1,249                1,252                1,250               1,250                1,249               12,498
R-squared                                      0.08                0.14                 0.11                 0.16                 0.09                0.13                 0.14                 0.14                0.11                 0.09                 0.05
              TABLE 6. EVENT STUDY OF FIRMS DYNAMICS AROUND ISSUANCE ACTIVITY
This table reports panel regressions of firm attributes on a seven-year window around the capital raising issuances that took
place between 2003 and 2011. The seven-year windows are captured by a dummy variable for the issuance year, three dummies
for the three preceding years, and three dummies for the three subsequent years. The regressions include firms with no
issuances as part of the control group. Total assets and sales are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars; number of
employees is in logs. Standard errors, shown in brackets, are clustered at the country level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                 A. Regressions in Levels
                                                                                                              Number of
                                                       Total Assets                   Sales                   Employees
Issuance year - 3                                            0.371 **                   0.229                     0.220    ***
                                                           [0.142]                    [0.146]                   [0.081]
Issuance year - 2                                            0.454 ***                  0.343    **               0.266    ***
                                                           [0.163]                    [0.152]                   [0.084]
Issuance year - 1                                            0.519 ***                  0.378    ***              0.322    ***
                                                           [0.145]                    [0.124]                   [0.077]
Issuance year                                                0.939 ***                  0.627    ***              0.622    ***
                                                           [0.142]                    [0.095]                   [0.095]
Issuance year + 1                                            0.999 ***                  0.705    ***              0.683    ***
                                                           [0.144]                    [0.099]                   [0.103]
Issuance year + 2                                            1.072 ***                     0.8   ***              0.756    ***
                                                           [0.165]                    [0.113]                   [0.121]
Issuance year + 3                                            1.116 ***                  0.867    ***               0.79    ***
                                                           [0.187]                    [0.130]                   [0.144]
Constant                                                  12.048 ***                  11.915     ***              6.175    ***
                                                          [0.044]                     [0.036]                   [0.033]

Country Fixed Effects                                         Yes                         Yes                        Yes
Country Fixed Effects x Time Trend                            Yes                         Yes                        Yes

No. of Observations                                       208,676                    138,365                    107,247
R-squared                                                    0.25                       0.18                       0.08
                                                 B. Growth Regressions
                                                                                                              Number of
                                                       Total Assets                   Sales                   Employees
Issuance year - 3                                           8.433 ***                   7.351    ***              6.971    ***
                                                          [0.903]                     [1.966]                   [0.934]
Issuance year - 2                                           8.002 ***                   8.894    ***              5.021    ***
                                                          [1.341]                     [2.388]                   [1.080]
Issuance year - 1                                           8.649 ***                   7.473    ***              5.748    ***
                                                          [2.058]                     [2.282]                   [1.073]
Issuance year                                              22.677 ***                   11.35    ***              8.172    ***
                                                          [3.083]                     [1.580]                   [0.868]
Issuance year + 1                                           8.193 ***                   8.762    ***               6.53    ***
                                                          [1.617]                     [0.941]                   [1.015]
Issuance year + 2                                           4.315 ***                    5.44    ***              4.582    ***
                                                          [0.716]                     [1.244]                   [0.483]
Issuance year + 3                                           4.244 ***                   5.743    ***              3.446    ***
                                                          [1.175]                     [1.081]                   [1.052]
Constant                                                    3.375 ***                   5.278    ***              2.043    ***
                                                          [0.283]                     [0.358]                   [0.227]

Country Fixed Effects                                         Yes                         Yes                        Yes
Country Fixed Effects x Time Trend                            Yes                         Yes                        Yes

No. of Observations                                       183,463                    121,803                      92,721
R-squared                                                    0.03                       0.01                        0.01
                                                              TABLE 7. QUANTILE AND MEAN REGRESSIONS
This table reports quantile and mean regressions of total assets as a proxy for firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, and an interaction
term of these two dummies. The dependent variable pools the data on total assets at two points in time (2003 and 2010) for all firms with data in both years. Issuing firms are those that
raised capital through equity (panel A) or bonds (panel B) between 2003 and 2010. Issuers are also split into domestic and foreign (panels C and D, respectively) according to whether
they issued in the country of their domicile or not. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. See the main text for more details. Total assets are in logs of thousands
of 2011 U.S. dollars. All coefficients are reported in exponential form. Standard errors, shown in brackets, are bootstrapped (using 400 replications) and clustered at the firm-level. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                                    A. Equity Issuers
                                                                                                   Quantile Regressions                                                        Mean
                                                                 1st Decile          3rd Decile        5th Decile       7th Decile                      9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                            3,517 ***          15,067 ***         64,710 ***     207,537 ***                     893,746 ***           55,443 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                    [51.629]                [439]           [1,502]          [4,458]                       [23,565]              [1,083]
Issuer Dummy                                                        1.169 **             2.048 ***         2.046 ***        2.696 ***                       5.597 ***           2.390 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                [0.077]              [0.100]           [0.083]          [0.136]                         [0.338]             [0.092]
2010 Dummy                                                          1.118 ***            1.253 ***         1.362 ***        1.398 ***                       1.543 ***           1.340 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)               [0.023]              [0.058]           [0.045]          [0.046]                         [0.063]             [0.013]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                           2.313 ***            1.974 ***         1.729 ***        1.595 ***                       1.239 **            1.746 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                [0.182]              [0.149]           [0.101]          [0.104]                         [0.103]             [0.033]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                       1.6%                  3.3%                  4.5%                  4.9%                  6.4%                  4.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                          14.5%                 13.8%                 13.0%                 12.1%                  9.7%                 12.9%

No. of Observations                                               44,302                44,302                44,302                44,302                44,302                44,302
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                         0.05

                                                                                     B. Bond Issuers
                                                                                                    Quantile Regressions                                                       Mean
                                                                 1st Decile           3rd Decile        5th Decile       7th Decile                     9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                            3,517 ***           15,067 ***         64,710 ***     207,537 ***                    893,746 ***           55,443 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                         [48]                [430]           [1,434]          [4,355]                      [26,179]              [1,083]
Issuer Dummy                                                       14.914 ***           31.903 ***         22.931 ***      22.989 ***                     28.498 ***           22.941 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                [1.874]               [1.839]           [1.107]          [1.206]                        [1.923]             [1.066]
2010 Dummy                                                          1.118 ***             1.253 ***         1.362 ***        1.398 ***                      1.543 ***           1.340 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)               [0.023]               [0.059]           [0.047]          [0.049]                        [0.069]             [0.013]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                           2.432 ***             1.736 ***         1.410 ***        1.231 ***                      1.006               1.457 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                [0.429]               [0.135]           [0.090]          [0.087]                        [0.095]             [0.029]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                       1.6%                  3.3%                  4.5%                  4.9%                  6.4%                  4.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                          15.4%                 11.7%                  9.8%                  8.1%                  6.5%                 10.0%

No. of Observations                                               36,666                36,666                36,666                36,666                36,666                36,666
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                         0.24

                                                                                   C. Domestic Issuers
                                                                                                    Quantile Regressions                                                       Mean
                                                                 1st Decile           3rd Decile        5th Decile       7th Decile                     9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                            3,517 ***           15,067 ***         64,710 ***     207,537 ***                    893,746 ***           55,443 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                         [51]                [468]           [1,581]          [4,702]                      [23,770]              [1,083]
Issuer Dummy                                                        1.322 ***             2.355 ***         2.278 ***        2.862 ***                      4.518 ***           2.466 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                [0.080]               [0.118]           [0.102]          [0.138]                        [0.288]             [0.092]
2010 Dummy                                                          1.118 ***             1.253 ***         1.362 ***        1.398 ***                      1.543 ***           1.340 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)               [0.024]               [0.065]           [0.050]          [0.049]                        [0.061]             [0.013]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                           2.124 ***             1.836 ***         1.624 ***        1.402 ***                      1.175 *             1.585 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                [0.169]               [0.145]           [0.105]          [0.089]                        [0.103]             [0.029]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                       1.6%                  3.3%                  4.5%                  4.9%                  6.4%                  4.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                          13.2%                 12.6%                 12.0%                 10.1%                  8.9%                 11.4%

No. of Observations                                               43,820                43,820                43,820                43,820                43,820                43,820
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                         0.05
                                                                                    D. Foreign Issuers
                                                                                                      Quantile Regressions                                                     Mean
                                                                 1st Decile           3rd Decile          5th Decile       7th Decile                   9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                            3,517 ***           15,067 ***           64,710 ***     207,537 ***                  893,746 ***           55,443 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                         [50]                [416]             [1,423]          [4,491]                    [24,076]              [1,083]
Issuer Dummy                                                        5.095 ***           26.234 ***           26.871 ***      29.454 ***                   47.104 ***           21.326 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                [0.832]               [2.822]             [2.254]          [2.379]                      [4.821]             [1.656]
2010 Dummy                                                          1.118 ***             1.253 ***           1.362 ***        1.398 ***                    1.543 ***           1.340 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)               [0.023]               [0.056]             [0.046]          [0.050]                      [0.062]             [0.013]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                           3.808 ***             2.199 ***           1.452 ***        1.352 ***                    1.089               1.802 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                [0.838]               [0.340]             [0.158]          [0.140]                      [0.162]             [0.061]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                       1.6%                  3.3%                  4.5%                  4.9%                  6.4%                  4.3%
Average Growth of Issuers                                          23.0%                 15.6%                 10.2%                  9.5%                  7.7%                 13.4%

No. of Observations                                               32,678                32,678                32,678                32,678                32,678                32,678
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                         0.16
                                 TABLE 8. EQUITY MARKET FINANCING: QUANTILE AND MEAN REGRESSIONS BY COUNTRY GROUP
This table reports quantile and mean regressions of total assets as a proxy for firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, and an interaction term of these
two dummies. The dependent variable pools the data on total assets at two points in time (2003 and 2010) for all firms with data in both years. Issuing firms are those that raised capital in equity
markets between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. Non-issuers include firms that did not issue (equity or bonds) in our sample. The table presents separately
the results for bank-based developed economies (panel A), market-based developed economies (panel B), and emerging economies (panel C). Total assets are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars.
All coefficients are reported in exponential form. Standard errors, shown in brackets, are bootstrapped (using 400 replications) and clustered at the firm-level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                             A. Bank-based Developed Economies
                                                                                                    Quantile Regressions                                                                 Mean
                                                                 1st Decile          3rd Decile         5th Decile                      7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                              3,619 ***           7,282 ***         40,357 ***                    203,765 ***           1,004,107 ***             48,504 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                           [45]              [221]            [2,717]                         [8,393]                [44,838]                [1,542]
Issuer Dummy                                                          5.047 ***         14.100 ***           8.054 ***                       5.754 ***              13.335 ***              7.976 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                  [0.428]             [1.091]            [0.751]                         [0.533]                 [1.719]               [0.540]
2010 Dummy                                                            1.077 ***           1.128 ***          1.129                           1.143 **                1.277 ***              1.156 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                 [0.018]             [0.046]            [0.111]                         [0.063]                 [0.095]                [0.011]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                             1.537 ***           1.411 ***          1.334 **                        1.307 **                1.121                  1.372 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                  [0.177]             [0.153]            [0.176]                         [0.176]                 [0.224]                [0.032]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                         1.1%                   1.7%                    1.7%                    1.9%                    3.6%                   2.1%
Average Growth of Issuers                                             7.5%                   6.9%                    6.0%                    5.9%                    5.3%                   6.8%

No. of Observations                                                 14,378                  14,378                  14,378                 14,378                  14,378                  14,378
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                    0.14

                                                                            B. Market-based Developed Economies
                                                                                                     Quantile Regressions                                                                Mean
                                                                 1st Decile           3rd Decile         5th Decile                     7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                              4,412 ***          37,321 ***        122,467 ***                    348,494 ***           1,349,377 ***            91,047 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                         [497]              [1,728]            [4,380]                      [14,300]                 [62,560]               [3,544]
Issuer Dummy                                                          0.477 ***            0.446 ***          0.661 ***                      1.393 ***               3.183 ***             0.962
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                  [0.068]              [0.034]            [0.048]                        [0.093]                 [0.287]               [0.060]
2010 Dummy                                                            1.141                1.218 ***          1.226 ***                      1.364 ***               1.398 ***             1.260 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                 [0.172]              [0.086]            [0.066]                        [0.080]                 [0.110]               [0.027]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                             2.245 ***            2.309 ***          2.292 ***                      1.675 ***               1.289 **              1.940 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                  [0.438]              [0.265]            [0.230]                        [0.155]                 [0.164]               [0.066]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                        1.9%                    2.9%                    3.0%                    4.5%                    4.9%                   3.4%
Average Growth of Issuers                                           14.4%                   15.9%                   15.9%                   12.5%                    8.8%                  13.6%

No. of Observations                                                 16,890                  16,890                  16,890                 16,890                  16,890                  16,890
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                    0.02

                                                                                     C. Emerging Economies
                                                                                                       Quantile Regressions                                                              Mean
                                                                 1st Decile             3rd Decile         5th Decile                   7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                              2,627 ***            16,560 ***          47,911 ***                 136,635 ***             464,069 ***            41,041 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                         [166]                  [587]            [2,049]                      [4,803]               [20,727]                [1,238]
Issuer Dummy                                                          3.023 ***              2.195 ***          2.175 ***                    2.201 ***               5.259 ***              2.83 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                  [0.293]                [0.143]            [0.155]                      [0.159]                 [0.560]               [0.181]
2010 Dummy                                                            1.352 ***              1.486 ***          1.696 ***                    1.719 ***               2.254 ***              1.67 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                 [0.140]                [0.080]            [0.098]                      [0.079]                 [0.138]               [0.028]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                             1.761 ***              1.776 ***          1.937 ***                    2.402 ***               1.589 ***              1.89 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                  [0.266]                [0.199]            [0.197]                      [0.263]                 [0.235]               [0.061]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                        4.4%                    5.8%                    7.8%                    8.0%                  12.3%                    7.6%
Average Growth of Issuers                                           13.2%                   14.9%                   18.5%                   22.5%                  20.0%                   17.8%

No. of Observations                                                 13,034                  13,034                  13,034                 13,034                  13,034                  13,034
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                    0.09
                                     TABLE 9. BOND MARKET FINANCING: QUANTILE AND MEAN REGRESSIONS BY COUNTRY GROUP
This table reports quantile and mean regressions of total assets as a proxy for firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, and an interaction term of these
two dummies. The dependent variable pools the data on total assets at two points in time (2003 and 2010) for all firms with data in both years. Issuing firms are those that raised capital through
bonds markets between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. Non-issuers include firms that did not issue (equity or bonds) in our sample. The table presents
separate results for bank-based developed economies (panel A), market-based developed economies (panel B), and emerging economies (panel C). Total assets are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S.
dollars. All coefficients are reported in exponential form. Standard errors, shown in brackets, are bootstrapped (using 400 replications) and clustered at the firm-level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                               A. Bank-based Developed Economies
                                                                                                       Quantile Regressions                                                                 Mean
                                                                   1st Decile           3rd Decile         5th Decile                      7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                                3,619 ***            7,282 ***         40,357 ***                    203,765 ***           1,004,107 ***            48,504 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                             [44]               [225]            [2,686]                         [8,397]                [43,122]               [1,542]
Issuer Dummy                                                          43.598 ***          138.941 ***          74.131 ***                     47.308 ***               46.558 ***           59.753 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                    [5.424]            [13.091]             [7.770]                         [5.944]                 [5.784]               [4.810]
2010 Dummy                                                              1.077 ***            1.128 ***          1.129                           1.143 **                1.277 ***             1.156 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                   [0.018]              [0.050]            [0.120]                         [0.066]                 [0.094]               [0.011]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                               1.098                1.092              1.227                           1.308                   1.097                 1.183 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                    [0.232]              [0.136]            [0.193]                         [0.222]                 [0.211]               [0.026]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                          1.1%                    1.7%                     1.7%                    1.9%                    3.6%                    2.1%
Average Growth of Issuers                                              2.4%                    3.0%                     4.8%                    5.9%                    4.9%                    4.6%

No. of Observations                                                   12,686                  12,686                  12,686                  12,686                  12,686                  12,686
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                       0.29

                                                                             B. Market-based Developed Economies
                                                                                                      Quantile Regressions                                                                  Mean
                                                                   1st Decile          3rd Decile         5th Decile                       7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                                4,412 ***         37,321 ***        122,467 ***                      348,494 ***           1,349,377 ***            91,047 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                           [485]             [1,629]            [4,429]                        [14,027]                 [58,020]               [3,544]
Issuer Dummy                                                            4.016 ***         14.460 ***          13.498 ***                      13.645 ***               18.814 ***           12.010 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                    [0.896]             [1.485]            [1.022]                          [0.996]                 [1.832]               [0.900]
2010 Dummy                                                              1.141               1.218 ***          1.226 ***                        1.364 ***               1.398 ***             1.260 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                   [0.166]             [0.087]            [0.069]                          [0.083]                 [0.102]               [0.027]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                               2.636 ***           1.509 ***          1.358 ***                        1.171                   0.976                 1.470 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                    [0.844]             [0.202]            [0.131]                          [0.121]                 [0.123]               [0.051]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                          1.9%                    2.9%                     3.0%                    4.5%                    4.9%                    3.4%
Average Growth of Issuers                                             17.0%                    9.1%                     7.6%                    6.9%                    4.5%                    9.2%

No. of Observations                                                   12,764                  12,764                  12,764                  12,764                  12,764                  12,764
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                       0.18

                                                                                      C. Emerging Economies
                                                                                                        Quantile Regressions                                                                Mean
                                                                   1st Decile            3rd Decile         5th Decile                     7th Decile              9th Decile             Regression
Constant                                                                2,627 ***           16,560 ***          47,911 ***                   136,635 ***             464,069 ***            41,041 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                           [152]                 [618]            [2,035]                        [4,660]               [20,065]                [1,238]
Issuer Dummy                                                          29.856 ***            16.023 ***          13.952 ***                    12.442 ***              17.063 ***            17.430 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                    [3.836]               [1.198]            [1.458]                        [1.311]                 [2.234]               [1.276]
2010 Dummy                                                              1.352 ***             1.486 ***          1.696 ***                      1.719 ***               2.254 ***             1.673 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                   [0.135]               [0.084]            [0.092]                        [0.081]                 [0.136]               [0.028]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                               2.467 ***             2.359 ***          1.984 ***                      1.997 ***               1.374 *               1.997 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                    [0.540]               [0.263]            [0.276]                        [0.297]                 [0.261]               [0.072]

Average Growth of Non-issuers                                          4.4%                    5.8%                    7.8%                    8.0%                    12.3%                    7.6%
Average Growth of Issuers                                             18.8%                   19.6%                   18.9%                   19.3%                    17.5%                   18.8%

No. of Observations                                                   11,216                  11,216                  11,216                  11,216                  11,216                  11,216
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                       0.24
                                                                                                               TABLE 10. MEAN REGRESSIONS CONTROLLING FOR FIRM AGE
This table reports in panel A mean regressions of firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, an interaction term of these two dummies, and a variable for firm age. The dependent variable pools the data on firm size at two points in time (2003 and 2010) for all
firms with data in both years. All coefficients in this panel are reported in exponential form. Panel B reports regressions of firm growth between 2003 and 2010 on a dummy variable for issuing firms, a variable for firm age, and a variable for firm size in 2003. All regressions in this panel include country
fixed effects. For both panels in this table, the issuer dummy equals one for companies that issued between 2003 and 2010, and zero otherwise. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from the sample. The headings in each column indicate the type of issuer and the proxy for firm size used in the
regression estimates. Total assets and sales are in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars; number of employees is in logs. Robust standard errors, shown in brackets, are clustered at firm level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.


                                                                                                                                           A. Regressions in Levels
                                                                                        Whole Sample                                        Bank-based Developed Economies                          Market-based Developed Economies                                 Emerging Economies
                                                                 All Issuers             All Issuers                All Issuers            Equity Issuers         Bond Issuers                     Equity Issuers        Bond Issuers                         Equity Issuers       Bond Issuers
Proxy for Firm Size                                              Total Assets                 Sales            Number of Employees            Total Assets               Total Assets                Total Assets                  Total Assets                  Total Assets                  Total Assets

Constant                                                             18,650     ***           24,736    ***                 207    ***           13,062    ***              13,732    ***              27,150    ***                 33,395    ***               31,309    ***                   34,955    ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003)                                          [556]                  [1,037]                        [7]                   [740]                      [838]                    [1,609]                       [1,951]                     [1,568]                         [1,681]
Issuer Dummy                                                           3.642    ***             2.396   ***               2.027    ***             5.165   ***              23.018    ***                1.267   ***                 11.964    ***                 2.792   ***                   15.905    ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003)                   [0.124]                  [0.093]                   [0.081]                  [0.340]                    [2.192]                    [0.078]                       [0.883]                     [0.177]                         [1.146]
2010 Dummy                                                             1.328    ***             1.424   ***               1.024    *               1.151   ***                1.151   ***                1.231   ***                   1.231   ***                 1.668   ***                     1.668   ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010)                  [0.013]                  [0.021]                   [0.013]                  [0.011]                    [0.011]                    [0.028]                       [0.028]                     [0.028]                         [0.028]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                              1.638    ***             1.467   ***               1.413    ***             1.376   ***                1.185   ***                2.001   ***                   1.497   ***                 1.887   ***                     2.023   ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers)                   [0.028]                  [0.032]                   [0.026]                  [0.033]                    [0.026]                    [0.070]                       [0.054]                     [0.061]                         [0.072]
Firm Age (in 2011)                                                     1.029    ***             1.024   ***               1.015    ***             1.034   ***                1.033   ***                1.028   ***                   1.023   ***                 1.009   ***                     1.006   ***
                                                                     [0.001]                  [0.001]                   [0.001]                  [0.002]                    [0.002]                    [0.001]                       [0.001]                     [0.001]                         [0.001]

No. of Observations                                                  46,048                    30,634                   23,944                   14,156                     12,508                      15,892                       11,938                      12,794                          10,976
R-squared                                                              0.22                      0.15                     0.10                     0.39                       0.50                        0.12                         0.27                        0.10                            0.24

                                                                                                                                           B. Growth Regressions
                                                                                        Whole Sample                                        Bank-based Developed Economies                          Market-based Developed Economies                                 Emerging Economies
                                                                 All Issuers             All Issuers                All Issuers            Equity Issuers       Bond Issuers                       Equity Issuers        Bond Issuers                         Equity Issuers       Bond Issuers
Proxy for Firm Growth                                            Total Assets                 Sales            Number of Employees            Total Assets               Total Assets                Total Assets                  Total Assets                  Total Assets                  Total Assets

Issuer Dummy                                                           0.637 ***                0.569 ***                 0.368 ***                0.350 ***                  0.319 ***                  0.712 ***                     0.772 ***                   0.786 ***                       1.021 ***
                                                                     [0.019]                  [0.022]                   [0.019]                  [0.026]                    [0.031]                    [0.035]                       [0.047]                     [0.034]                         [0.063]
Firm Age (in 2011)                                                     0.000 *                  0.000                    -0.001 ***                0.000                      0.000                      0.001 **                      0.000                       0.001                           0.001
                                                                     [0.000]                  [0.000]                   [0.000]                  [0.000]                    [0.000]                    [0.000]                       [0.000]                     [0.001]                         [0.001]
Total Assets in 2003                                                  -0.135 ***                                                                  -0.064 ***                 -0.051 ***                 -0.179 ***                    -0.142 ***                  -0.105 ***                      -0.109 ***
                                                                     [0.007]                                                                     [0.008]                    [0.009]                    [0.011]                       [0.013]                     [0.018]                         [0.022]
Total Sales in 2003                                                                            -0.171 ***
                                                                                              [0.009]
Total Number of Employees in 2003                                                                                        -0.102 ***
                                                                                                                        [0.006]

Country Fixed Effects                                                    Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes                         Yes                           Yes                        Yes                              Yes

No. of Observations                                                  23,024                    15,317                   11,972                     7,078                     6,254                       7,946                         5,969                      6,397                            5,488
R-squared                                                              0.15                      0.15                     0.10                      0.11                      0.09                        0.16                          0.11                       0.12                             0.12
                                                                                                 TABLE 11. QUANTILE AND MEAN REGRESSIONS CONTROLLING FOR FIRM AGE
This table reports quantile and mean regressions for total assets as a proxy for firm size on a constant, a dummy variable for 2010, a dummy variable for issuing firms, and an interaction term of these two dummies. The dependent variable pools the data on firm size at two points in time
(2003 and 2010) for all firms with data in both years. Issuing firms are those that raised capital through equity or bonds between 2003 and 2010. Firms that issued only in 2011 are excluded from this table. The sample of firms vary in the different panels: panel A comprises young firms
(younger than 10 years old in 2011), panel B comprises mature firms (10-30 years old in 2011), and panel C comprises old firms (31 years old or older in 2011). Total assets is in logs of thousands of 2011 U.S. dollars. All coefficients are reported in exponential form. Standard errors, shown
in brackets, are bootstrapped (using 400 replications) and clustered at the firm-level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                                                                                                                         A. Young firms
                                                                                                                                                                      Quantile Regressions                                                                                            Mean
                                                                                        1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile           4th Decile          5th Decile       6th Decile                7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                                                   3,236 ***           3,736 ***            3,900 ***            4,363 ***           5,166 ***        6,646 ***                 9,633 ***           21,130 ***           72,192 ***            8,267 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003 for Young Firms)                                                [97]                [33]                 [31]                                    [153]           [330]                     [449]              [2,268]             [18,793]                [498]
Issuer Dummy                                                                               0.298 ***           1.433 **             3.556 ***             6.586   ***       10.960 ***       21.268 ***                42.916 ***           69.117 ***           83.320 ***            8.855 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003 for Young Firms)                       [0.090]             [0.244]              [0.532]               [0.763]            [1.590]          [3.610]                  [11.663]             [15.995]             [27.500]              [1.296]
2010 Dummy                                                                                 1.060 *             1.066 ***            1.153 ***             1.213   ***        1.288 ***        1.306 ***                 1.392 ***            1.357 *              2.928 ***            1.428 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010 for Young Firms)                      [0.034]             [0.016]              [0.021]               [0.043]            [0.071]          [0.085]                   [0.124]              [0.228]              [1.083]              [0.056]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                                                  8.280 ***           3.956 ***            3.438 ***             3.573   ***        3.724 ***        3.362 ***                 2.458 ***            2.061 **             0.644                2.748 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers for Young Firms)                       [3.029]             [0.990]              [0.761]               [0.709]            [0.837]          [0.830]                   [0.790]              [0.649]              [0.300]              [0.226]

Average Growth of Young Non-issuers                                                       0.8%                 0.9%                 2.1%                 2.8%                 3.7%                 3.9%                 4.8%                 4.5%                 16.6%                 5.2%
Average Growth of Young Issuers                                                          36.4%                22.8%                21.7%                23.3%                25.1%                23.5%                19.2%                15.8%                  9.5%                21.6%

No. of Observations                                                                       3,654                3,654                3,654                3,654                3,654                3,654                3,654                3,654                 3,654                3,654
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.22

                                                                                                                                        B. Mature Firms
                                                                                                                                                                     Quantile Regressions                                                                                             Mean
                                                                                        1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile           4th Decile         5th Decile       6th Decile                 7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                                                   2,611 ***           4,565 ***            8,137 ***           15,812 ***         31,008 ***       60,291 ***               111,899 ***          208,103 ***           466,172 ***          30,296 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003 for Mature Firms)                                               [71]              [132]                [238]                [591]            [1,089]          [2,198]                    [3,644]              [5,298]             [16,351]                [812]
Issuer Dummy                                                                               1.170 **            1.954 ***            2.501 ***            2.522 ***          2.432 ***        2.548 ***                  2.919 ***            3.829 ***             5.394 ***           2.665 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003 for Mature Firms)                      [0.077]             [0.120]              [0.150]              [0.143]            [0.141]          [0.156]                    [0.183]              [0.267]               [0.340]             [0.132]
2010 Dummy                                                                                 1.208 ***           1.156 ***            1.215 ***            1.297 ***          1.350 ***        1.356 ***                  1.433 ***            1.597 ***             1.774 ***           1.375 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010 for Mature Firms)                     [0.047]             [0.048]              [0.060]              [0.086]            [0.070]          [0.073]                    [0.070]              [0.084]               [0.093]             [0.020]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                                                  1.955 ***           2.223 ***            2.084 ***            2.029 ***          2.158 ***        2.026 ***                  1.927 ***            1.542 ***             1.301 ***           1.854 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers for Mature Firms)                      [0.210]             [0.190]              [0.175]              [0.194]            [0.189]          [0.185]                    [0.178]              [0.156]               [0.126]             [0.049]

Average Growth of Mature Non-issuers                                                      2.7%                 2.1%                 2.8%                 3.8%                 4.4%                 4.4%                 5.3%                 6.9%                  8.5%                 4.7%
Average Growth of Mature Issuers                                                         13.1%                14.4%                14.2%                14.8%                16.5%                15.5%                15.6%                13.7%                 12.7%                14.3%

No. of Observations                                                                      23,186               23,186               23,186               23,186               23,186               23,186               23,186               23,186                23,186              23,186
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.07

                                                                                                                                          C. Old Firms
                                                                                                                                                                     Quantile Regressions                                                                                              Mean
                                                                                        1st Decile          2nd Decile           3rd Decile           4th Decile         5th Decile       6th Decile                 7th Decile           8th Decile           9th Decile           Regression
Constant                                                                                 12,862 ***           31,763 ***           62,796 ***         103,445 ***        165,004 ***      261,645 ***                406,848 ***          694,010 ***         1,552,118 ***          152,209 ***
(Size of Non-issuers in 2003 for Old Firms)                                                [690]             [1,200]              [1,839]              [3,244]            [4,646]          [7,477]                   [11,471]             [18,750]              [73,079]              [4,031]
Issuer Dummy                                                                               2.781 ***           3.559 ***            3.789 ***            4.241 ***          4.995 ***        5.559 ***                  7.109 ***            9.063 ***            11.908 ***            5.159 ***
(Relative Size of Issuers vs. Non-issuers in 2003 for Old Firms)                         [0.268]             [0.238]              [0.232]              [0.254]            [0.302]          [0.337]                    [0.435]              [0.636]               [0.899]              [0.250]
2010 Dummy                                                                                 1.251 ***           1.302 ***            1.287 ***            1.248 ***          1.259 ***        1.232 ***                  1.278 ***            1.320 ***             1.390 ***            1.257 ***
(Total Growth of Non-issuers between 2003 and 2010 for Old Firms)                        [0.102]             [0.074]              [0.056]              [0.052]            [0.051]          [0.048]                    [0.050]              [0.050]               [0.085]              [0.016]
Issuer Dummy x 2010 Dummy                                                                  1.323 **            1.223 **             1.248 ***            1.342 ***          1.203 **         1.263 ***                  1.195 **             1.184 *               1.085                1.282 ***
(Relative Total Growth of Issuers vs. Non-issuers for Old Firms)                         [0.170]             [0.108]              [0.103]              [0.111]            [0.092]          [0.099]                    [0.098]              [0.103]               [0.118]              [0.025]

Average Growth of Old Non-issuers                                                          3.3%                 3.8%                 3.7%                 3.2%                 3.3%                 3.0%                 3.6%                 4.0%                 4.8%                 3.3%
Average Growth of Old Issuers                                                              7.5%                 6.9%                 7.0%                 7.6%                 6.1%                 6.5%                 6.2%                 6.6%                 6.0%                 7.1%

No. of Observations                                                                      19,208               19,208               19,208               19,208               19,208               19,208               19,208               19,208                19,208              19,208
R-squared                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.14
                       APPENDIX TABLE 1. COUNTRY COVERAGE
This table reports the number of issuing and non-issuing firms per country. The table also reports the
classification of countries according to their level of development (panels A, B, and C). Issuing firms
are those with at least one equity or bond issuance between 2003 and 2011. Non-issuing firms are all
other firms in the sample.

                             A. Developed Bank-based Economies
                                                    Number of Firms
          Country                    Non-issuing Firms            Issuing Firms
 Austria                                     87                         54
 Belgium                                    133                         98
 Cyprus                                     129                         23
 Denmark                                    146                         85
 Germany                                    723                        410
 Ireland                                     46                         55
 Israel                                     535                         93
 Italy                                      156                        183
 Japan                                     1,978                      2,125
 Netherlands                                147                        109
 New Zealand                                 55                        105
 Norway                                     239                        148
 Poland                                     504                        335
 Portugal                                    67                         34
 Spain                                     3,028                        91
 United Arab Emirates                        73                         37
                     B. Developed Market-based Economies
                                             Number of Firms
           Country            Non-issuing Firms            Issuing Firms
 Australia                           296                       1,636
 Greece                              243                         56
 Finland                             83                          71
 France                              680                        461
 Hong Kong SAR, China                78                         160
 Kuwait                              181                         32
 Luxembourg                          44                          32
 Oman                                110                         24
 Qatar                               27                          18
 Saudi Arabia                        73                          71
 Singapore                           225                        491
 Sweden                              423                        281
 Switzerland                         186                        142
 United Kingdom                     1,540                      1,452
 United States                      4,622                      4,191
                                     C. Emerging Economies
                                                       Number of Firms
          Country                       Non-issuing Firms            Issuing Firms
 Argentina                                     71                          37
 Brazil                                        297                        250
 Bulgaria                                      402                         26
 Chile                                         172                         82
 China                                        1,268                      1,471
 Colombia                                      94                          26
 India                                        3,501                      1,233
 Indonesia                                     230                        222
 Jordan                                        202                         57
 Malaysia                                      472                        596
 Mexico                                        81                          75
 Pakistan                                      525                         42
 Peru                                          142                         47
 Philippines                                   145                        111
 Russian Federation                           1,161                       117
 South Africa                                  285                         96
 Sri Lanka                                     187                         64
 Thailand                                      260                        320
 Turkey                                        268                        120
 Vietnam                                       565                        247
                                     % of Firms in the Sample




                        0%
                                                     50%
                                                                 70%
                                                                                   100%




                             10%
                                   20%
                                         30%
                                               40%
                                                           60%
                                                                       80%
                                                                             90%
                  Spain
               Bulgaria
               Pakistan
    Russian Federation
                  Israel
                Kuwait
                Cyprus
                 Oman
                Greece
             Colombia
                 Jordan
                    Peru
          South Africa
             Sri Lanka
                   India
              Vietnam
                Turkey
                  Chile
 United Arab Emirates
              Portugal
             Argentina
             Germany
             Denmark
               Norway
                Austria
               Sweden
                Poland
                                                                                          are those with at least one equity or bond issuance between 2003 and 2011.




                  Qatar
                 France
          Luxembourg
               Belgium
          Netherlands
           Switzerland
            Philippines
                  Brazil
                Finland
         United States
                Mexico
      United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX FIGURE 1. PERCENTAGE OF ISSUING FIRMS




             Indonesia
          Saudi Arabia
                  Japan
                  China
                    Italy
                Ireland
              Thailand
              Malaysia
         New Zealand
Hong Kong SAR, China
             Singapore
              Australia
                                                                                          This figure shows the number of issuing firms as a percentage of the number of firms in each country in the sample. Issuing firms
