                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   A MODEL TO EVALUATE VEHICLE EMISSION INCENTIVE POLICIES IN JAPAN

                                            Don Fullerton
                                              Li Gan
                                            Miwa Hattori

                                        Working Paper 20333
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20333


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We are grateful for financial support from Japan’s Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI),
for logistical support from PM-Keypoint, and for comments from Toshi Arimura, Frank Convery,
Hilary Sigman, Karl Storchman, and Sarah West. All remaining errors belong to us. This paper is
part of the NBER’s research programs in Public Economics and Environmental and Energy Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the ESRI or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Don Fullerton, Li Gan, and Miwa Hattori. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Model to Evaluate Vehicle Emission Incentive Policies in Japan
Don Fullerton, Li Gan, and Miwa Hattori
NBER Working Paper No. 20333
July 2014
JEL No. H23,Q52

                                               ABSTRACT

Using three years of data from the 47 prefectures of Japan, we estimate behavior of households who
simultaneously make discrete decisions about vehicle ownership and continuous decisions about driving
distance. We use the estimated parameters to calculate elasticities and to simulate the effects of alternative
pollution control policies such as taxes on gasoline, on distance, or on particular cars. Given choices
about cars and distance, we also calculate emissions. Since we model simultaneous choices, both
the chosen distance and the chosen car can be affected either by a tax on distance or by a tax on car
characteristics. We find expected signs for coefficients on price and income. Car choices are relatively
inelastic, however, either to taxes on cars or to taxes on gas or distance. Thus emissions are more
affected by taxes on gasoline than by taxes on particular vehicles.

Yet taxes on cars have lower costs on consumers and thus lower marginal cost of abatement. Given
that the existing gas tax already achieves some abatement, mostly through driving reduction, this analysis
suggests that further abatement from the use of distance-reducing taxes is more costly than achieving
some marginal abatement from induced changes in car choices. The option with the lowest cost is
to tax each car at a rate proportional to its emission rate.


Don Fullerton                                         Miwa Hattori
Department of Finance                                 Department of Economics
University of Illinois                                University of Texas at Austin
BIF Box#30 (MC520)                                    Austin, TX 78712
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu

Li Gan
Department of Economics
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4228
and NBER
gan@econmail.tamu.edu
         Accumulation of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases may lead to
significant future costs of global warming and other climate changes. Burning of fossil
fuel also emits regional pollutants such as sulfur dioxide (SO2) and local pollutants such
as carbon monoxide (CO), nitrous oxides (NOx), and hydrocarbons (HC) that react with
sunlight to cause health-damaging urban ozone (O3). The control of these emissions
may be a complex issue in light of various national interests, problems with data,
analytical issues, difficulties of international coordination, and high uncertainty.

         Vehicles are a significant source of these pollutants. According to International
Energy Agency (2013, page 71), the transport sector in 2011 contributed 31.0% of CO2
emissions in the United States and 18.5% in Japan. Upon the adoption of the Kyoto
Protocol, Japan agreed to cut emissions to the same level as in 1995. According to
International Energy Agency (2013, page 50), the 2011 emissions of CO2 in Japan were
only 1.8% higher than that of 1995.

         According to Pigou (1920), the costs of reducing emissions can be minimized by
the use of incentives such as a pollution tax or permit system. A price per unit of
emissions provides all the right incentives to reduce emissions by using all the cheapest
avenues of abatement: switch to cleaner fuels, employ abatement technology, or reduce
the usage of energy itself.

         This theory works well for stationary sources such as electric power plants,
where the technology is available to measure emissions in a reliable and cost-effective
manner. Some empirical studies have found that initial market incentive policies for
electric power plants in the United States have significantly reduced the costs of SO2
emission abatement (Schmalensee et al, 1998). However, the theory cannot be applied
so easily to mobile sources where the measurement technology is simply not available. 1

         This paper investigates alternative policies such as taxes on gasoline or on cars
that could help achieve efficient methods of vehicle emission abatement in Japan. What
are the effects of each such policy on car choices and driving behavior, and what are the
effects of those driving behaviors on emissions? To answer these questions, we use
three years of data for the 47 prefectures of Japan to estimate the simultaneous
determination of household discrete choice of vehicle and continuous demand for
1
 On-board monitoring devices are imperfect and costly (Harrington and McConnell, 2003). Remote
sensing is less expensive, but cannot measure emissions precisely for every car (Sierra Research, 1994).
                                                      -2-

driving distance. We then use those estimates to simulate policies, to predict new
behaviors, and to calculate emissions. We also find the equivalent variation measure of
welfare cost, and we use it to plot the marginal cost of abatement (MCA).

           If a vehicle emissions tax were feasible, then drivers could buy a newer, cleaner
car, buy a smaller car with better fuel efficiency, fix their pollution control equipment,
buy cleaner gas, or drive fewer kilometers. Moreover, an emissions tax would induce
consumers with different incomes or characteristics to choose different combinations of
these abatement methods, as required for economic efficiency. Some with old cars may
speed up plans to switch to a newer or smaller car, while others with easier access to
public transit may switch to no car. Still others may pay the tax instead of changing
their habit. As an alternative to such incentives, command-and-control regulations tend
to ignore heterogeneity, requiring the same forms of abatement for all drivers.

           While the inability to measure emissions may preclude a per-unit tax on vehicle
emissions, it does not preclude any use of incentives. Price mechanisms can still apply
to any observable choice, especially to market transactions that generate an invoice for
verification where the auto dealer or gas station can collect the tax or provide a subsidy.
Heterogeneity is respected, allowing each individual to choose the vehicle and distance.
In fact, incentive instruments have been at the center of discussion about environmental
policies in Japan. 2 The Japanese government charges annual registration fees that can
be made to depend on vehicle characteristics, and periodic inspections can record
odometers for a tax on distance.

           A few papers have previously explored market incentives that could be used in
place of a unit tax on vehicle emissions. 3 Several other papers have estimated models
of discrete choice among vehicle types. 4 Some estimate the demand for gasoline or for
distance traveled as functions of relevant prices and incomes, and some others have


2
    See e.g. Ministry of the Environment of Japan (1998), at http://www.env.go.jp/en/rep/tax/ishitax.pdf .
3
  For examples, see Eskeland and Devarajan (1996), Innes (1996), Kohn (1996), Plaut (1998), Sevigny
(1998), and Fullerton and West (2002, 2010). For a review article, see Parry et al (2007). Fullerton and
West (2010) simulate the effects of incentive policies with heterogeneous households, but they do not
model discrete choices. Their parameters for the simulations are calibrated rather than estimated. In a
theoretical model of discrete choices, De Borger (2001) derives optimal combinations of fixed taxes on
vehicles and variable tax on distance.
4
 For U.S. examples, see McFadden (1979), Train (1986), Brownstone et al (1996), Brownstone and
Train (1999), and other papers reviewed in McFadden (2001). For Japan, see Hibiki and Arimura (2005).
                                                    -3-

predicted emissions. 5 Several papers have used the sequential method of Dubin and
McFadden (1984) to estimate both discrete choice of vehicle and continuous choice of
distance (e.g. Mannering and Winston, 1985, Goldberg, 1998, and West, 2004). This
sequential method first estimates the discrete vehicle choice, which generates estimates
of parameters in the indirect utility function. The predicted choice of vehicle is then
used to correct for endogeneity in estimating the implied demand for distance. This
second step generates another set of estimates of the same parameters, but it does not
constrain the estimates from the second step to match the estimates of the first step.
Finally, a few new papers are introducing simultaneous methods to obtain a single set of
estimates of these parameters. 6

         Relative to this literature, our paper makes several contributions. First of all, the
Dubin-McFadden procedure was designed for individual household data, such as data
available for the United States employed by all studies listed in text or footnotes above.
In contrast, data for other countries may only be aggregated. In our case, the Japanese
government would not release the micro data. Hibiki and Arimura (2005) also have no
individual household data. In developing countries, adequate micro data may not even
exist. Here, we develop a procedure to use aggregate data for the 47 prefectures of
Japan, a procedure that requires modification to the basic framework of Dubin and
McFadden. Second, we do this while estimating discrete and continuous choices
simultaneously. Thus, the price of gasoline can affect both gas demand and car choices,
while a car’s price also affects gas demands and discrete choices. Our method
generates one set of consistent estimates. Third, we allow for unobserved heterogeneity,
which is important because different prefectures may react to the same price change in
different ways. Not only does vehicle choice affect distance, but the agent-specific


5
 See the review in Harrington and McConnell (2003). For an example of emissions models, the U.S.
EPA (1998, pp.3-68) discusses the MOBILE5a model and the California’s EMFAC7F model.
6
  A simultaneous method is proposed by Hanemann (1984), but his method does not consider unobserved
individual heterogeneity – a key factor in the Dubin-McFadden model. Bhat (2005) allows consumers to
choose multiple discrete alternatives, while Bhat et al (2009) use this approach to analyze the effects of
gasoline price on the choice of vehicle type, vintage, and use. Bento et al (2009) estimate car choices and
miles driven with one set of parameters; they combine those demands with a model of new and used car
supplies to simulate efficiency and distributional effects of an increase in the gasoline tax. These papers
estimate discrete and continuous demands in one step with one set of parameters, but without the same
individual error term in both choices. This unobserved individual heterogeneity is a key factor in the
Dubin-McFadden model. Feng et al (2013) introduce a method of simultaneous estimation that captures
the individual unobserved heterogeneity.
                                                    -4-

error in our continuous demand estimation can also affect the choice of vehicle. We
integrate over this error to produce the estimates and to calculate elasticities. Fourth,
we also integrate over this error to simulate policy changes such as adding to the
existing tax on gasoline or adding a tax on distance driven or on cars (such as a tax
proportional to the car’s emission rate). 7 Fifth, for each policy, we calculate resulting
emissions and welfare effects. Using demands derived from utility maximization
allows us to solve back for the change in utility and the equivalent variation.

         Our results suggest that the gasoline price per kilometer has an effect on choices
of some cars more than others, and effects on distance driven more in some cars than in
others. Car costs have small effects both on car choices and distance driven (and thus
on emissions). However, those “small effects” are not enough to conclude that a tax by
car type is ineffective. Though a tax on the car’s age or its emission rate has small
effects on emissions, it also has small costs on consumers. Either car tax has a marginal
cost per unit of abatement (MCA) that is smaller than taxes on gasoline or distance.

         Section I develops the multinomial logit model used to estimate both the discrete
choice of vehicle and the continuous demands for driving. Section II describes the data,
while Section III presents estimation results and elasticities. Section IV discusses how
seven alternative environmental policies may reduce emissions, and it simulates these
policies using the estimated parameter values. Section V concludes.

I. Model

         Our basic framework derives from the model of Dubin and McFadden (1984),
where they conduct the estimation in two steps: first they apply a logit model to
estimate the discrete choice, and then conditional on that choice, they estimate a
continuous demand. Compared with the Dubin-McFadden model, our framework has
two distinguishing characteristics. First, since we do not have micro-level data
showing individual choices, we have to deal with aggregate data for each of the 47
prefectures in Japan. Second, we build a model to estimate simultaneously the
discrete choice of vehicles and continuous demand for distance.


7
  These simulations represent market outcomes only if supply curves are horizontal. Calculations for a
change in the price of a new car or old car can be interpreted as a new local tax or subsidy in a small open
jurisdiction that can import more of those new or old cars at a constant price. However, our demand
system could be combined with some other estimates of supply to calculate equilibrium outcomes.
                                                   -5-

        Assume that a total of K types of vehicles are available from which individual
households can choose. In our empirical work below, we consider K=5 to include
four vehicle types and the no-car option. For a household making choice i, direct
utility is a function of vehicles kilometers traveled (VKT) and another consumption
good c, that is, U = U (VKTi , ci ) . Given income y, the budget constraint is:

                             pg
                                  VKTi + ci = y − ρki ,                                           (1)
                           KPLi
where pg is the price of gasoline (in yens per liter), and KPLi is fuel efficiency of car
type i (in kilometers per liter), so that pi ≡ pg/KPLi is the price in yens per kilometer.
The price of the other consumption good is normalized to 1. The vehicle’s annual rental
cost is assumed to take the form ρki, where ki is the total capital value of choice i
(depreciated or market value), and ρ is the annual rental rate (which includes interest
cost and further depreciation). We assume that ρ =0.25 (but we also try other values
and find almost no difference in results below). 8 The indirect utility from choice i is a
function of household income and prices, and it is denoted as V(y-ρki, pi).

        One common way to obtain the indirect utility function is to use a parametric
VKT demand equation and then solve a partial differential equation from Roy’s
identity (Hausman, 1981). For comparability with other studies, we use a log-linear
specification for each VKT equation:

                  ln(VKTi ) = α 0 + α1i pi − β ( y − ρki ) + x' γ + η                             (2)

where x is a vector of other observed socio-demographic variables that may affect
VKT. The index on α1i means that an increase in the price of gasoline (and thus pi)
could affect desired distance in some cars more than in others. If it discourages driving
in large cars and households can substitute, it could even increase distances in small
fuel-efficient cars. The random error η represents agent-specific unobserved factors
that may affect both the vehicle choice and VKT. It is assumed that E(η) = 0.

        As pointed out by Dubin and McFadden (1984), however, the conditional
expectation E(η|bundle i) is not zero, as can be seen clearly if we rewrite (2) as:



8
 The 25% rental rate is consistent with a 5% annual interest cost plus a 20% depreciation rate (which we
use later to calculate the current value of each car, ki).
                                                      -6-

                  ln(VKTi ) = α 0 + ∑ α1 j p j d ij − β ∑ ( y − ρk j )d ij + x' γ + η               (3)
                                         j                  j


where dij is a choice indicator variable equal to one when i=j. The random error η is
correlated with dij. Taking the expectation of (3), we have:

                  ln(VKTi ) = α 0 + ∑ α1 j p j S *j − β ∑ ( y − ρk j ) S *j + x' γ ,                (4)
                                         j                  j


where S *j is a predicted probability that the jth bundle is chosen. Equation (4) is

called the “Reduced Form Method” in Dubin and McFadden (1984). They obtain S *j

from a first-stage logit model, while we obtain it simultaneously.

         Using Roy’s identity and equation (2), the implied indirect utility function is:

                         1                                               1
                  Vi =       exp(− α0i + β ( y − ρki ) − x' γ − η ) −         exp(α1i pi )          (5)
                         β                                              α1i
We assume that the individual chooses vehicle type i that yields the highest indirect
utility Vi. Observed vehicle choices then can be used to estimate the parameters of (5).
However, note that the parameters of the vehicle choice in (5) are the same parameters
as in the distance choice in (4). 9 Indeed, for many households, the choice of vehicle
and desired distance are interrelated. For this reason, we use (4) and (5) together to
estimate parameters that best characterize simultaneous choices by consumers regarding
vehicles and distance. Now the index on α1i means not just that an increase the price
of gasoline (and thus pi) can differentially affect distances in each type of car, but that it
can have different effects on the choice of car. A higher gas price can decrease demand
for large cars and increase demand for small, fuel-efficient cars.

         Next, as in the usual discrete choice model, we add a choice-specific error term
εi to equation (5) that represents the difference between the true individual utility at
choice i and the calculated utility level. In practice, this error term for each choice i,
conditional on agent-specific error term η, is assumed to be independently distributed
over choices with an extreme value distribution. Using this extreme value distribution,
we integrate over η to obtain an expression for Sin* , the expected probability of


9
  An exception is that utility in (5) allows for constant terms α0i that depend on choice i, to reflect
unobserved differences that affect utility but are not captured by p, y, or x. These constants also differ
from α0 in equation (4), to capture scale differences between utility and ln(VKT). As described below,
the vehicle bundles include a no-car option, and we normalize the indirect utility from this bundle to zero.
                                                           -7-

choosing bundle i at prefecture n. Dubin and McFadden (1984) have individual
household data with actual choices, so they use a logit model to estimate predicted
probabilities (the shares Sin* ). In our case, aggregate prefecture data provide observed
shares (Sin). We add an error term uin to reflect the difference between these, so that
Sin = Sin* + uin. We then estimate simultaneously the following moment conditions: 10

                        exp(Vin (η ))
        Sin =   ∫   K
                                               f (η ) dη + uin                               (6a)
                η
                    ∑ exp(V
                    j
                              jn   (η )) + 1


        ln(VKTin ) = α0 + ∑ α1 j p jn S *jn − β ∑ ( yn − ρk jn ) S *jn + xn′ γ + vin         (6b)
                               j                       j


In (6b), we have added an error term vin to represent the difference between observed
and predicted kilometers traveled. Both uin and vin are assumed to be independent
across different choices and across different prefectures. We estimate (6) using
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM), as described more below.

        Once we obtain the parameter estimates, we are ready to calculate elasticities for
both discrete choices and continuous demand. Let zi denote either ki or pi. Then, the
own-price and cross-price elasticities for the discrete choice model are given by:

                                                   ∂S i zi ∂Vi
        Own-price elasticity:                             =    zi (1 − S i ) ,               (7a)
                                                   ∂zi S i ∂zi

                                                   ∂S i z j    ∂V j
        Cross-price elasticity:                             =−      z jS j .                 (7b)
                                                   ∂z j S i    ∂z j

Note that the right-hand-side of (7b) does not depend on i, so variable zj has the same
cross-price effect on share i for all choices i≠j. For example, a change in the distance
price pj has the same cross-price effect on all of the other four vehicle choices. The
elasticity of choice i with respect to income is given by:

                             ∂S i y      ∂V        ∂V j 
                                    = y i − ∑ S j      
                                                                                            (8)
                             ∂y S i      ∂y  j      ∂y  
For continuous distance demands, the formula for the own-price elasticity is:


10
  Dubin and McFadden (1984) use simplifying assumptions that make η drop out of (6a). Here, we
integrate over η, so our model is a mixed logit model as discussed in McFadden and Train (2000).
                                                       -8-

                                       ∂ ln(VKTi )
                              e pi =               = α1i pi     .                                (9)
                                          ∂ ln pi

We can also calculate the income elasticity ey and capital cost elasticity eki, as:

                            ∂ ln(VKT )                         ∂ ln(VKT )
                     ey =              = − βy,         eki =              = βρki .               (10)
                               ∂ ln y                             ∂ ln k
In equations (7) – (10), each elasticity is typically evaluated at the mean values of y
and ki and at the average price per kilometer for each choice.

II. Data

           A. General Data Description

           To analyze behavior of households choosing automobile bundles and VKT, we
could use household-level micro-data on each household’s characteristics, income and
expenditures, vehicle ownership, kilometers driven, and each vehicle’s characteristics
including fuel efficiency in kilometers per liter (KPL), local emissions per kilometer
(EPK), and carbon dioxide emissions per kilometer (CPK). To our knowledge, no
single data set that is publicly available contains all such information for Japan. 11

           The Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES) conducted by the Ministry
of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and Telecommunications of Japan provides
some data on income, expenditures on gasoline, car purchases, and other private
transport-related costs, as well as the price of gasoline and the purchase price of cars
(but it contains no distinction among car attributes). 12 The micro-data with household
characteristics and spending are not disclosed to any party outside the nation of Japan,
however, so we must use the publicly available aggregate data found in “The Annual
Reports on the Family Income and Expenditure Survey,” published by the Statistics
Bureau of Japan. Since the aggregate data are available for each prefecture, we treat the
47 Japanese prefectures as units of observation, for each of the three years 2000-2002.
That is, each observation describes the average household in a particular prefecture in a
particular year, so we think of each prefecture as a single household in the sample. We
pool the data for three years to obtain a sample size of 47×3=141 observations.

11
  Automakers may collect some of this information, and others may collect data using surveys, but these
data are neither complete nor readily accessible.
12
     See http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/kakei/1560.htm for an outline of the FIES.
                                                    -9-

        B. Classification of Vehicle Bundles

         In our model, an agent representing an individual household faces a discrete
choice among a finite number of vehicle bundles. Each bundle is identified by the
vehicle’s type according to size and vintage. In particular, we define our vehicle types
according to the engine size measured in liters of total displacement, as is customary in
the Japanese classification of passenger cars. The regular passenger car class (denoted
by subscript r) consists of cars with total displacements of 2.0 liters and above, while
the small passenger car class (denoted by s) consists of cars with total displacement
less than 2.0 liters. 13 The vehicle vintages are classified by new cars (denoted by n)
versus old cars (denoted o). Vehicle bundles are then described by a set of subscripts
{rn, ro, sn, so, 0}, where 0 denotes the zero-vehicle bundle.

        C. The Data Sources

        (1) Household income and expenditures on gasoline. We use the FIES data to
obtain the prefectural average of expenditure on gasoline and total expenditures (which
we use as total income). The FIES data for a given year are collected through a survey
of randomly selected households throughout all of Japan. The selection of households
is based on a three-stage stratified sampling method, where the sampling units at the
three stages are the municipality, the survey unit area, and the household. The capital
city of each prefecture is a stratum, and some reported data series contain only
households in the capital city rather than the entire prefecture, but we must in any case
assume that all households of a given prefecture behave similarly. Some statistics
reported in the Annual Reports are based on surveys among Workers’ Households, and
some others are based on All Households. We use the Annual Report for 2000, 2001,
and 2002, supplemented by some series taken from the Report for 1999.

        (2) Household characteristics. Since demographic characteristics are not in the
Annual Reports of FIES, even at the prefecture level, we use the 2000 Population
Census – the most recent census conducted in Japan. These data are entirely public, and

13
  Japan has another class, light vehicle, consisting of passenger cars with total displacement less than
0.660 liters. This class is dropped from our study because it does not exist in the U.S., and so no data are
available for its emissions. The next section describes our U.S. sources for emissions data. Of passenger
cars in Japan, light vehicles were 20% in 2002, and rising. Our multinomial logit model has the property
of “independence of irrelevant alternatives”, so parameter estimates are not affected by this omission.
Thus, the calculated marginal effects and elasticities are unaffected. Average effects across all vehicles
are likely over-estimated, however, because light vehicles presumably have lower mean effects.
                                                  -10-

can be obtained freely from http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/kokusei/index.htm. For
each prefecture, we obtain from the Census the average family size, fraction of residents
with higher-education, fraction of households residing in densely inhabited districts
(“metro”), fraction of residents under 15 years of age (“child”), average number of
income earners per household (“earner”), the fraction of households with two earners,
the average age of household heads, and the homeowner fraction of households. Table
1 shows summary statistics for our demographic variables.

        (3) Household-owned vehicle characteristics. Unfortunately, we cannot observe
detailed characteristics of household-owned vehicles such as make, model, year, vehicle
vintage, and number of cylinders. Since the prefecture is our unit of observation, we
need at least the fraction of households owning each car bundle in each prefecture
(including the choice of no vehicle). The Automobile Statistics Data Books published
yearly by the Japan Automobile Dealers Association (JADA, 2000, 2001, 2002) shows
registered vehicles by type and by prefecture. It also quantifies new car purchases of
each type in each prefecture. 14 To divide owned cars into two age categories, we use a
two-year period for new car purchases. Thus, for each size category in each prefecture,
the number of new cars (vintage type n) in 2000 is the number purchased new in 1999
and 2000. Subtracting this quantity from the number of registered vehicles of that size
in the year 2000, we obtain the quantity of old cars (vintage type o). Vehicle quantities
for 2001 and 2002 are obtained similarly. Because these statistics from the JADA Data
Books are only for the households who own at least one automobile, we supplement
them by the reported percentage of households owning no vehicle. 15

        (4) Fuel efficiency of vehicles. To our knowledge, no source in Japan provides
data on fuel efficiency and emission rates (except for brand new cars). Since we need
test results for older cars, we use data on cars in the U.S. to approximate fuel efficiency
and emissions of cars in Japan. Technologies are similar in the two countries, and cars
made in Japan are sold in the U.S., suggesting that a sample of Japanese cars found in
the U.S. would be a good proxy for cars available to Japanese consumers.

14
  The quantity of new cars purchased is not reported in the Data Books, but JADA personnel testify that
the reported number of first-time registrations of new cars represents this quantity.
15
  For this purpose, we use a report on the passenger vehicle market by Japan Automobile Manufacturers
Association (JAMA, http://www.jama.or.jp/release/news/prev/2000/03/000329_t1.html). These figures,
however, are not available by prefecture.
                                                     -11-

         We use the results of recent vehicle testing by the California Air Resources
Board (CARB, 1997, 2000) in the Unites States to estimate KPL for each size-vintage
bundle. The dataset consists of two sub-samples: first, in “series 13”, the CARB tested
a total of 345 passenger cars, light-duty trucks, and medium-duty vans from November
1995 to March 1997; and second, in “series 14”, the CARB sampled 332 vehicles from
November 1997 to August 1999. Each observation in the CARB data represents an
individual tested car and contains the manufacturer, year, and model, along with fuel
efficiency (measured in miles per gallon, MPG). We then identify and extract the
subset of tested cars that are made by Japanese manufacturers (Toyota, Nissan, Mazda,
Mitsubishi, Honda, Isuzu, and Subaru). The extracted subset is a sample of 234
Japanese vehicles. We then divide this subset into our two engine size categories,
which leaves us with 96 regular-size cars and 138 small-size cars. For each set, we
estimate MPG as a function of vehicle age (in years) using a semi-log specification. 16
The estimation results are shown in the first panel of Table 2.

         For both types of cars, results confirm that fuel efficiency declines with age. We
can evaluate the estimated regression at any particular age to get predicted MPG. For
new cars of each size, we assume age=1. For old cars, we use the reported mean of
age of each type of passenger car in Japan for each year. 17 Averaging over all three
years, estimated fuel efficiencies are: MPGrn=21.9, MPGro=21.1, MPGsn=29.0, and
MPGso=27.5. We multiply these figures by 0.4251 to convert to KPL, listed in Table 3.

         (5) Emissions of local pollutants. The critical data on emissions per kilometer
(EPK) of individual cars tested in Japan are unavailable. 18 The CARB data provide test
results on the emissions rates per mile (EPM) of carbon monoxide (CO), nitrous oxides
(NOx), and hydrocarbons (HC’s) for each tested vehicle. Moreover, we can calculate
the weighted sum of these emissions, using weights from Fullerton and West (2010):

16
   Even if a given car has the same MPG in Japan as in the U.S., however, the mix of regular-size cars
(over 2.0 liters) in the U.S. may differ from the mix of such cars in Japan. Thus the MPG of regular cars
in Japan could differ from the MPG predicted from this regression on Japanese cars in the U.S.
17
   These data are provided by the Automobile Inspection and Registration Association (AIRA) of Japan
(http://www.aira.or.jp/data/ pdf/ age.pdf). For years 2000, 2001, and 2002, respectively, the average age
for regular-size cars is 4.8, 5.2, and 5.6 years; for small-size cars the average age is 6.3, 6.5, and 6.6 years.
18
   For brand new cars, tests are performed by Japanese manufacturers to meet the established emission
standards and to release their models’ environmental specifications. For older vehicles, however, no
emissions test is done in Japan that is equivalent to that by the CARB. Japan Automobile Research
Institute (JARI), a public-service and test-research organization, has handled a few cases of emissions
testing on used cars. Unfortunately, the data from those cases cannot be disclosed.
                                                     -12-

                  EPM = 0.1 × CO + 0.495 × NOx + 0.405 × HC.                                           (11)

         Using the sample of 234 Japanese cars described in the previous subsection, we
estimate a semi-log equation for EPM of each car size as a function of vehicle age. 19
The second panel in Table 2 reports the estimation results. Then, to obtain the emission
rate for each new vehicle bundle, we evaluate the estimated emission rate regression at
age=1. For each old bundle, we use the reported means of the age of passenger cars in
Japan for each year 2000 through 2002. For each bundle, Table 3 shows the calculated
emissions per kilometer (EPK), averaging over those three years. These vary from
0.216 for a new regular-size vehicle to 0.549 for an old small-size vehicle. Surprisingly,
for either age category, the larger cars have lower emission rates than the smaller cars. 20

         (6) Carbon dioxide emissions. While the data on CO2 emissions per kilometer
(CPK) of individual cars tested in Japan are unavailable, the aforementioned “series 14”
of the CARB data provides test results on the carbon dioxide emission rate per mile
(CPM). We extract and obtain a sample consisting of 117 cars made by Japanese
manufacturers. We then divide it into our two engine size categories, yielding 48
regular cars and 69 small cars. For each set, we estimate ln(CPM) as a function of
vehicle age (in years). The results shown in the last panel of Table 2 reveal that the
carbon emission rate does not depend much on age, but it does depend on size. When
we use those estimates to calculate carbon dioxide per kilometer (CPK), Table 3 shows
that the mean for regular cars is about 250 and for small cars is about 190 (grams/km).

         (7) Market value of vehicles. Although the Annual Reports on the FIES offer
the prefectural averages of purchase prices of all cars (with no distinction by the cars’
attributes), we need a market value for each of the four vehicle bundles (for capital cost,




19
  A problem is that emission rate standards differ between Japan, California, and the rest of the US, but
we do not use these emissions data in estimation of the behavioral model of household choice. Instead,
after the behavioral model is estimated, we simulate tax policies, calculate changes in car choices and
distance demand, and then use these emission rates only to calculate the implied effect on emissions.
These calculations of emissions are the best we can do, given data limitations, but are still “illustrative”.
20
   Fullerton and West (2010) regress emission rate on engine size (in cubic inches of displacement) and
find the coefficient is positive and significant at the 10% level. When we use our US sample with all cars,
EPM is a U-shaped function of size. Four cylinder cars have less EPM than eight cylinder cars, but more
EPM than six cylinder cars. The “small” car in Japan corresponds roughly to four cylinders in the US
data, and regular cars correspond roughly to six cylinders, so small cars have higher emissions.
                                                    -13-

ki). 21 For new cars, we can use the manufacturers’ suggested retail prices of selected
models available on multiple Japanese manufacturers’ websites. Using the list of the
ten most popular models published in the JADA Data Book per year, we obtain each krn
and ksn as the weighted average of the retail prices of the subset of models belonging to
each size class, with the weight being the share of each model. We assume that cars
depreciate at a rate of 20% per year, so used car prices kro and kso are calculated as:

                kro = krn×0.8 aar , and           kso = ksn×0.8 aas ,

where aar is the average age of regular cars, and aas is the average age of small cars
in each year. That year’s market value for any vehicle bundle is thus obtained, but it
does not vary across prefectures. Table 3 lists this market value of each bundle.

         (8) Gasoline price per kilometer. As described above, the FIES provides each
year’s average price of gasoline for each prefecture (in yens per liter). These are
observed gasoline prices and include the existing gasoline tax (uniform across Japan).
The bottom of Table 1 shows the mean gasoline price across prefectures, as well as
mean gasoline expenditure and total expenditure. For each vehicle bundle, we then
combine each year’s prefectural data on gasoline price pg (in yens per liter) and each
year’s fuel efficiency KPLi (in kilometers per liter) to calculate the price of distance
pin (in yens per kilometer). Here, we assume that gasoline expenditures are the only
cost per kilometer. 22 For each vehicle bundle, the bottom of Table 3 shows the mean
and standard deviation of this price per kilometer, over 47 prefectures.

         (9) Vehicle kilometers traveled (VKT). Since VKT is not observed directly, we
use data on En, the average household’s expenditure on gasoline in prefecture n. We
take En (in yens per household) and divide by pin (in yens per kilometer) to get VKT
(in kilometers per household). Thus, the dependent variable on the left side of (6b)
becomes [ln(En) – ln(pin )].

IV. Estimation Results

21
  Other fixed costs may include insurance, finance charges, and license fees. Following West (2004), we
assume that market value serves as a good proxy because these other costs vary closely with market value.
However, Toshi Arimura points out that the cost of renting a parking space differs across prefectures.
22
  Some maintenance cost may generally add to this cost, but we have no clear way to divide maintenance
cost into the part that is required regardless of kilometers and the part that should be treated as a cost per
kilometer. West (2004) adds tire cost per kilometer to the calculation of per-kilometer costs. Expenditures
on tires, unfortunately, are not reported for Japanese households.
                                                    -14-

         We have information on each prefecture’s shares {Srn, Sro, Ssn, Sso, S0}, but the
sum of these five shares is one. To avoid the problem of collinearity, we use only the
first four shares to form four moment conditions based on (6a). Since pin vary across
the four vehicle types, we have four additional moment conditions that are based on
continuous demand for VKT in (6b). We employ GMM to estimate our model on
these eight moment conditions. Estimating (6a) requires some distribution of the
random error η, so we assume η to be distributed as standard normal. The
estimation results are reported in Table 4.

         In Table 4, the first five parameters are the key parameters in our paper, and all
five are significantly different from zero. The coefficients on per-kilometer gas prices
{α1i} are all negative and highly significant. Thus, for each car choice, people drive less
when they face a higher cost per kilometer. Next, note that the demand for VKT in
equation (6b) includes total expenditure (income) with a negative sign in front of it.
The estimated coefficient on this income variable (β) is negative, so people drive more
when they have more income (net of the capital cost of their vehicle). Table 4 also
indicates that distance demand is greater for households that own their own homes, are
younger, have more children, and live outside a metropolitan area. Note that these
interpretations are tricky, however, because these parameters serve dual roles: they
determine distance choices and discrete car choices.

         Our primary interest is to understand how people respond to changes in the gas
price per kilometer, total expenditure (income), and capital cost. To analyze these
questions, we calculate elasticities using the formulas derived above, for both discrete
choice and continuous demand. Table 5 lists own-price and cross-price elasticities for
the discrete choices with respect to gas price per kilometer. Table 6 lists all own-price
and cross-price elasticities for the discrete choices with respect to each capital cost (ki)
and the elasticity of each choice with respect to income (y). Finally, Table 7 shows all
continuous VKT demand elasticities. 23

         In Table 5, for the gasoline price in any row, the table shows the effect on each
vehicle bundle choice, that is, the change in the probability of choosing that column’s

23
  All discrete and continuous elasticities are derived from the single set of estimates in Table 4 obtained
from our simultaneous method. Feng et al (2013) estimate both sequential and simultaneous versions of
the same basic model, in order to compare results. We do not make such comparisons here, but instead
choose to proceed into new ground: policy simulations, welfare changes, and MCA calculations.
                                                   -15-

car for a one percent change in gas cost per kilometer in that row. The diagonal shows
own-price elasticities. As expected, the own-price elasticity for each choice is negative,
while the cross-price elasticities are positive for all car types. In other words, an
increase in one car’s driving cost would decrease the market share of that same car but
increase market shares of other cars. Given a car size (regular or small), the own-price
elasticity of the new car choice is much smaller than that of the old car (in absolute
value). That is, household choice to own an old car is more negatively affected by the
gas price than is the choice to own a new car. For example, a 1% increase in the gas
price of choice sn induces a 0.69% decrease in the probability of choosing sn, while the
same change to the gas price of choice so induces a 2.7% decrease in the probability of
that choice. Note that a gas price change for choice rn barely alters any market share.

         The first part of Table 6 presents capital cost elasticities for the discrete choice
model. Each elasticity gives the percentage change in market share of the column car
associated with a one-percent increase in the capital cost of the row car. As expected,
all own-price elasticities are negative while cross-price elasticities are positive for all
car types. Thus an increase in the capital cost of a car would decrease the probability of
owning that same car, and increase the probabilities of owning each other car (or no car).
Quantitatively, however, all entries are close to zero; any change in capital cost barely
affects the market share of any choice. The last row of Table 6 reports the share
elasticities with respect to income (total expenditure). The last entry for the no-car
option is negative, suggesting that an increase of income makes households less likely
to hold no car, as expected. The other entries have different signs; more income
increases the share of small old cars and decreases other shares. 24

         Table 7 shows effects of key variables on VKT, given each car choice. Goldberg
(1998) calls these short-run elasticities, because the household can change its distance
but not its car. The short-run elasticity of VKT with respect to gas price per kilometer
is negative for every choice. The VKT elasticity for small old cars is -0.555, in the




24
  West (2004) does not report discrete car choice elasticities with respect to gas price, car price, or
income. Goldberg (1998) reports large elasticities. In any case, their results are not comparable for
several reasons: they use US data, they use sequential estimation, and the bundles are defined differently.
                                                     -16-

range of previous estimates. 25 However, elasticities for the other three car types are
substantially higher (-2.4 to -11.2). Perhaps these estimates are “too high” and
unreliable because we estimate a structural model and because we are limited to data for
prefectures rather than for individual households. Yet perhaps other prior results are
“too low” and unreliable because they do not capture the simultaneity of car and
distance choices by households, as we do here. We still have no “final” results, but we
believe that results here are important indicators that we need further investigation.

         In any case, relative elasticities are instructive. Given car size, for example,
Table 7 shows that VKT demand is more responsive to a change in gas price for new
cars than for old cars. For regular cars in the first two rows, the VKT elasticity is -2.378
if old and -11.23 if new. For small cars in the next two rows, the elasticity is -0.555 if
old and -2.383 if new. For a different comparison, taking vintage as given, VKT
demand is substantially more responsive to the gas price for regular-sized cars than for
small cars. If old, this elasticity is -0.555 for small cars and -2.378 for regular cars. If
new, it is -2.383 for small cars and -11.23 for regular cars. An explanation can be found
in Table 3, where a regular-sized car is shown to be less fuel efficient than a small car.
If they are both the same vintage, a unit increase in the gas price of a regular car affects
the distance driven more than does an increase in the gas price of a small car.

         The form of our model in equation (5) and our negative estimated β together
imply that income has a positive effect on indirect utility – as expected. Thus, in Table
6, more income decreases the probability of owning no car. Also, as expected, a higher
capital cost ki reduces the probability of owning car i . In our model of simultaneous
discrete and continuous choices, however, equation (10) shows that VKT elasticities are
ey = -βy and eki =βρki . Thus, the same estimated β <0 means that more income must
raise VKT demand, and a higher capital cost must reduce VKT demand. As shown in
Table 7, a household drives 0.23% more when income rises by one percent. 26 However,
it reduces driving by less than 0.04% when any capital cost rises by one percent.

IV. Simulations of Various Environmental Policies

25
   In general, using US data, the distance elasticity with respect to gas price is estimated to be about -0.2
by Goldberg (1998) and -0.9 by West (2004). It is only around -0.03 from either the sequential or
simultaneous procedure of Feng et al (2013).
26
   Using US data, the distance elasticity with respect to income is found to be insignificant in Goldberg
(1998), 0.02 in West (2004), and around 1.0 in Feng et al (2013).
                                                    -17-

         Our estimates already incorporate current policies, because the data on gasoline
prices reflect existing taxes, and the purchase prices of vehicles include the acquisition
taxes currently levied by the Japanese government. 27 We now use the estimated
parameters to perform a number of simulations to compare the effects of alternative
reforms. For any particular policy, we can use the characteristics of the Japanese
population along with the estimated parameters to predict the proportion of households
that hold each vehicle, the total distance driven, and total emissions. The benchmark
for comparison is the status quo. For the current policy regime, the simulated
household average VKT is 4,029 kilometers per year. The average household has local
emissions of 1.914 kilograms and CO2 emissions of 819 kilograms.

         For each vehicle, note that VKT in equation (4) and utility in (5) both depend
on the price per unit distance (pi) and the cost of the vehicle (ki). Therefore, each policy
needs to be translated into “model-equivalent form,” that is, a change in either pi or ki.
In this paper, we focus on one policy at a time rather than combinations of policies.

         A. Policies that Alter the Price per Kilometer

         First, we consider policy options that affect pi, including a tax per liter of
gasoline (tg), a tax per unit distance (td), or even the possibility of a tax per unit of local
pollutant emissions (te) or carbon emissions (tc). To incorporate any such policy, the
new general form for the price per kilometer for choice i is:

                          pg + t g                               
                   pi′ =           + t e EPK i + t c CPK i + t d                                   (12)
                          KPLi                                   
         For these purposes, the existing gasoline tax is embodied in pg , so any tax rate
in (12) represents an added tax. We next describe our simulations.

        1.) A tax per unit of local emissions (te > 0, tc = tg = td = 0). An emissions tax in
yens per gram times EPKi in grams per kilometer yields the effect on the price in yens
per kilometer. As discussed above, this policy is not available if emissions are too
difficult or costly to measure. Emissions are not a market transaction with an invoice to
verify the tax base for collection and enforcement. However, the concept of taxing each


27
  The current acquisition tax on a passenger vehicle is 5% of “acquisition price”, regardless of whether
the car is new or used. The “acquisition price” of a vehicle for purposes of this tax is determined by the
retail price of the model when sold brand new and the age of the particular vehicle.
                                                  -18-

unit of emissions has been shown to minimize the total social cost of achieving any
given emissions-abatement target, and it thus represents an important ideal against
which to compare all other realistic policy options. We assume that consumers know
how their vehicle choices affect emissions, and thus tax due, so this policy may induce
households to choose cleaner-burning cars as well as to drive less.

        2.) A tax per unit of CO2 emissions (tc > 0, te = tg = td = 0). This policy may be
more feasible than the tax on local pollutants, because it can be imposed on the carbon
content of each fuel when purchased. While local emissions depend on characteristics
of the vehicle, carbon emissions are closely related to the carbon content of fuels.

        3.) A tax per liter of gasoline (tg >0, tc = te = td = 0). This policy is technically
feasible and enforceable, as the Japanese government currently collects such a tax. 28

        4.) A tax per kilometer driven (td>0, tc = tg = te = 0). The car’s driving distance
is not purchased in a market transaction, but kilometers driven are more observable than
emissions. Old style odometers might be rolled back by consumers who want to cheat,
but new cars have electronic odometers that are more difficult to change. If each car is
inspected once a year, even just for the usual safety inspection, the inspector can record
the distance, and the prefecture can include the calculated tax in the annual registration
fee. In theory, the distance tax ought to perform better than a gas tax, because it avoids
the “rebound effect” discussed in Harrington and McConnell (2003). A gas tax might
induce consumers to buy more fuel-efficient cars, so the higher KPLi partly offsets the
higher price per kilometer, but td cannot be avoided in any way except by reducing
driving distance. However, the distance-tax would not reduce emissions as much as te,
because te encourages other abatement methods that affect EPKi.

        For all of these tax rates, we infer a reasonable range from the current gasoline
tax rate in Japan, 53.8 yens per liter. To implement an added tax that is 5% to 100% of
the existing gas tax, we choose the range of tg = 2.69 to 53.8 (¥/liter), as shown in the
second row of Table 8. We then we find how much on average (across vehicle choices)
each gas tax rate adds to the per-kilometer price of driving (Δp in the first row). We use
that Δp to calculate the comparable range for te, tc, and td (shown in rows 3 to 5).


28
  Both the national government and prefectures levy taxes on gasoline. The current rates are 48.6
yens/liter at the national level and 5.2 yens/liter at the prefecture level.
                                             -19-

       For any tax, we use equation (12) to get the new price per kilometer for each
vehicle, and we use those in conjunction with the estimated parameters to calculate the
new choices of vehicle types, distances traveled, and the resulting total emissions.
Figures 1-3 show simulated effects on VKT, local emissions, and CO2 emissions.

       Figure 1 shows effects on VKT of the four taxes when they are scaled to raise
the per-kilometer cost by the same amount on average. A tax on local emissions (in
yens/gram) reduces vehicle distances the most, followed by the distance tax (per km),
the gasoline tax (per liter), and the CO2 tax (per gram). The solid dark line shows that
doubling the existing gas tax will achieve about 40% reduction in VKT, whereas a tax
of 14 yens per gram of local pollutants would raise the price per kilometer the same
amount (Table 8) and reduce driving distances by 55% (Figure 1).

       Figure 2 shows the control of local emissions achieved by these comparable
rates of tax on gasoline, distance, and emissions. The points where each curve crosses
the horizontal line labeled “-30” indicate that government can cut local pollutants by
about 30% of the status-quo level by charging an extra 2.3 yen per km through te, or an
extra 3.3 yen per km through td. To bring about the same 30% reduction in emissions
using the gasoline tax as the only instrument would require an extra 3.6 yen per km (an
increase of almost 70% in the existing gas tax). Similarly, Figure 3 shows the degree of
carbon dioxide abatement achieved by these taxes, when they are scaled to increase per-
kilometer costs by the same amount.

       Figure 4 shows effects of an emissions tax on all five vehicle ownership shares.
Figures 5-7 show analogous effects of the carbon tax, gas tax, and distance tax. In all
four figures (for all four taxes), households shift away from using a small, old car (type
so). This car has the largest emission rate, as seen in Table 3. All other choice shares
rise. The choice that rises the least in all four figures is the one with the next highest
emission rate (type ro, which also has the lowest fuel efficiency in Table 3). Thus, all
four taxes tend to encourage newer cars. The local emissions tax in Figure 4 and carbon
tax in Figure 5 raise the ro share only slightly, whereas the gasoline tax in Figure 6 and
the distance tax in Figure 7 raise the ro share almost as much as the other shares. These
latter two taxes encourage the no-car option almost as much as the sn option.

       B. Policies That Alter the Cost of Each Vehicle
                                                    -20-

         We now consider potential policy instruments to alter the capital cost or rental
cost of some car types. Examples of such policies are taxes levied at the time of vehicle
purchase (acquisition taxes), annual registration fees, or annual vehicle tax. The annual
fixed cost for owning choice i is now raised by ti, the bundle-specific addition to the
rental cost, in 100,000 yens, for i= {rn, ro, sn, so}. We can then compare our
simulation results to the corresponding benchmark outcomes.

         1.) A tax on the size of the engine (ts). The correlation between the size of the
engine and the emissions rate is ambiguous. Surprisingly, the calculation of EPK using
local pollutants from the CARB data reveals that small cars have a larger EPK than
regular cars (see Table 3). Whether this results from the specific nature of the CARB
data remains unclear. It is well established, however, that size increases emissions of
CO2, as is also shown using the CARB data (CPK in Table 3).

         Japanese prefectures already collect annual fees on vehicles that rise with total
displacement of engines, and so further taxation of size can be implemented easily. 29 A
tax on engine size can be modeled by the addition of trn>0 and tro>0 to the rental cost
of regular-sized vehicles, with no change in the cost of small vehicles. We choose the
range from trn = tro = 0.051 to 0.510 (¥5,100 to ¥50,100 per year), in order to simulate
the effects of an additional tax that ranges from one to ten times the existing annual fees
on regular-sized vehicles (those over 2.00 liters). Figure 8 illustrates the results.

         Because carbon emissions are related to vehicle size, this size tax in Figure 8
reduces CO2 by larger percentages than it reduces VKT or local emissions (LE). None
of these reductions is larger than 0.005%, however. As noted above, we found very
small elasticities with respect to capital costs, both for car choices (Table 6) and for
distance demand (Table 7). Thus, the simulated car ownership tax has only tiny effects
on vehicle and distance choices. We find that this tax on engine size is not an effective
policy tool for reducing emissions of any pollutant.

         2.) A tax on the emissions rate (tEPK). Since EPKi is a characteristic of the car,
this tax can also be modeled via changes to the annual cost of each vehicle. It may
perform better than the size tax, as local emissions are more closely related to vehicle

29
  For home-owned cars, the annual fees are ¥29500 (1.0 liter or less), ¥34500 (1.001-1.5 liters), ¥39500
(1.501-2.0 liters), ¥45000 (2.001-2.5 liters), ¥51000 (2.501-3.0 liters), ¥58000 (3.001-3.5 liters), ¥66500
(3.501-4.0 liters), ¥76500 (4.001-4.5 liters), ¥88000 (4.501-6.0 liters), and ¥111000 (6.001 liters or more).
                                            -21-

emission rates than to vehicle size. On the other hand, EPKi is not as easily measured
as engine size for the purposes of imposing the tax. To make tEPK proportional to our
estimated emission rates in Table 3, we initially set trn = 0.216 (¥ 21,600/year), tro =
0.402, tsn = 0.288 and tso = 0.549. Then we simulate 10% to 100% increases in these
rates. Figure 9(a) shows that the initial rates induce almost 0.6% reduction of all
continuous variables (LE, CO2, and VKT). Doubling those tax rates achieves 1.1%
reductions. This kind of tax could lead to a percentage cut in emissions that exceeds the
percentage cut in VKT, but only if it shifts households into cars with low emission rates.
These taxes affect capital cost, which has been shown to have only small effects on car
choices. Figure 9(b) shows how these taxes induce small changes in vehicle shares.

       3.) A tax on vehicle age (tage). In our framework, tage could be modeled as a
tax on old cars or a subsidy to buying a new car. Age is more observable than EPKi,
yet highly correlated with emissions, so this policy might be nearly as effective as tEPK.
A disadvantage may be that a tax or subsidy related to age does not provide incentive
for maintenance to reduce the vehicle’s emissions rate, as would a tax on EPK.

       In 2002, the Japanese government began implementing a Green Tax structure
that adds 10% to the annual vehicle taxes already imposed on gasoline-driven vehicles
that have been registered since 1991. Vehicles of eleven years of age or older continue
to be subject to this yearly penalty in Japan. This policy is modeled here by setting trn =
tsn = 0 and tro>0, tso>0. We start with additional old-car taxes that are 10% of existing
rates (tro = 0.051 and tso =0.0345), and we test the sensitivity of results by raising those
added rates up to 100% of existing taxes.

       Figure 10(a) shows that this age tax has very similar effects on all continuous
variables (local emissions, CO2, and VKT). With added taxes equal to 100% of existing
taxes, these variables all fall by 0.35%. Compared to the tax on size, this tax on age
raises the rental cost per vehicle by the same or less, and yet it induces more emission
abatement and VKT reduction. The reason is that a large proportion of households
own old cars and thus are affected by the tax. Figure 10(b) shows that this age tax
discourages old cars that are small (so), but not necessarily larger old cars (ro). It does
provide for slightly larger increases in the no-car share and new car shares.

       C. The Marginal Cost of Abatement
                                            -22-

       To compare the cost-effectiveness of different abatement methods, many studies
estimate production or cost functions and plot for each technology the marginal cost of
abatement (MCA). Efficiency requires that such technologies be undertaken to a point
where all have the same MCA. When all curves are plotted on the same diagram, an
efficient combination is where all curves have the same height. Similar analysis for
vehicles might show the MCA for adding a type of equipment or for reducing distance.

       In this paper, as in Fullerton and Gan (2005), we use a somewhat different view
of cost-effectiveness that compares policies instead of technologies. A policy such as
the gasoline tax, for example, might induce several changes in technologies (changes in
car choices and distance choices). For each rate of tax, we calculate how the combined
changes in technologies affect emissions. We can also calculate the cost to consumers,
which in this case is a loss of consumer surplus rather than cost of equipment per se.
To calculate the cost to consumers, we use the indirect utility function for each car
choice. For each household (i.e. prefecture), we calculate the utility level at the old
equilibrium and at the new taxed equilibrium. We then iterate numerically to find the
equivalent variation (EV), the yen amount that could be given to each household at the
old prices that would allow them to attain the new utility level. This amount is negative
for a loss, so the “cost” stated as a positive amount is –EV. Government obtains some
added tax revenue, ∆R, so the net social cost or “deadweight loss” of the tax is DWL =
–EV–∆R. Comparing each tax rate to a slightly higher tax rate, we take the added DWL
over the additional abatement as the marginal social cost of abatement (MCA). Since
the DWL generally starts near zero and rises with the square of the tax rate, one might
expect the MCA to start near zero and to rise at an increasing rate.

       For each tax instrument, we increment the tax rate and calculate the average
household’s change in local emissions, EV, additional DWL, and marginal cost of
abatement. We show all MCA curves in Figure 11, where all curves are increasing, as
expected. Perhaps surprisingly, the MCA are quite low for car taxes (tage and tEPK).
Indeed, theory suggests that the tax on emissions (te) is the least cost way to reduce
emissions. The explanation is that this theory must be modified in a second best model
with other existing taxes. The existing gasoline tax in our model is 53.8yen/liter, which
essentially doubles the price of gasoline. Thus, any additional gas tax starts with a high
                                            -23-

marginal DWL. In Figure 11, the marginal cost of raising this existing gas tax is
¥5,000 for the first additional gram of abatement per household.

       Moreover, the cost of the existing gas tax is the consumer surplus lost from
reduced driving, and that cost is exacerbated by any tax that further affects distance –
such as the tax on distance (td) or on emissions (te or tc). All those taxes start with
MCA of about ¥5,000/gram and rise from there. Among those taxes, the emissions tax
does have the lowest MCA. In contrast, however, the car taxes (tage and tEPK) do not
exacerbate the pre-existing cost of reduced driving distance. If these car taxes induce
any switch toward low-emission cars, then they can reduce emissions at very low initial
marginal cost of abatement – despite having small behavioral response elasticities.

       Given that the existing gas tax already achieves some abatement, mostly through
VKT reduction, this analysis suggests that further abatement from the use of distance-
reducing taxes is more costly than achieving some marginal abatement from induced
changes in car choices. The option with the lowest cost is to tax each car at a rate
proportional to its emission rate in grams per kilometer.

V. Conclusions and Future Research

       This paper develops a model for simultaneous estimation of consumer behavior
regarding discrete choice of vehicle and continuous choice of distance driven in Japan.
We make unique use of prefectural average data on households, the 2000 Population
Census, and vehicle ownership information in Japan, all combined with fuel efficiency
and emission rates estimated from U.S. vehicle testing data. We estimate the equations
of this model simultaneously using general method of moments, and we find expected
signs of effects on vehicle and driving choices from changes to income, the annual cost
of each vehicle type, and the cost per kilometer of driving. Then we simulate different
policy alternatives and show how they change driving distance and emissions.

       Our model provides several opportunities for future research. First, it could be
used to calculate the welfare-maximizing rate for all of these policy instruments used in
combination. This possibility provides a computational analog to the voluminous
literature on “optimal tax rates”. Second, the standard errors from the estimation could
be used to calculate the standard errors around the predicted outcomes (costs, emission
levels, and optimal tax rates). Third, the model could be used to analyze distributional
                                           -24-

results, with households categorized on some meaningful basis (such as annual or
lifetime incomes). The set of all household equivalent variations could be used to
calculate changes in Gini coefficients or progressivity indices. The usual expectation is
that most of these emission policies are regressive, a fact that has discouraged the use of
incentive policies to deal with vehicle emissions problems.

       In this case, however, the model could be used to analyze subsidies to reduce
emissions. If those subsidies are accepted by households with low income, then they
might have relatively low cost of abatement and favorable distributional effects. This
kind of result can only be calculated in a model incorporating all of our features:
heterogeneity among households in terms of incomes and other characteristics that
affect discrete choice of vehicle and continuous choice of distance; estimation of
parameters and standard errors; multiple tax and subsidy policies that affect the relative
price of kilometers driven in each vehicle; technical information to calculate emissions
from each car; and the ability to solve for household welfare effects.


                                       References

Automobile Inspection and Registration Association of Japan (AIRA),
     http://www.aira.or.jp/data/ pdf/ age.pdf (2003).
Bento, Antonio, Lawrence Goulder, Mark Jacobsen and Roger Von-Haefen.“Efficiency
       and Distributional Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes,” American
       Economic Review 99:3 (June 2009), 667-99.
Bhat, Chandra R. “A Multiple Discrete-Continuous Extreme Value Model: Formulation
       and Application to Discretionary Time-Use Decisions,” Transportation
       Research: Part B: Methodological 39:8 (2005), 679-707.
Bhat, Chandra R., Sudeshna Sen, and Naveen Eluru. “The Impact of Demographics,
       Built Environment Attributes, Vehicle Characteristics, and Gasoline Prices on
       Household Vehicle Holdings and Use,” Transportation Research: Part B:
       Methodological 43:1 (January 2009), 1-18.
Brownstone, David and Kenneth Train, “Forecasting New Product Penetration with
      Flexible Substitution Patterns,” Journal of Econometrics 89 (1999), 109-29.
Brownstone, D., D.S. Bunch, T.F. Golob, and W. Ren, “A Vehicle Transactions Choice
      Model for Use in Forecasting Demand for Alternative-Fuel Vehicles,” Research
      in Transportation Economics 4 (1996), 87-129.
California Air Resources Board, Test Report of the Light-Duty Vehicle Surveillance
       Program, Series 13, Project Number 2S95C1 (September 1997).
California Air Resources Board, Report of the Results of the Vehicle Surveillance
       Program 14, Project Number 2S97C1 (March 2000).
                                           -25-

De Borger, Bruno, “Discrete Choice Models and Optimal Two-Part Tariffs in the
      Presence of Externalities: Optimal Taxation of Cars,” Regional Science and
      Urban Economics 31 (2001), 471-504.
Dubin, Jeffrey and Daniel McFadden, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
       Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica 52:2 (March 1984).
Eskeland, Gunnar and Shantayanan Devarajan, Taxing Bads by Taxing Goods:
       Pollution Control with Presumptive Charges, Washington: World Bank (1996).
Feng, Ye, Don Fullerton, and Li Gan, “Vehicle Choices, Miles Driven, and Pollution
       Policies”, Journal of Regulatory Economics 44 (August 2013), 4–29.
Fullerton, Don, and Li Gan, “Cost-Effective Polices to Reduce Vehicle Emissions”,
        American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 95:2 (May 2005), 300-4.
Fullerton, Don and Sarah West, “Can Taxes on Cars and on Gasoline Mimic an
        Unavailable Tax on Emissions?,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
        Management 43 (January 2002), 135-57.
Fullerton, Don and Sarah West, “Tax and Subsidy Combinations for the Control of Car
        Pollution,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Advances) 10:1
        Article 8 (2010).
Goldberg, Pinelopi, “The Regulation of Fuel Economy and the Demand for ‘Light
      Trucks’,” Journal of Industrial Economics 46:1 (March 1998), 1-33.
Hanemann, W. Michael, “Discrete/Continuous Models of Consumer Demand,”
     Econometrica 52:3 (May 1984), 54-62.
Harrington, Winston and Virginia McConnell, “Motor Vehicles and the Environment,”
       in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., International Yearbook of Environmental
       and Resource Economics 2003/2004, Northampton MA: Edward Elgar (2003).
Hausman, Jerry A., “Exact Consumer’s Surplus and Deadweight Loss,” American
     Economic Review 71:4 (September 1981), 662-76.
Hibiki, Akira and Toshi Arimura, “An Empirical Study of the Effect of the Fuel Tax in
        Japan on Vehicle Selection and NOx Emission,” Department of Social
        Engineering Discussion Paper, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
        http://www.soc.titech.ac.jp/~library/discuss/index_e.html (2005).
Innes, Robert, “Regulating Automobile Pollution Under Certainty, Competition, and
        Imperfect Information,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
        31 (September 1996), 219-39.
International Energy Agency (IEA), “CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion” (2013),
       http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/name,43840,en.html
Japan Automobile Dealers Association (JADA), The Automobile Statistics Data Book
       (1999, 2000, 2001, 2002).
Kohn, Robert E., “An Additive Tax and Subsidy for Controlling Automobile Pollution,”
      Applied Economics Letters 3 (July 1996), 459-62.
Mannering, Fred and Winston, Clifford, “A Dynamic Empirical Analysis of Household
      Vehicle Ownership and Utilization,” Rand Journal of Economics 16:2 (Summer
      1985), 215-36.
                                          -26-

McFadden, Daniel, “Quantitative Methods for Analyzing Travel Behavior of
     Individuals: Some Recent Developments,” in David Hensher and P. Stopher,
     eds., Behavioral Travel Modeling, London: Croom Heml (1979), 279-318.
McFadden, Daniel, “Disaggregate Behavioural Travel Demand’s RUM Side: A 30-Year
     Retrospective,” in Hensher, ed., Travel Behavior Research: The Leading Edge.
     London: Pergamon (2001).
McFadden, Daniel and Kenneth Train, “Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response,”
     Journal of Applied Econometrics 15:5 (2000), 447-70.
Ministry of the Environment of Japan, Environment Agency, Report of the Study Group
       on Economic Instruments in Environmental Policies,
       http://www.env.go.jp/en/rep/tax/ishitax.pdf (1998).
Parry, Ian W. H., Margaret Walls and Winston Harrington. “Automobile Externalities
        and Policies,” Journal of Economic Literature 45 (June 2007), 374-400.
Plaut, Pnina, “The Comparison and Ranking of Policies for Abating Mobile-Source
        Emissions,” Transportation Research D 3 (July 1998), 193-205.
Pigou, Arthur C., The Economics of Welfare, London: MacMillan (1920).
Sevigny, Maureen, Taxing Automobile Emissions for Pollution Control, Cheltenham,
      UK and Northhampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. (1998).
Schmalensee, R., Paul Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, Juan Pablo Montero and Elizabeth
      M. Bailey, “An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Trading,”
      Journal of Economic Perspective 12:3 (Summer 1998).
Sierra Research, Analysis of the Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of Remote
        Sensing Devices, Report SR94-05-05, prepared for the U.S. Environmental
        Protection Agency, Sacramento, CA: Sierra Research (1994).
Statistics Bureau of Japan, The Annual Report on the Family Income and Expenditure
        Survey, conducted by Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts and
        Telecommunications of Japan (1999, 2000, 2001, 2002).
Statistics Bureau of Japan, The 2000 Population Census, Online documentation,
        http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/kokusei/index.htm (2003).
Train, Kenneth, Qualitative Choice Analysis: Theory, Econometrics, and an Application
       to Automobile Demand, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press (1986).
Train, Kenneth, Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
       University Press (2003).
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Technical Methods for Analyzing Pricing
       Measures to Reduce Transportation Emissions, Washington, DC (1998).
West, Sarah, “Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control Policies,”
       Journal of Public Economics 88:3-4 (March, 2004), 735-57.
                                                 -27-




                        Table 1: Definitions and Summary Statistics
                                                                                           Standard
Variable Name         Definition                                              Mean         Deviation
Famsize               Average number of people in a household                  2.797         0.018
Educationa            Fraction of residents with higher education              0.231         0.005
Metro                 Fraction in densely inhabited districts                  0.504         0.016
Child                 Fraction of population under 15 years old                0.147         0.001
Earner                Number of income earners per household                   1.419         0.012
Two-earn              Dual-income fraction of households                       0.346         0.005
Age                   Average age of the head of a household                    52.6         0.133
Own-home              Homeowners fraction of households                        0.655         0.006
Income, y             Yearly total expenditure (in ¥ 100,000)                  37.57         0.275
Gas expenditure       Yearly spending on gasoline (¥ 100,000)                 0.5139         0.013
Gasoline price        Gasoline price (in ¥ per liter)                         101.09         0.267
Households            Number of households in prefecture                    1,001,335       87,586
(a)
   “Education” is the number of residents with more than high school education divided by the number of
residents with at least 6 years of education not currently in school.




               Table 2: Estimation of Fuel Efficiency and Emission Rates
                           Dependent                                                        Number
                                                                                      2
                            Variable           Constant            Age            R         of obs.
  Fuel Efficiency
  Regular-size cars     ln(MPG)                   3.093           -0.0083        0.083         96
                                                (0.0293)         (0.0029)
  Small-size cars       ln(MPG)                   3.382           -0.0128        0.217        138
                                                (0.0250)         (0.0021)
  Emission Rates
                                                   -28-

 Regular-size cars       ln(EPM)                  -1.2067           0.1480         0.609          96
                                                 (0.1259)          (0.0122)
 Small-size cars         ln(EPM)                  -0.8850           0.1176         0.465         138
                                                 (0.1300)          (0.0108)
 Carbon Dioxide Emission Rates
 Regular-size cars       ln(CPM)                   6.008            -0.0006        0.001          48
                                                 (0.0413)          (0.0122)
 Small-size cars         ln(CPM)                   5.672            0.0091         0.144          69
                                                 (0.0357)          (0.0027)
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. These regressions use U.S. data to estimate miles per
gallon (MPG), emissions per mile (EPM), and carbon dioxide emissions per mile (CPM) for Japanese
cars only. When applied to cars in Japan, these are converted to kilometers per liter (KPL), emissions per
km (EPK), and carbon dioxide emissions per km (CPK).




              Table 3: Summary Statistics of the Choice-specific Variables
 Choices                                    rn           ro            sn           so        Means
 Bundle i proportion                      0.042        0.210         0.081        0.453       0.1965
                                         (0.000)      (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.003)
 Fuel efficiency (KPLi)                   9.294        8.975        12.348       11.703       10.580
 Emission rate (EPKi)                     0.216        0.402         0.288        0.549        0.364
 CO2 emission rate (CPKi)                252.43       251.79        182.30       191.64       219.54
 Market value (ki in ¥100,000)           24.649        7.708        14.462        3.436       12.564
 Gasoline cost (pi in ¥/km)               10.88        11.26          8.19         8.64         9.74
                                         (0.029)      (0.029)       (0.022)      (0.022)
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. KPL is kilometers per liter. EPK is emissions per
kilometer (km). CPK is carbon-dioxide per kilometer.
                                            -29-

Table 4: Simultaneous Estimation of Discrete Choice and Continuous Demand

   Variable                                                 Coefficient      t-statistic
   Gas cost per kilometer of choice rn (α1rn)                  -1.032          -42.62
   Gas cost per kilometer of choice ro (α1ro)                  -0.211          -65.78
   Gas cost per kilometer of choice sn (α1sn)                  -0.291          -37.78
   Gas cost per kilometer of choice so (α1so)                  -0.064          -49.61
   Net income (β)                                             -0.0062          -3.034
   Constant for choice rn (α0rn)                                5.178          11.04
   Constant for choice ro (α0ro)                                6.920          14.11
   Constant for choice sn (α0sn)                                5.455          11.43
   Constant for choice so (α0so)                                2.831          5.830
   Constant for continuous choice (α0)                          8.765          33.34
   Famsize                                                     -0.102          -1.587
   Education                                                   -0.716          -3.299
   Metro                                                       -0.274          -3.716
   Child                                                        3.383          4.343
   Earner                                                       0.130          2.579
   Two-earn                                                    -1.005          3.742
   Age                                                         -0.014          -4.504
   Own-home                                                     1.404          6.761
   Dummy for Tohoku                                             0.028          1.318
   Dummy for Kanto                                             -0.031          -1.348
   Dummy for Hokuriku                                           0.050          1.795
   Dummy for Chubu                                              0.030          1.187
   Dummy for Kinki                                             -0.110          -4.567
   Dummy for Chugoku                                            0.083          3.737
   Dummy for Shikoku                                           -0.034          -1.470
   Notes: We use 3 years, 47 prefectures, for 141 observations. The 7 dummy variables are
   for regions of Japan. Total expenditures and capital costs are normalized in ¥100,000.
   Standard errors are computed from the heteroscedastic-consistent covariance matrix.
                                                       -30-




  Table 5: Estimated Own-Price and Cross-Price Elasticities of Each Choice with
                           Respect to Gas Cost (pi)

                       Choices
                                         rn                    ro                sn           so
  Prices
                 prn                  -1.389E-4          6.087E-6             6.087E-6     6.087E-6

                 pro                   0.219                  -0.825           0.219        0.219

                 psn                   0.061                  0.061            -0.694       0.061

                 pso                   2.249                  2.249            2.249        -2.713
Where i is the row and j is the column, each entry gives the percentage change in probability of
choosing car j for a 1% change in gas cost per kilometer of choice i.




  Table 6: Estimated Own-Price and Cross-Price Elasticities of Each Choice with
               Respect to Capital Cost (ki) and Total Expenditure (y)

            Choices                                                                            0
                                 rn               ro                   sn             so    (no car)
 Capital cost
           krn              -0.0301            0.0013               0.0013       0.0013     0.0013

           kro              3.54E-4            -0.0013              3.54E-4      3.54E-4    3.54E-4

           ksn               0.0011            0.0011               -0.0127      0.0011     0.0011

           kso               0.0202            0.0202               0.0202       -0.0243    0.0202

   Total income,
                             -0.717            -0.876               -0.766        1.038      -0.909
  expenditure (y)
Where i is the row and j is the column, each entry gives the percentage change in probability of
choosing car j for a 1% change in capital cost of choice i.
                                                     -31-




                           Table 7: Short-Run Kilometer Elasticities



  Elasticities of VKT with respect to:                                                          Values

            gas cost per kilometer of choice rn (ep,rn)                                         -11.23
            gas cost per kilometer of choice ro (ep,ro)                                         -2.378
            gas cost per kilometer of choice sn (ep,sn)                                         -2.383
            gas cost per kilometer of choice so (ep,so)                                         -0.555
            total expenditure (ey)                                                              0.233

            capital cost of choice rn (ek,rn )                                                  -0.038
            capital cost of choice ro (ek,ro)                                                   -0.012
            capital cost of choice sn (ek,sn)                                                   -0.022
            capital cost of choice so (ek,so)                                                   -0.005
  Note: All the elasticities are evaluated at the mean values of the variables.




                              Table 8: Comparison of Tax Instruments
 Δp(yen/km)               0       0.254      0.509      0.763       …       4.577      4.831       5.085
 tg (yen/liter)           0       2.690      5.380      8.070       …      48.420 51.110 53.800
 te (yen/gram)            0       0.699      1.398      2.098       …      12.586 13.286 13.985
 tc (yen/gram)            0       0.001      0.002      0.003       …       0.021      0.022       0.023
 td (yen/km)              0       0.254      0.509      0.763       …       4.577      4.831       5.085
Note: In each column, rates for the different tax instruments all induce the same change in price per
kilometer as given in the first row in bold. The average price of gasoline in our data is 101.96 ¥/liter.
                             % Δ in Local Emissions                                                                                                                                        % Δ in VKT
              0.                                                                                                                                                0.




                       -70
                             -60
                                   -50
                                              -40
                                                          -30
                                                                     -20
                                                                           -10
                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                         -70
                                                                                                                                                                               -60
                                                                                                                                                                                     -50
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -40
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                 25                                                                                                                                                25
                   4                                                                                                                                                 4
              0.                                                                                                                                                0.
                 50                                                                                                                                                50
                   9                                                                                                                                                 9
              0.                                                                                                                                                0.
                 76                                                                                                                                                76
                   3                                                                                                                                                 3
              1.                                                                                                                                                1.
                 01                                                                                                                                                01
                   7                                                                                                                                                 7
              1.                                                                                                                                                1.
                 27                                                                                                                                                27
                   1                                                                                                                                                 1
              1.                                                                                                                                                1.
                 52                                                                                                                                                52
                   6                                                                                                                                                 6
              1.                                                                                                                                                1.
                 78                                                                                                                                                78
                   0                                                                                                                                                 0
              2.                                                                                                                                                2.
                 03                                                                                                                                                03
                   4                                                                                                                                                 4
              2.                                                                                                                                                2.
                 28                                                                                                                                                28
                   8                                                                                                                                                 8
              2.                                                                                                                                                2.
                 54                                                                                                                                                54
              2. 3                                                                                                                                              2. 3
                 79                                                                                                                                                79
                   7                                                                                                                                                 7
              3.                                                                                                                                                3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -32-




                 05                                                                                                                                                05
                   1                                                                                                                                                 1
              3.                                                                                                                                                3.
                 30                                                                                                                                                30




Δp (yen/km)
                                                                                                                                                  Δp (yen/km)
                   5                                                                                                                                                 5
              3.                                                                                                                                                3.
                 56                                                                                                                                                56
                   0                                                                                                                                                 0
              3.                                                                                                                                                3.
                 81                                                                                                                                                81
                   4                                                                                                                                                 4
              4.                                                                                                                                                4.
                 06                                                                                                                                                06
                   8                                                                                                                                                 8
              4.                                                                                                                                                4.
                 32                                                                                                                                                32
                   2                                                                                                                                                 2
              4.                                                                                                                                                4.
                 57                                                                                                                                                57
                   7                                                                                                                                                 7
              4.                                                                                                                                                4.
                 83                                                                                                                                                83
                   1                                                                                                                                                 1
              5.                                                                                                                                                5.
                 08                                                                                                                                                08
                   5                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                     Figure 2: Effects of Four Policies on Local Emissions (LE)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 1: Effects of Four Policies on Vehicle-Kilometers Traveled (VKT)




                                                tc
                                                                                                                                                                                                   tc




                                         tg
                                                     te
                                                                td
                                                                                                                                                                                            tg
                                                                                                                                                                                                        te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   td
                                                                                              -33-



                                           Figure 3: Effects of Four Policies on Carbon Emissions

                              0

% Δ in Carbon Emissions
                          -10



                          -20


                                                                                                                                          td
                          -30
                                                                                                                                          te
                                                                                                                                          tc
                          -40
                                                                                                                                          tg
                          -50



                          -60



                          -70
                               4
                               9
                               3
                               7
                               1
                               6
                               0
                               4
                               8

                          2. 3
                               7
                               1
                               5
                               0
                               4
                               8
                               2
                               7
                               1
                               5
                             25
                             50
                             76
                             01
                             27
                             52
                             78
                             03
                             28
                             54
                             79
                             05
                             30
                             56
                             81
                             06
                             32
                             57
                             83
                             08
                          0.
                          0.
                          0.
                          1.
                          1.
                          1.
                          1.
                          2.
                          2.
                          2.


                          3.
                          3.
                          3.
                          3.
                          4.
                          4.
                          4.
                          4.
                          5.
                                                                                 Δp (yen/km)




                                        Figure 4: Effects of Emission Tax on Market Shares of Cars

                                         120



                                         100



                                          80



                                          60
                                                                                                                                   rn
                          %Δ in Share




                                          40                                                                                       ro
                                                                                                                                   sn
                                          20
                                                                                                                                   so
                                                                                                                                   None
                                          0



                                         -20



                                         -40



                                         -60
                                             4


                                                      3


                                                               1


                                                                        0


                                                                                 8


                                                                                          7


                                                                                                    5


                                                                                                             4


                                                                                                                      2


                                                                                                                               1
                                           25


                                                    76


                                                             27


                                                                      78


                                                                               28


                                                                                        79


                                                                                                  30


                                                                                                           81


                                                                                                                    32


                                                                                                                             83
                                        0.


                                                 0.


                                                          1.


                                                                   1.


                                                                            2.


                                                                                     2.


                                                                                               3.


                                                                                                        3.


                                                                                                                 4.


                                                                                                                          4.




                                                                                Δp (yen/km)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            %Δ in Share
                                               % Δ in Share
                                                                                                                                                                          0.




                                                                                                                                                                                   -60
                                                                                                                                                                                         -40
                                                                                                                                                                                               -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      80




                       -50
                             -40
                                   -30
                                         -20
                                                -10
                                                       0
                                                                10
                                                                      20
                                                                           30
                                                                                40
                                                                                     50
                                                                                          60
              0.                                                                                                                                                             25
                 25                                                                                                                                                            4
                   4                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                                                                                                             50
              0.
                 50
                   9                                                                                                                                                      0. 9
                                                                                                                                                                             76
              0.
                 76                                                                                                                                                            3
                   3                                                                                                                                                      1.
                                                                                                                                                                             01
              1.
                 01                                                                                                                                                            7
                   7                                                                                                                                                      1.
                                                                                                                                                                             27
              1.
                 27                                                                                                                                                       1. 1
                   1                                                                                                                                                         52
              1.
                 52                                                                                                                                                            6
                   6                                                                                                                                                      1.
                                                                                                                                                                             78
              1.
                 78                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                          2.
                   0                                                                                                                                                         03
              2.
                 03                                                                                                                                                       2. 4
                   4                                                                                                                                                         28
              2.
                 28                                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                          2.
                   8                                                                                                                                                         54
              2.
                 54                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                          2.
                   3                                                                                                                                                         79
              2.                                                                                                                                                               7
                 79                                                                                                                                                       3.
                   7                                                                                                                                                         05
              3.                                                                                                                                                          3. 1
                 05
                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -34-




                                                                                                                                                            Δp (yen/km)      30
              3.                                                                                                                                                               5
                 30                                                                                                                                                       3.




Δp (yen/km)
                   5                                                                                                                                                         56
                                                                                                                                                                               0
              3.                                                                                                                                                          3.
                 56                                                                                                                                                          81
                   0
              3.                                                                                                                                                          4. 4
                 81                                                                                                                                                          06
                   4                                                                                                                                                           8
              4.                                                                                                                                                          4.
                 06                                                                                                                                                          32
                   8                                                                                                                                                           2
              4.                                                                                                                                                          4.
                 32                                                                                                                                                          57
                   2
              4.                                                                                                                                                          4. 7
                 57                                                                                                                                                          83
                   7                                                                                                                                                           1
              4.                                                                                                                                                          5.
                 83                                                                                                                                                          08
                   1                                                                                                                                                           5
              5.
                 08
                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 5: Effects of Carbon Tax on Market Shares of Cars




                                                                                               Figure 6: Effects of Gasoline Tax on Market Shares of Cars
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            rn



                                                                                                                                                                                                            so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 sn




                                                                 ro
                                                                      rn



                                                      so
                                                           sn
                                                                                                                                                                                                     None




                                               None
                                                                  -35-

                          Figure 7: Effects of Distance Tax on Market Shares of Cars

                   60




                   40




                   20
% Δ in Share



                                                                                                                 rn
                                                                                                                 ro
                    0                                                                                            sn
                                                                                                                 so
                                                                                                                 None
                   -20




                   -40




                   -60
                       4
                       9
                       3
                       7
                       1
                       6
                       0
                       4
                       8
                       3
                       7
                       1
                       5
                       0
                       4
                       8
                       2
                       7
                       1
                       5
                     25
                     50
                     76
                     01
                     27
                     52
                     78
                     03
                     28
                     54
                     79
                     05
                     30
                     56
                     81
                     06
                     32
                     57
                     83
                     08
                  0.
                  0.
                  0.
                  1.
                  1.
                  1.
                  1.
                  2.
                  2.
                  2.
                  2.
                  3.
                  3.
                  3.
                  3.
                  4.
                  4.
                  4.
                  4.
                  5.
                                                      Δp (yen/km)



                 Figure 8: Effects of Size Tax on VKT, Carbon, and Local Emissions (LE)

                  0.000

                 -0.001

                 -0.001

                 -0.002
Percent Change




                 -0.002
                                                                                                                 VKT
                 -0.003                                                                                          LE
                                                                                                                 CO2
                 -0.003

                 -0.004

                 -0.004

                 -0.005

                 -0.005
                          0.051   0.102   0.153   0.204   0.255    0.306   0.357   0.408   0.459   0.510   trn

                          0.051   0.102   0.153   0.204   0.255    0.306   0.357   0.408   0.459   0.510   tro

                                                  Size Tax (Yen/year)
                                                               -36-


                                 Figure 9(a): Effects of an EPK-Proportional Tax

                 0.000


                 -0.200
Percent Change

                 -0.400
                                                                                                            VKT
                 -0.600                                                                                     LE
                                                                                                            CO2
                 -0.800


                 -1.000


                 -1.200
                               0.549 0.604 0.659 0.714 0.769 0.824 0.878 0.933 0.988 1.043 1.098     tso

                               0.288 0.317 0.346 0.374 0.403 0.432 0.461 0.490 0.518 0.547 0.576     tsn

                               0.402 0.442 0.482 0.523 0.563 0.603 0.643 0.683 0.724 0.764 0.804     tro
                               0.216 0.238 0.259 0.281 0.302 0.324 0.346 0.367 0.389 0.410 0.432     trn
                                        EPK-Proportional Tax (Yen Per Year)




                  Figure 9(b): Effects of an EPK Tax on Market Shares of Cars

                      1.500

                      1.000
     Percent Change




                      0.500
                                                                                                           rn
                      0.000                                                                                ro
                                                                                                           sn
                      -0.500                                                                               so
                                                                                                           None
                      -1.000

                      -1.500

                      -2.000
                                                                                                    tso
                                0.549 0.604 0.659 0.714 0.769 0.824 0.878 0.933 0.988 1.043 1.098

                                0.288 0.317 0.346 0.374 0.403 0.432 0.461 0.490 0.518 0.547 0.576   tsn

                                0.402 0.442 0.482 0.523 0.563 0.603 0.643 0.683 0.724 0.764 0.804   tro
                                0.216 0.238 0.259 0.281 0.302 0.324 0.346 0.367 0.389 0.410 0.432   trn
                                         EPK-Proportional Tax (Yen Per Year)
                                                                             -37-



                                                   Figure 10 (a): Effects of a Tax on Old Cars


                                  0.000

                                  -0.050
                 Percent Change

                                  -0.100

                                  -0.150                                                                                       VKT
                                  -0.200                                                                                       LE
                                                                                                                               CO2
                                  -0.250

                                  -0.300

                                  -0.350

                                  -0.400
                                                                                                                        tso
                                           0.000 0.035 0.069 0.104 0.138 0.173 0.207 0.242 0.276 0.311 0.345

                                               0       0       0    0    0    0     0   0       0       0       0       tsn

                                           0.000 0.051 0.102 0.153 0.204 0.255 0.306 0.357 0.408 0.459 0.510            tro

                                               0       0       0    0    0    0     0   0       0       0       0       trn
                                                                    AgeTax (Yen Per Year)




                 Figure 10 (b): Effects of a Tax on Old Cars on Market Shares of Cars

                      0.600
                      0.500

                      0.400
                      0.300
Percent Change




                      0.200                                                                                                          rn
                                                                                                                                     ro
                      0.100
                                                                                                                                     sn
                      0.000
                                                                                                                                     so
                   -0.100
                                                                                                                                     None
                   -0.200
                   -0.300

                   -0.400
                   -0.500
                                       0.000 0.035 0.069 0.104 0.138 0.173 0.207 0.242 0.276 0.311 0.345                      tso

                                           0       0       0        0    0    0     0       0       0       0       0         tsn
                                       0.000 0.051 0.102 0.153 0.204 0.255 0.306 0.357 0.408 0.459 0.510                      tro
                                           0       0       0        0    0    0     0       0       0       0       0
                                                                                                                              trn
                                                                   Age Tax (Yen Per Year)
                                                -38-



Figure 11: Marginal Cost of Abatement (MCA) for Local Emissions



                     30000


                                      t-g
                     25000            t-d
                                      t-e
                                      t-c
MCA (Yen Per Gram)




                                      t-age on car
                     20000            t-EPK on car




                     15000




                     10000




                     5000




                        0
                             0   50   100    150       200   250   300   350

                                 Grams (Per Household Per Year)
