NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTIPLE POLLUTANTS, UNCOVERED SECTORS, AND SUBOPTIMAL ENVIRONMENTAL
POLICIES
Don Fullerton
Daniel H. Karney
Working Paper 20334
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20334

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We are grateful for suggestions from Stefan Ambec, Kathy Baylis, George Deltas, Firouz Gahvari,
Garth Heutel, Stephen Holland, Jonathan Hughes, Ben Marx, Nick Muller, and Ian Sue Wing. Our
email addresses are dfullert@illinios.edu and dkarney2@illinois.edu. Regular mail can be sent to Fullerton
at the Finance Department, UIUC, Champaign IL 61820. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Don Fullerton and Daniel H. Karney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Multiple Pollutants, Uncovered Sectors, and Suboptimal Environmental Policies
Don Fullerton and Daniel H. Karney
NBER Working Paper No. 20334
July 2014
JEL No. H23,Q48,Q53
ABSTRACT
In our analytical general equilibrium model where two polluting inputs can be substitutes or complements
in production, we study the effects of a tax on one pollutant in two cases: one where both pollutants
face taxes and the second where the other pollutant is subject to a permit policy. In each case, we
solve for closed-form solutions that highlight important parameters. We demonstrate two important
ways that environmental taxes and permits are not equivalent. First, the change in the pollutant facing
a tax increase depends on whether the other pollutant is subject to a tax or permit policy. Second,
if that other pollutant is subject to a tax, then general equilibrium effects can increase or decrease its
quantity (affecting overall welfare). However, when the second pollutant is subject to a permit policy
that binds, then welfare is not affected by this spillover effect. Finally, a numerical exercise helps demonstrate
these two ways that taxes and permits differ. Using the example of coal-fired power plants, our numerical
exercise examines the impacts of increasing a hypothetical carbon tax on the quantity of sulfur dioxide
emissions.

Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
BIF Box#30 (MC520)
515 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu
Daniel H. Karney
Department of Economics
University of Illinois
David Kinley Hall
Champaign, IL 61820
dkarney2@illinois.edu

In a simple model with multiple pollutants, the first-best can be achieved either
by a tax on each pollutant or equivalent permit price that reflects each marginal
environmental damage. That is, the first-best requires each pollutant to be optimally
regulated. Not all pollutants are regulated, however, and even regulated ones likely face
suboptimal policy. The multiple pollutant setting creates complications for regulators:
tightening rules on one pollutant changes how firms value other pollutants. Thus, a
regulator concerned with social welfare who can change only one policy needs to
account for changes across multiple pollutants. For example, policymakers who adopt a
new carbon policy may not be able to adjust each regulation on other types of pollution,
especially where different laws and jurisdictions govern the different pollutants. 1
Our model is general enough to represent any industry with multiple pollutants
that are substitutes or complements, so a price increase on one can induce firms to
increase or decrease other pollutants. For example, Sigman (1996) studies chlorinated
solvents used for metal cleaning and degreasing, and she finds that raised disposal costs
for liquid chemical wastes may lead to more air emissions (i.e., substitutes). 2 Ren et al.
(2011) find that reducing CO2 by use of biofuel can increase nitrogen runoff from
farms. Our numerical example below involves coal-fired electric power plants that emit
both carbon dioxide (CO2) and sulfur dioxide (SO2). Agee et al. (2014) describe four
ways these two pollutants could be substitutes or complements. 3 They “find that
reducing NOX has substantially reduced SO2 and CO2, while reducing SO2 has
substantially increased CO2” (p.66). Our illustration uses the U.S. EPA assumption that
a carbon tax reduces use of coal and therefore both pollutants (i.e., complements).
A permit policy limits SO2 from power plants under the U.S. Acid Rain Program
(ARP), which has received much academic attention. 4 If CO2 were to be regulated by a
1

In fact, studies of a particular environmental regulation often include “ancillary” benefits from the
reduction of other pollutants. See Burtraw et al. (2003), Groosman et al. (2011) and Kolstad et al. (2014).

2

Yet, Greenstone (2003) finds little evidence that the Clean Air Act increased water or ground pollution.
Gamper-Rabindran (2006) finds that off-site recycling is a substitute for chemical waste disposal, while
Färe et al. (2012) find that NOX and SO2 are substitutes in production at power plants.
3

In response to SO2 controls, the switch to low-sulfur coal with lower heat rate could increase CO2 per
kilowatt hour. Also, desulfurization equipment uses electric power that requires burning more coal and
may generate added CO2 emissions from the chemical reactions that capture SO2. If the response is to
shut down dirty plants, then effects on CO2 depend on whether new plants use coal or natural gas.
4

See Schmalensee et al. (1998), Burtraw et al. (1998), and Carlson et al. (2000). The ARP’s cap on SO2
is not currently binding, so the permit price is zero (starting in 2011). To explore the general problem of
interactions between pollution policies, our numerical exercises use positive SO2 prices from 2007 data.

-2tax, then we expect a reduction in carbon emissions, but SO2 permit prices may rise or
fall depending on the degree to which carbon and sulfur are complements in production.
While some of the features of our model have appeared in prior literature, our
paper is the first to combine all four of the following. First, we model analytically the
general case where two pollutants can be complements or substitutes in production. 5
Second, not all pollutants are necessarily controlled by the same type of
environmental policy. Indeed, one pollutant might be subject to a tax, while another is
limited under a permit system.

Therefore, we use a framework that can analyze

multiple combinations of tax and permit policies. We show how doing so allows for a
relatively easy comparison of policy scenarios available to regulators. 6
Third, environmental policies are likely to be suboptimal, where the marginal
price per unit of pollution does not equal the marginal environmental damage. In a
multiple pollutant setting, each policy regulating each pollutant is unlikely to be optimal
for at least three reasons: technical limitations and informational constraints may
preclude correct estimation of social costs and benefits; political concerns may prevent
the adoption of a first-best policy; and, a pollution tax or price likely reflects conditions
at the time of enactment rather than present or future conditions. Furthermore, multiple
pollutants – even from a single source – are not necessarily all regulated by a single
regulator using a comprehensive approach.

Thus, we address situations where a

regulator must choose a policy given existing regulations on other pollutants. 7
Fourth, a pollution tax or permit system is unlikely to cover all sectors. A carbon
policy such as a tax or cap-and-trade system may cover more than just power plants, but
it cannot cover all carbon emissions from all industrial, commercial, transportation, and
residential sources. Existing estimates suggest that carbon policy can apply at most to

5

For examples of other models with multiple pollutants that could be complements or substitutes in
production, see Moslener and Requate (2007), Holland (2012b), Ren et al. (2011), and Agee et al. (2014).

6

Ambec and Coria (2013) provide a recent theoretical contribution that simultaneously analyzes a mix of
tax and permit policies, using a “prices vs. quantities” approach in the style of Weitzman (1974) for the
case with a technological externality for abatement effort. The sign of their key technology parameter
determines whether the pollutants are substitutes or complements. Our paper differs by using a general
equilibrium approach with perfect certainty, and we do not solve for either first- or second-best results.
Ambec and Coria (2013) rank the welfare outcomes of policy mixes, while we focus on the general
equilibrium effects for a wide range of policy choices and settings.
7

Moslener and Requate (2007) derive optimal abatement strategies in a dynamic multi-pollutant model.
We limit our analysis to welfare effects of small changes from a suboptimal equilibrium, because many
studies already consider first-best and second-best optimal policy with other distortions.

-3approximately 80 percent of U.S. carbon emissions (Metcalf and Weisbach, 2009). If
so, then a rise in the carbon price or tax may have multiple second-best effects, as
carbon emissions shift to uncovered sectors (i.e. carbon leakage). 8
Our analytical model has two sectors and two pollutants, where initial policy is
suboptimal. Both sectors are competitive, with constant returns to scale production.
We employ standard assumptions that include full information, factor mobility, and
certainty, but a less standard assumption is that one sector has three inputs: two kinds of
pollution and a clean input. We refer to the clean input as labor, but it could represent
labor, capital, or a composite of all clean inputs. For concreteness, our primary example
is electricity generation that uses labor, SO2 and CO2. With three inputs to production in
the covered sector that faces an increased carbon tax, the elasticities of substitution
between inputs become key model parameters. In addition, we assume that the other,
uncovered sector employs two inputs, labor and carbon, where these carbon emissions
face an unchanged price. Log-linearization allows us to evaluate policy changes.
Each pollutant in the covered sector could face a tax or permit policy, so we
analyze four potential combinations. Our example for the tax-permit scenario is a tax
on carbon with a permit policy on sulfur. We solve explicitly for the tax-tax and taxpermit scenarios, but the model is symmetric so the permit-tax and permit-permit
scenarios are analogous. In these scenarios, we hold the sulfur policy constant and
solve for effects of a small increase in the carbon tax. We find closed-form solutions,
interpret them, and decompose them into output and substitution effects.
The tax-tax scenario provides important baseline results. Our simple closedform solutions characterize the conditions that guarantee particular outcomes (although
perverse signs on outcomes can occur with extreme parameter values). In particular,
the signs of elasticities of substitution are important. When the carbon tax is raised,
holding the sulfur tax constant, then the covered sector’s output falls (except in unusual
cases identified below). When the two pollutants are substitutes, then SO2 may rise or
fall, but when they are complements then both effects act to reduce sulfur emissions –
with positive effects on welfare.
The tax-permit results are more complicated than the tax-tax results, because the
8

Baylis et al. (2014) analyze and discuss the carbon leakage issue in greater detail. In addition, Holland
(2012a) and Karp (2013) provide recent, analytical models of carbon leakage.

-4covered sector essentially has a fixed factor of production. Specifically, the closedform solutions in this scenario have a denominator with an ambiguous sign, unlike those
in the tax-tax scenario. However, we show how to use the tax-tax scenario solutions to
interpret both the numerator and denominator of the tax-permit solutions.
The results from the tax-tax and tax-permit scenarios highlight two important
ways that environmental tax and permits differ in a model with perfect certainty. First,
given a tax increase on one pollutant, its quantity change depends on whether the other
pollutant is subject to a tax or a permit policy. At coal-fired power plants, for example,
carbon abatement resulting from a 10 percent increase in carbon tax depends on
whether SO2 faces a tax or permit policy. Second, if SO2 were subject to a tax, then its
quantity can increase or decrease in a way that impacts overall welfare gains from the
carbon tax increase itself. However, when the second pollutant is subject to a permit
policy and that policy binds, then welfare does not change via spillover effects.
Our numerical exercise using historical data from 2007 helps demonstrate the
two ways that taxes and permits differ in this paper. In the tax-tax scenario, a 10
percent increase in a carbon tax is found to decrease CO2 emissions by 4.6 percent, and
to decrease SO2 by 0.9 percent. However, the same 10 percent carbon tax increase in
the tax-permit scenario results in a smaller decrease in CO2 emissions and zero change
in the quantity of SO2 (by definition). Despite the same tax increase in both scenarios,
these differences in outcomes yield welfare gains in the tax-tax scenario that are more
than twice the gains in the tax-permit scenario.
Section 1 below presents our basic model with multiple pollutants, and section 2
outlines our welfare analysis. Section 3 provides closed-form, analytical solutions for
changes in endogenous variables, given exogenous changes in policy.

Section 4

identifies plausible parameter values to calibrate the model. Section 5 uses those values
for numerical results, and it conducts sensitivity analysis. Section 6 briefly concludes.
1

Model

We assume perfect competition, full information, mobile factors, many identical agents,
lump-sum transfers, costless enforcement of policies, and perfect mixing of pollutants
(i.e. no non-convexities or “hot-spots”). While both sectors face a positive price for
carbon emissions from various existing energy policies, we model effects of a tighter

-5carbon policy in a “covered” sector that does not apply to the uncovered sector. We
compare only long-run equilibria and do not consider adjustment costs.
1.A Initial Setup
The covered sector produces output Y by a constant return to scale (CRTS) production
function Y = Y ( LY , CY , S ) , where LY is a productive resource called labor that could
be a composite of all non-polluting factors (labor, capital, land, and technology). The
representative firm pays a market-clearing price (pL) for the composite labor input, and
it emits both carbon (CY) and sulfur (S). 9 In sector Y, carbon and sulfur each face a tax
or permit price, depending on prevailing regulation, so the firm pays a price pCY when
emitting carbon and pS when emitting sulfur. The government returns all revenue from
taxes or permit sales via lump-sum transfer to the representative household.
Good X is the other good, produced in the uncovered sector, which emits only
carbon (CX). Good X is produced by the CRTS production function X = X ( L X , C X ) ,
where L X denotes labor use. 10 Labor is undifferentiated, so the representative firm in
sector X also pays pL per unit of labor. This sector does not face an explicit carbon
policy, but it does face an implicit price of carbon (pCX) from other policies such as a
gasoline tax, BTU tax, or fuel-efficiency standards.
The binding resource constraint in this economy is given by

L ≡ LY + L X .

Here, a fixed total amount of labor is perfectly mobile between sectors X and Y, so
leisure does not enter the utility function. In both sectors, all inputs are necessary for
production and exhibit diminishing marginal returns. These conditions – along with
regularity conditions on the consumer side – guarantee an interior solution.
In a generic utility function U = U ( X , Y ; C , S ) , the representative household
gets positive utility from the consumption of goods X and Y, and receives disutility
from total carbon emissions C = CY + CX and from sulfur emissions S. The household
can choose its level of X and Y, but not C or S, where pollutants are separable. 11
9

Pollutant S could be a generic “smoke” pollutant that accounts for all non-carbon pollution. Also,
since firms are identical, trades are irrelevant, and the permit system is equivalent to non-tradable quotas.
10

As a special case, the production of good X could be perfectly clean, emitting no pollution (CX=0) and
eliminating the leakage component of the model.

11

Many simplifying assumptions here would be interesting to investigate in a more complex model.
With non-separability in utility, for example, changes in pollution can further affect demands. With

-6Also, pX is the market clearing price for good X, and pY is the analogous price for
good Y. The household maximization problem is:

p L L + R ≥ p X X + pY Y .

max{ X ,Y } U ( X , Y ; C , S ) s.t.

where R is the lump sum rebate of revenue from the government, viewed as fixed by the
consumer but calculated as R ≡ pCY CY + pS S + pCX C X .
1.B Log-Linearization
Totally differentiate the resource constraint L ≡ LY + L X to get:
0 = α X Lˆ X + α Y LˆY

(1)

where α X ≡ L X L is the share of labor in production of good X and α Y ≡ LY L is the
share of labor used in Y. Note that α X + α Y = 1 . We use the “hat” notation throughout

(

)

this paper to denote a proportional change in any variable e.g. Lˆ X ≡ dLX LX .
Totally differentiate the production functions to show how final output changes
when firms adjust input quantities:
Xˆ = θ XL Lˆ X + θ XC Cˆ X

(2)

Yˆ = θ YL LˆY + θ YC Cˆ Y + θ YS Sˆ

(3)

where θ gi is the factor share of income for input i in the production of good g (e.g.

θ XL ≡ p L LX p X X ). Thus, θ XL + θ XC = 1 and θ YL + θ YC + θ YS = 1 .
The zero profit conditions due to perfect competition are p X X = pL LX + pCX C X
and

pY Y = pL LY + pCY CY + pS S . Totally differentiate these equations and use the

profit maximizing first-order conditions:

(

(

)

pˆ X + Xˆ = θ XL pˆ L + Lˆ X + θ XC pˆ CX + Cˆ X

(

)

(

)

)

(4)

(

)

pˆ Y + Yˆ = θYL pˆ L + LˆY + θYC pˆ CY + CˆY + θYS pˆ S + Sˆ .

(5)

consumer heterogeneity, policies would have distributional effects. With firm heterogeneity, tradable
permits would be more efficient than firm-specific quotas. With locational heterogeneity, different
sources would have differential damages (e.g. Muller and Mendelsohn (2009)). All of these interesting
extensions are beyond the scope of the present paper, but are investigated elsewhere.

-7Good X has only two inputs, so factor use responds to changes in relative input prices
via the elasticity of substitution, σ X . Differentiating the definition of σ X yields:
Cˆ X − Lˆ X = σ X ( pˆ L − pˆ CX ).

(6)

To handle three inputs to Y, we follow Allen (1938), as in Mieszkowski (1972). 12
Define eij as the Allen-elasticity of substitution between input i and input j. That is,
eij measures the effect on the quantity of i from a change in the price of input j, holding
all other input prices constant. As shown in Appendix A, the relative input factor
responses in sector Y are given by:
LˆY − Sˆ = (eLL − eSL )θYL pˆ L + (eLC − eSC )θYC pˆ CY + (eLS − eSS )θYS pˆ S

(7)

CˆY − Sˆ = (eCL − eSL )θYL pˆ L + (eCC − eSC )θYC pˆ CY + (eCS − eSS )θYS pˆ S .

(8)

If eij is positive, then the inputs are substitutes; if it is negative, they are complements.
Each input is a complement to itself ( eii ≤ 0, ∀i ). The Allen-elasticities are symmetric,

eij = e ji , and at most one of the three cross-price elasticities can be negative. 13
Finally, since pollution is separable in utility, we use σ U for the elasticity of
substitution in utility between X and Y. Differentiation yields changes in demand
behavior from a shift in output prices:
Xˆ − Yˆ = σ U ( pˆ Y − pˆ X ) .

(9)

These nine linear equation are solved below for the equilibrium impacts of p̂CY , a small
change in the covered sector’s price of carbon. 14
2

Welfare Changes

Regulators in a multiple pollutant setting have the additional concern that changing
regulation on one pollutant has general equilibrium effects that can change the quantity

12

Fullerton and Heutel (2007) similarly model relationships among labor, capital, and a single pollutant.

13

A profit maximizing firm conforms to

a iL + a iC + a iS = 0 , where aij is the partial elasticity of

substitution in production (related to the Allen-elasticity of substitution by aij = θYj eij ).
14

These equations cannot exactly consider the introduction of a new carbon tax, because the initial pCY
cannot be zero in the denominator of pˆ CY = dpCY / pCY . The initial tax could be very small, however.

-8of other pollutants.

In fact, tightening regulation on one pollutant may increase

pollution in uncovered sectors and increase emissions of the other pollutant, both results
that decrease welfare (due to initially suboptimal regulation).
Define µ C as the marginal environmental damage (MED) from a unit of carbon,
and define µ S as the MED from a unit of sulfur. In other words, µC ≡ − (∂ U ∂C ) λ ,
and µ S ≡ − (∂ U ∂S ) λ , where λ is the marginal utility of income. In general, the
welfare change – derived in Appendix B – is given by:
dU
C
C
S
= ( pCX − µC ) X Cˆ X + ( pCY − µC ) Y CˆY + ( pS − µ S ) Sˆ.
I
I
λI
I

The left-hand side is the dollar value of the change in utility
national income (I).

(dU λ ) ,

divided by

Thus, it represents the percentage change in welfare (as in

Bovenberg and de Mooij, 1994, or Fullerton and Metcalf, 2001).
Consider the case where carbon is initially under-priced relative to its MED, such
that pCX < pCY < µC . Suppose all pollutants face environmental taxes, but policymakers
increase the carbon tax in Y ( pˆ CY > 0 ), holding other taxes constant ( pˆ S = pˆ CX = 0 ).
Any reduction in CY then raises welfare through the second term above. Yet this tax
on carbon may have negative effects on welfare through either of the other two terms,

(

)

because the covered sector may increase use of sulfur Sˆ > 0 , and the uncovered sector

(

)

may increase use of carbon Cˆ X > 0 . Thus, welfare is generally ambiguous.
Next, consider the case where carbon in Y is subject to a tax increase, but sulfur is
controlled by a permit policy ( Ŝ = 0, where the permit policy binds). Thus, only carbon
leakage to the uncovered sector can offset welfare gains from reductions in CY. If pYC
is “near” the MED, then the welfare gain from Cˆ Y < 0 can be offset by the welfare loss

(

)

from leakage Cˆ X > 0 . Again, to evaluate final welfare changes would require values
for parameters in the closed-form solutions derived in the next section. 15

15

Our simple model assumes perfect mixing, so a binding sulfur permit policy means no effect on welfare
from any change in sulfur. More generally, of course, the policy may not be binding, and the carbon tax
may change sulfur emissions. Even with binding sulfur permits, but without perfect mixing, the added
carbon tax may cause a re-allocation of sulfur from low- to high-damage locations.

-93

Analytical Solutions for a Change in Carbon Policy

Equations (1) - (9) are the linear system for general equilibrium effects of a small policy
change. We define L as numeraire, so pˆ L = 0 , and we hold the carbon price in sector
X constant relative to that numeraire (as is necessary for the regulatory change not to
apply to the uncovered sector). Thus p̂CX = 0, so equation (6) simplifies to Cˆ X = Lˆ X .
Next, simplify equation (4) and compare it to equation (2) to show that pˆ X = 0 . Good
X acts as an equivalent numeraire, because both of its inputs have unchanged prices.
Equation (4) becomes redundant to equation (2), leaving eight equations.
The two pollutants in sector Y are regulated, where either CY or S can face an
environmental tax or permit policy. In a tax-tax scenario, the carbon tax exogenously
increases

( pˆ CY

( )

quantity ĈY

> 0 ) , while the sulfur tax remains constant

()

and sulfur quantity Ŝ

( pˆ S

= 0) , leaving the carbon

to vary endogenously. In contrast, a tax-permit

scenario means that the carbon tax increases, but the sulfur quantity remains unchanged

(Sˆ = 0), allowing the carbon quantity (Ĉ )
Y

and sulfur price

among the four potential policy variables in the set

{pˆ

CY

( p̂ S )

to adjust. Thus,

}

, CˆY , pˆ S , Sˆ , two will be

specified as exogenous changes, while the other two remain endogenous. The other six

{

}

unknown variables are Xˆ , Lˆ X , Cˆ X , Yˆ , LˆY , pˆ Y , so each policy scenario yields a linear
system with eight equations and eight unknowns.
Table 1 categorizes four possible scenarios, given two pollutants and two policy
regimes for each pollutant. However, we explicitly solve and analyze only two of the
four scenarios: the tax-tax case and the tax-permit case (with permits for S). The
model’s symmetry means that these two cases implicitly also solve the remaining two
scenarios (the permit-tax and permit-permit cases). Thus, for the first column of Table
1 with a sulfur tax, the carbon tax case is functionally equivalent to the box below it
with a carbon permit system. 16 Similarly, for the second column with a sulfur permit
system, the effects of a carbon tax are functionally equivalent to the effects of a carbon
permit. This symmetry highlights the fact that the type of policy on sulfur
fundamentally determines how the covered sector reacts to the tightening restriction on
16

Given a sulfur tax, the case with 1% higher carbon tax that leads to a 2% change in carbon is equivalent
to the case with a 2% change in carbon permits (which leads to a 1% increase in price).

- 10 carbon, regardless of whether that carbon restriction is a tax or permit policy. 17
Table 1: Policy Scenario Matrix, for a Change in Carbon Policy (with pˆ CX = 0 )
Sulfur Tax
Sulfur Permit
pˆ CY > 0
pˆ CY > 0
Carbon
pˆ S = 0
Sˆ = 0
Tax
(Tax-Permit)
(Tax-Tax)
Carbon
Permit

Cˆ Y < 0
pˆ S = 0
(Permit-Tax)

Cˆ Y < 0
Sˆ = 0
(Permit-Permit)

3.A Tax-Tax Scenario
The exogenous change in the tax-tax scenario is pˆ CY > 0 . The change in the price of
good Y is pˆ Y = θYC pˆ CY (by substituting equation (3) into (5) and cancelling terms).
Thus, the price of Y always rises relative to the price of X (since pˆ X = 0 ). Further
algebra reveals the change in output of good Y (given the sulfur tax, p S ):
Yˆ

pS

= α X [γ C eCC + γ S eSC − σ U ]θYC pˆ CY

(10)

α θ 
α θ 
where γ C ≡  Y YC  > 0 and γ S ≡  Y YS  > 0 . Perhaps surprisingly, the added
 α X θYL 
 α X θYL 

carbon tax in Y might raise output. 18 We interpret the three terms in the brackets in
equation (10) when pˆ CY > 0 . First, γ C eCC ≤ 0 reflects an own-price effect on carbon
use from an increase in carbon price. All inputs have a positive marginal product, so
less carbon means less Y. In the third term, when the carbon tax increases pY , then

σ U > 0 means that consumers shift demand away from good Y. Thus, the sign of Yˆ
depends on the second term. If the two pollutants are complements

(γ S eSC < 0) , then

the higher price of carbon reduces sulfur. Less of this input would also reduce output Y,

17

Alternatively, either pollutant could face an environmental mandate. Fullerton and Heutel (2010) show
how a restrictions on emissions per unit output is equivalent to the combination of a tax on emissions and
subsidy to output. A similar model is possible here but would add considerable complexity.
18

Output always falls in the simpler model of Baylis et al. (2014), but the carbon tax can raise output in a
model with three inputs and particular complementarities (Fullerton and Heutel, 2007).

- 11 which then unambiguously falls.

This term has the opposite sign when the two

pollutants are substitutes, so then the change in Y is ambiguous.
Alternatively, equation (10) can be rewritten as:
Yˆ

pS

= −[α X σ U + α Y eLC ]θYC pˆ CY .

(10')

This equation shows that when carbon and labor are substitutes (eLC > 0) , then Y must
fall. 19 We explicitly show those two forms for Yˆ because equation (10) highlights the
cross-pollutant elasticity eSC , while equation (10') provides a more compact closedform solution with fewer parameters.
Next, we solve for the change in the covered sector’s carbon emissions: 20





CˆY
= − (α X σ U + α Y eLC ) + eCC θYC pˆ CY .



pS 
Substitution 
Output
Effect
Effect



(11)

The second term in this equation is the substitution effect. It is always negative,
because eCC ≤ 0 ; the higher carbon tax induces firms to substitute away from carbon.
The first term is called the output effect because it equals Yˆ from equation (10'). In
general its sign is ambiguous, but only in very unusual cases would a carbon tax
increase output in the covered sector. Therefore, CY likely falls. 21
Next, we report solutions for the changes in sulfur (S) and labor (LY):

This e LC > 0 does not imply eSC < 0 , but eSC < 0 does imply eLC > 0 (since the properties of Allenelasticities guarantee 0 = θ e + θ e + θ e and e < 0 ). Therefore, to guarantee Yˆ < 0 , carbon
19

YL LC

YC CC

YS SC

CC

and labor being substitutes is a more general condition than the pollutants being complements. Also, it
might be easier to determine empirically whether C and L are substitutes, since L is often well measured.
20

Equation (11) can be inverted to yield the solution to the permit-tax scenario (where carbon gets a
 Cˆ Y 

1
=
tighter permit policy, while sulfur is subject to a tax): pˆ CY
.

p S  − (α X σ U + α Y eLC ) + eCC θ YC 

21

From (10'), output Y rises when CY and LY are complements ( eLC < 0 ) and

from (11), carbon still falls if eCC >

α X σ U + α Y eLC ) .

α Y eLC > α X σ U ( but

In our numerical example, α X is much larger

than α Y so output of Y always falls. Since pY / p X rises, Y can only rise if X rises more, which is only
possible if real income rises (e.g. if the increase in pCY reduces distortions from initial pCY < pCX ).

- 12 -

Sˆ

LˆY

pS

= {− (α X σ U + α Y eLC ) + eSC }θYC pˆ C ≡ Apˆ CY

pS

= {− (α X σ U + α Y eLC ) + eLC }θYC pˆ CY

(12)

(13)

where the notation Apˆ CY in (12) is used below. Equations (12) and (13) have forms
similar to (11). The output effect is the same in all three equations (and it is negative
except in unusual cases, as discussed). The substitution effect in (11) has a clear sign
(because eCC < 0), but the substitution effects in equations (12) and (13) have
ambiguous signs (since the signs of eSC and eLC are ambiguous). For instance, if the
two pollutants are substitutes (eSC > 0) , then the carbon tax has a positive substitution
effect on sulfur. Since the output effect is usually negative, however, the net effect on
sulfur would still be ambiguous. However, if the two pollutants are complements (as in
EPA assumptions used below), then the carbon tax would reduce sulfur in both terms.
The change in labor is similarly ambiguous. Only one of the three cross-price
Allen-elasticities can be negative, however, so both eSC and eLC cannot simultaneously
have negative signs. Thus, one of those substitution effects is positive. Furthermore,
we can rewrite (13) as:
LˆY

pS

= −α X [σ U − eLC ]θYC pˆ CY .

(13')

Therefore, σ U > eLC guarantees LˆY < 0 (because consumers substitute away from Y).
Since σ U > 0 , equation (13') says that LY must fall, unless labor and carbon are more
substitutable in production than the two goods are substitutable in utility.
Finally, we look at carbon leakage, defined as the change in pollution in the
other sector, building on Baylis et al. (2014). They have a simpler model, with carbon
as the only pollutant, and they show that because firms in sector X face an unchanged
cost of carbon ( pˆ CX = 0 ) with labor as numeraire ( pˆ L = 0 ) , they choose to adjust carbon
and labor inputs equally ( Cˆ X = Lˆ X ). With CRTS, proportional changes in both inputs
means the same proportional change in output, and leakage here is:

- 13 -

Cˆ X

pS

= Lˆ X

pS

= Xˆ

pS

= −(α Y α X )LˆY = α Y [σ U − eLC ]θYC pˆ CY .

(14)

In summary, these closed-form solutions highlight how the signs of endogenous
outcomes are determined by cross-price elasticities that need to be estimated. We show
how an increase in the carbon tax decreases carbon emissions in the covered sector
(except in unusual cases where covered sector output rises). The same carbon tax may
or may not raise sulfur emissions when the pollutants are substitutes, but it reduces SO2
when the pollutants are complements (except in unusual cases with more output). The
amount of labor used in the covered sector falls, unless labor and carbon are more
substitutable in production than the goods are substitutable in consumption.
3.B Tax-Permit Scenario
If a tax is levied on carbon while sulfur is subject to a permit policy, then pˆ CY > 0 and
Sˆ = 0 . Here, the quantity of sulfur is fixed, so changes in the carbon tax do not affect

sulfur emissions. Unlike the tax-tax scenario, the price change in sector Y can have an
ambiguous sign and is recursively given by pˆ Y = θYS pˆ S + θYC pˆ CY , where p̂ S is now
endogenous. Also, unlike the tax-tax scenario, price changes such as p̂ S in the taxpermit scenario include a denominator (D). To define this term D, we first digress to
look briefly at an alternate tax-tax case with a change only in the sulfur tax:
Sˆ

pCY

= {− (α X σ U + α Y eLS ) + eSS }θYS pˆ S ≡ Dpˆ S .

(15)

This equation merely switches the roles of CY and S in equation (11) above (instead
of finding the effect on carbon from a change in carbon tax, it show the effect on sulfur
from a change in the sulfur tax). The reason for that digression is that we can use it to
show the effect on sulfur price from a change in carbon tax:
pˆ S

 − (α X σ U + α Y eLC ) + eSC  θYC
A
pˆ CY = − pˆ CY
= −

S
D
 − (α X σ U + α Y eLS ) + eSS  θYS

where A is the coefficient from equation (12) in the tax-tax scenario.

(16)

- 14 The change in sulfur permit price has an ambiguous sign, and equation (16)
initially appears complicated relative to solutions in the tax-tax scenario, because it
contains four different Allen-elasticites and a denominator. While D is not necessarily
negative, a strong enough substitution effect in equation (15) would likely mean that an
increase in the sulfur tax decreases the sulfur quantity (in that other tax-tax scenario).
Closed-form solutions for the other endogenous variables in the tax-permit scenario
have the same denominator as equation (16), so for purposes of discussion we focus on
the “normal” case where eSS < 0 is large enough to ensure that D is negative.
In the numerator (A) of the tax-permit scenario in (16), suppose carbon and
sulfur are complements (where eSC < 0 implies eLC > 0 and eLS > 0 ). Intuitively, when
the pollutants are complements, an increase in carbon price reduces demand for sulfur
and thus the sulfur price. Furthermore, neither eLC > 0 nor eLS > 0 guarantees pˆ S < 0 ,
so the sign of the cross-price elasticity between pollutants provides greater information
on the sign of endogenous variables than does the sign of the cross-price elasticity
between labor and either pollutant (where the opposite is true in the tax-tax scenario).
Next, solving the closed-form solution for p̂Y yields:
pˆ Y

S

=

θYC D − θYS A
D

pˆ CY

(17)

where the denominator is the same as in equation (16), and the sign is generally
ambiguous. The output price may fall despite an increase in the cost of an input. A
large enough substitution effect in D leads to (θYC D − θYS A) < 0 , however, meaning the
price of good Y likely increases (since we assume the denominator is likely negative).
Recursively, the change in output is Yˆ = θYL LˆY + θYC Cˆ Y , which is simply the
weighted-sum of the changes in the two inputs (since the tax-permit scenario fixes the
quantity of sulfur). Solving for the closed-form solution yields:
Yˆ

S

=−

eSCθYC D − eSSθYS A
pˆ CY
D

(18)

where (18) looks similar to (17), but Allen elasticities enter each numerator term to
switch from a price solution to a quantity solution. Also, equation (18) has a negative
sign, unlike (17), because price and quantity generally move in opposite directions.

- 15 -

[

]

1 ˆ
Y − θYL LˆY , an expression
Next, insert Sˆ = 0 into (3) and solve for Cˆ Y =

θYC

that decomposes the change in carbon into output and substitution effects. Here, due to
the fixed sulfur content, the substitution effect is just the scaled change in the clean
labor input. The closed-form solution is:
Cˆ Y

S

=−

(eSC − eCC )θYC D − (eSS − eCS )θYS A pˆ

CY

D

.

(19)

This equation is similar to (18), but it has two more elasticities in the numerator. Again,
we might expect the quantity of carbon to fall when the carbon tax increases, but
equation (19) in general has an ambiguous sign. However, the two pairs of elasticity
parameters in the numerator can help explain the ambiguity. The pair (eSC − eCC )
measures the relative changes in sulfur and carbon given a carbon price change. Most
plausible parameters suggest that the own-price effect is larger than cross-price effects.
Thus, since eCC < 0 , and assuming that eCC > eSC , then (eSC − eCC ) > 0 means the first
term in the numerator is negative (reducing carbon in Y). 22
Finally, comparing equations (11) and (19) shows that whether sulfur faces a tax
or permit policy clearly changes how the carbon tax affects the quantity of carbon
emissions. When the increased carbon tax affects sulfur quantities, only in the tax-tax
case, pollutant complementarity means that those changes in sulfur quantities have their
own feedback effects on the desired quantity of carbon input.
Similarly, the change in the clean composite (labor and capital) input LY in the
tax-permit scenario can be decomposed into output and substitution effects using
equation (3) with Sˆ = 0 . The closed-form solution here is also complicated, given by:
LˆY

S

=−

(eSC − eLC )θYC D − (eSS − eLS )θYS A pˆ
D

CY

.

(20)

It has a form like equation (19), but with some of the elasticity parameters switched.
Specifically, (eSC − eLC ) measures the relative changes in sulfur and labor given a
carbon price change, while (eSS − eLS ) measures the relative change in sulfur and labor
22

Similarly, the pair

(eSS − eCS )

measures the relative changes in sulfur and carbon, given the sulfur

price change from equation (16) and recalling the symmetry of Allen-elasticities (eSC = eCS ) .

- 16 given a sulfur price change. Finally, as in the tax-tax scenario, carbon leakage in sector
X is given by the recursive equation Cˆ X = −(α Y α X )LˆY .
Overall, compared to the tax-tax scenario, we find that the tax-permit scenario
has more ambiguous outcomes that depend on parameter values, since sector Y has a
fixed-factor of production (S). As in the tax-tax scenario, however, we can still
decompose the changes to input variables ( ĈY and L̂Y ), into output and substitution
effects. In the end, we still highlight the intermediate conclusion that the cross-price
elasticities need to be estimated.
4

Parameter Values

This section provides parameter values for a numerical illustration that uses equations
above to solve for endogenous outcomes and welfare. Analytical expressions in section
3 are complex, with ambiguous signs in many instances, so this calculation can help
determine both signs and magnitudes. The covered sector in this example is all of U.S.
electricity generation, which emits both CO2 and SO2 and which can substitute away
from carbon in the long run by switching from coal to natural gas or wind power.
We note that the price of sulfur permits has recently fallen to zero in the U.S., but
we wish to illustrate our model for positive pollution prices, so we calibrate the model
to emission data and economic data from the year 2007. Also, our simplified analytical
model does not capture all possible effects of a carbon tax in general equilibrium, such
as in a computational model with explicit fuel markets. It is therefore not a “forecast”
of actual effects from a carbon tax, but merely an illustration of analytical results above.
4.A Benchmark Levels
The U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) report 2007 GDP of $13,808
billion, which we use for national income, I (see U.S. BEA, 2009). The U.S. Energy
Information Agency (EIA) calculates end-use electricity sales of $344 billion, or 2.5
percent of total economic activity (U.S. EIA, 2009). Thus, we use $344 billion for pY Y .
Table 2 records all of the benchmark levels (used to obtain our primary parameters).
Next, the U.S. EPA’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory (U.S. EPA, 2009a) reports that
electric generators emitted 2,397 million metric tons (MMtons) of CO2 in 2007
(constituting 42 percent of all U.S. domestic CO2 combustion emissions that year).

- 17 While no carbon tax or permit policy currently applies to the U.S. electricity market, we
suppose a hypothetical initial price of $15 per metric ton of CO2 as a starting point
(Hassett, Mathur, and Metcalf, 2009). Thus, pCY CY equals $36 billion. The rest of the
economy emitted 3,339 MMtons of CO2 from fossil fuel combustion in 2007. We use
$5 per metric ton of CO2 in sector X, and thus pCX C X equals $16.7 billion. 23
Table 2: Benchmark Levels
Level Variable
CY

Value
2,397.2

Units
MMtons

Source
U.S. EPA (2009a)
Hassett, Mathur, and
Metcalf (2009)
Authors’ calculation

pCY

15.0

$/metric ton

pCY CY
S
pS
pS S
CX
pCX
pCX C X
I = GDP
pY Y
pX X
R = pCY CY + pS S + pCX C X
p L LY
pL LX
L = LX + LY

36.0
8,973.0
530.0

$ billions
thousand tons
$/metric ton

4.8

$ billions

Authors’ calculation

3,338.6
5.0

MMtons
$/metric ton

U.S. EPA (2009a)
Authors’ assumption

16.7
13,807.5
343.7
13,463.8
57.4
303.0
13,447.1
13,750.1

$ billions
$ billions
$ billions
$ billions
$ billions
$ billions
$ billions
$ billions

Authors’ calculation

U.S. EPA (2009b)
Bloomberg Data

U.S. BEA (2009)
U.S. EIA (2009)
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ assumption
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation
Authors’ calculation

Second, the National Emissions Inventory (U.S. EPA, 2009b) reports that
generators emitted 8,973 thousand tons of SO2 from fossil fuel combustion in 2007
(constituting 69.4 percent of all U.S. domestic SO2 emissions). For the initial p S in our
model, we use the equilibrium price for emission permits under the U.S. EPA’s Acid
Rain Program cap-and-trade regime, which represents the opportunity cost for each ton
23

Sector X includes all of the economy except electricity. The U.S. gasoline tax as a fraction of those CO2
emissions is over $5/ton, but it’s not clear how much of the gasoline tax covers congestion or other
externalities as opposed to carbon. Also, emissions in sector X face other implicit costs from energy
efficiency and other regulations. Finally, the Chicago Climate Exchange (CCX) was a market where U.S.
companies voluntarily bought and sold carbon allowances, so the price on this exchange represents an
opportunity cost that firms faced when emitting CO2. In 2007, the average daily mid price for 2007
allowances was $3.18 per metric ton. Rather than attempt a precise calculation, we just use $5/ton for pCX.

- 18 of SO2 emissions. We use the average of the 2007 vintage allowance price during the
year 2007, or $530 per ton of SO2 emissions. Thus, p S S equals $4.8 billion. 24
Since the production function Y ( LY , CY , S ) exhibits constant returns to scale
with zero profits, clean input costs

( pL LY )

can be identified by subtracting the costs of

pollution from sales revenue. Then the normalization p L = 1 determines LY . Since the
electricity sector has $40.8 billion in emission costs, the remainder of $303 billion must
be paid to the non-polluting input. A similar calculation is conducted for the rest of the
economy to determine L X .
Table 3: Primary Parameter Values
Parameter

α X ≡ LX / L
α Y ≡ LY L
θ YL ≡ LY ( pY Y )
θ YC ≡ ( pC CY ) ( pY Y )
θ YS ≡ ( p S S ) ( pY Y )

Value
Panel A: Share Parameters
0.978
0.022
0.882

Source

See Table 2

0.105

See Table 2

0.014
Panel B: Allen-Elasticities

eSC
e LS
e LC
e LL
eCC

-0.6

Authors’ calculation

0.5

Considine and Larson (2006)

0.5

Authors’ assumption

eSS

-27.3

-0.1
-4.1

Authors’ calculations

Panel C: Other Parameters

σU
µC
µS

0.25

Ross (2008)

39

Tol (2009)

1,510

Muller and Mendelsohn (2009)

Notes: Values subject to independent rounding.

Next, these levels are converted into the share parameter values used in the loglinearized equations (1)-(9), and hence in the closed-form solutions. For example,
Table 3 panel A shows that the U.S. electricity sector uses 2.2% of the total clean inputs
24

Generating units under 25 MW are exempt from the cap, but a vast majority of emissions are covered.
The permit price data are reported by Evolution Markets and retrieved via Bloomberg data terminal.

- 19 in the economy (α Y = 0.022 ) , and those clean inputs account for 88.2% of the inputs in
sector Y (θYC = 0.882 ) .
4.B Allen-Elasticities
Equations (7)-(8) contain nine Allen-elasticities that determine input demand responses
in the covered sector. However, the Allen-elasticities are symmetric ( eij = e ji ). Also,
knowing the cross-price Allen-elasticities (eij for i ≠ j ) and share parameters determines
the own-price Allen-elasticities (see Appendix A). Thus, we focus on identifying the
cross-price Allen-elasticities (e SC , e LC , e LS ) , and we use them to determine the ownprice elasticities (e LL , eCC , eSS ) . All these are best interpreted as long-run elasticities.
A key question in our analysis is whether the two pollutants are substitutes or
complements. As Appendix C explains, we use the EPA’s analysis of proposed carbon
cap-and-trade law to determine our primary value of e SC , and we find -0.6 (so carbon
and sulfur are complements under EPA assumptions). Also, we round the 0.47 estimate
of Considine and Larson (2006) for the labor and sulfur elasticity to eLS = 0.5 , and we
assume that same value for the labor and carbon elasticity (eLC ) . Remaining own-price
terms are derived from those. Table 3 panel B reports all primary-case elasticity values.
4.C Other Parameters
Table 3 panel C reports the final three parameters needed.

For the elasticity of

substitution in utility (σ U ) , we use 0.25, which is the value used by the U.S. EPA in
their computational general equilibrium model as their household substitution parameter
between energy and all other goods (Ross, 2008). 25 Tol (2009) surveys the literature
and finds an average estimate for the MED of carbon dioxide

(µC )

that we convert to

$39 per metric ton for 2007. Muller and Mendelsohn (2009) calculate an average MED
of sulfur dioxide

(µ S ) that we convert to $1,510 per ton.26

25

This low elasticity of substitution in utility between electricity and other goods is consistent with
empirical estimates of a low price elasticity of demand for electricity.

26

Tol (2009) reports a social cost of carbon of $105 per metric ton (in 1995), a value we convert to CO2
equivalent and inflate to 2007 dollars using the All Items CPI (Series ID# CUSR0000SA0). Muller and
Mendelsohn (2009) report an SO2 MED estimate in 2002 dollars, which we also inflate to 2007.

- 20 5

Numerical Results

5.A Results with Primary Parameters
Our numerical results appear in Table 4. Column (1) reports results for the tax-tax
policy scenario, where the carbon tax increases by 10 percent, and an SO2 tax remains
constant (so p̂CY is 0.10 and p̂ S is zero by assumption; those entries are shaded grey).
As a result of this policy change with primary-case parameters, covered CO2 emissions
fall by 4.6 percent, and SO2 emissions fall by almost one percent. As the carbon price
increases, complementarity between pollutants (eSC = −0.6) leads to the decline in SO2
(-0.90). Producers increase their use of the clean input, a result expected from the
substitutability between carbon and labor (eLC = 0.5) . Next, the price of good Y
increases by slightly more than one percent, and output of Y falls by 0.27 percent.
Since production of X retains an unchanged ratio of inputs, the increase in L̂Y
means that both L̂ X and Ĉ X must fall. Thus, the tax on CO2 in sector Y cuts carbon in
both sectors. Leakage is slightly negative with primary-case parameters. 27 Carbon
pollution can fall in both sectors because carbon has no binding constraint; decreasing
its use in one sector does not necessitate increasing its use in the other sector. As a
result of the policy change, overall welfare improves by 0.59 percent, which is a utility
increase worth $8.13 billion per year. The welfare gain is almost evenly split between
gains from carbon reduction in the covered sector (0.287 percent) and SO2 reductions
(0.302 percent). The reduction in carbon emissions of the uncovered sector is small and
adds little to welfare. Interesting is the fact that this added carbon tax raises slightly
more welfare from SO2 reduction than from CO2 reduction. 28
However, if both MED’s are really only half of the size measured by Tol (2009)
and Muller and Mendelsohn (2009), then the welfare gains fall by more than half (see
Table 4 panel C). For example, halving the MEDs for the tax-tax scenario leads to a
27

Intuition for the negative leakage result in Baylis et al. (2014) is simple: a carbon tax can induce firms
to use more clean inputs per unit of output, and thus draw resources away from the other sector, which
reduces the other sector’s output and emissions. The same mechanism operates in this model.
28

The Muller and Mendelsohn (2009) estimate of marginal damage from sulfur is $1,310/ton for 2002
(scaled to 2007 in Table 3). But Muller (2014) reports an emission-weighted estimate for the same year
that is $15,906/ton, more than ten times larger. The latter estimate uses different procedures, including a
higher value of statistical life (VSL). If we used this latter estimate of µ S , then the huge majority of the
welfare gain from a carbon tax increase would be attributable to reductions in sulfur emissions.

- 21 welfare gain of 0.123 percent instead of 0.589 percent. Despite the fact that the model’s
equations for changes are linear, section 3 shows that welfare changes are:

dU
C
C
S
= ( pCX − µC ) X Cˆ X + ( pCY − µC ) Y Cˆ Y + ( pS − µ S ) Sˆ.
λI
I
I
I
Table 4: Results with our Primary-case Parameters (% change)

Variable/Policy

ĈY
p̂C
Ŝ
p̂ S

L̂Y
p̂Y
Yˆ
Xˆ = Lˆ X = Cˆ X

From ĈY
From Ŝ
From Ĉ X

Scenario
Tax-Permit
Tax-Tax
Tax-Permit
[Match
[Baseline]
[Match Tax]
Carbon]
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Quantity and Price Changes
-4.59
-4.56
-4.59
10.00
-0.90
0.00

-9.43

10.06
0.00
-2.36

20.66
0.00
-4.85

0.26
0.25
0.25
1.05
1.01
1.02
-0.27
-0.26
-0.26
-0.006
-0.006
-0.006
Panel B: Welfare Changes [Primary-case]
(MEDs: µC = 39.0 and µ S = 1510 )

0.51
2.09
-0.54
-0.012

0.287
0.302
0.0002

10.00
0.00
-2.35

Tax-Permit
[Match
Welfare]
(4)

0.285
0.000
0.0002

0.287
0.000
0.0002

Overall %
0.589
0.285
0.287
$ billions
8.13
3.94
3.96
Panel C: Alternate Welfare Changes [Sensitivity Analysis]
(MEDs: µC = 19.5 and µ S = 755 )

0.589
0.000
0.0005
0.589
8.13

From Ŝ
From Ĉ X

0.054
0.036
0.0001

0.053
0.000
0.0001

0.054
0.000
0.0001

0.110
0.000
0.0002

Overall %
$ billions

0.123
1.70

0.053
0.74

0.054
0.74

0.110a
1.52a

From ĈY

Note: Grey cells indicate exogenously set variable. Each cell is independently rounded.
a
These welfare changes do not match those reported in Column (1). To match the welfare change in this
case with the alternate MED values, the carbon tax increase would need to be 23.06% instead of the
20.66% reported in Panel A.

- 22 When the MEDs are halved, the differences ( pCY − µC ) and ( p S − µ S ) fall by
more than half. For example, primary-case parameters values yield ( pCY − µC ) = 24,
but halving the carbon MED changes that difference to 4.5, a drop of over 81 percent.
Welfare is affected disproportionally by a larger social cost.
Table 4 column (2) reports primary results for the tax-permit scenario with the
carbon tax increase of 10% and holding fixed the permit policy on sulfur. Here, sector
Y’s decrease in carbon emissions is only slightly lower than in the tax-tax scenario.
However, the welfare gain is only 0.285 percent – approximately half of the gain in the
tax-tax scenario – because sulfur is fixed in the tax-permit case. Meanwhile, the sulfur
price falls. This column numerically demonstrates how effects of the carbon tax on
carbon emissions depend on whether the policy on sulfur is a tax or permit policy.
Table 4 column (3) matches the change in sector Y’s carbon emission across the
two policy scenarios. Here, the tax-permit scenario needs a larger carbon tax increase
(10.06%) to reach the same 4.59% reduction in carbon emissions as in the tax-tax
scenario. 29 Table 4 column (4) sets the carbon tax increase in tax-permit scenario to
match the welfare gains of the tax-tax scenario; we find that this tax rate increase would
need to more than double (20.7% rather than 10%). 30

(

)

Table 5 decomposes the input variables CˆY , Sˆ , LˆY from Table 4 into output and
substitution effects, using the analytical expressions in section 4. In column (1), for
example, the change in carbon in sector Y is -4.59%, with -0.27 percentage points
coming from the output effect and -4.32 percentage points coming from the substitution
effect. The output effect for each cell in Table 5 is just the value of Yˆ

from the

corresponding column in Table 4 (so the output effect is constant within each column).
Since the decomposition is linear, the remainder must be the substitution effect.
While the levels of the output and substitution effects are important, we find the
ratio of the two effects to be quite informative. First, for ĈY , note that the ratio of the
29

Interestingly, even with a higher tax rate, the tax-permit scenario has a smaller output effect compared
to the tax-tax scenario (-0.26% vs. -0.27%). It is offset by a larger substitution effect.
30

When both pollutants face taxes, a higher carbon tax gets about half of its welfare gain from the 0.9%
sulfur reduction (Table 4 column (1)). Thus, SO2 policy is suboptimal, and we could ask about effects of
reducing sulfur directly. From the same benchmark, when we hold the carbon tax constant and suppose
that the number of sulfur permits is reduced 0.9%, the effect is almost no reduction in carbon emissions
and approximately half the welfare gains of column (1). Alternatively, to match column (1) welfare gain
with no change in the carbon tax would require nearly doubling the SO2 cap reduction to -1.74 percent.

- 23 substitution effect to the output effect is 16.18 in column (1) but rises to 16.62 in
columns (2) – (4). This result is expected, given that the fixed sulfur input in the taxpermit scenarios keeps output from falling as much as in the tax-tax scenario. Second,
the ratio for ĈY is the same in three columns (2) – (4), as expected from the model’s
linearity. Third, the ratio for L̂Y is the same across all models. Decomposition of
output and substitution effect helps to understand the numerical outcomes.
Table 5: Primary-case Output and Substitution Effects (% change)

Tax-Tax
[Baseline]
Yˆ = −0.27
(1)

(

Variable/Policy
-4.59
ĈY
Output:
Substitution:
Ratio [Sub/Out]:
-0.90
Ŝ
Output:
Substitution:
Ratio [Sub/Out]:
0.26
L̂Y
Output:
Substitution:
Ratio [Sub/Out]:

)

-0.27
-4.32
16.18
-0.27
-0.63
2.35
-0.27
0.52
-1.96

Scenario Name
Tax-Permit
Tax-Permit
Tax-Permit
[Match
[Match
[Match Tax]
Carbon]
Welfare]
Yˆ = −0.26
Yˆ = −0.26
Yˆ = −0.54
(2)
(3)
(4)
-4.56
-4.59
-9.43
-0.26
-0.26
-0.54
-4.31
-4.33
-8.89
16.62
16.62
16.62
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.25
0.25
0.51
-0.26
-0.26
-0.54
0.51
0.51
1.05
-1.96
-1.96
-1.96

(

)

(

)

(

)

Note: Grey cells indicate exogenously set variable. Each cell is independently rounded.

5.B Sensitivity
Whether the two pollutants are substitutes or complements drives many of the empirical
results. Thus, we conduct a sensitivity analysis by varying the parameter eSC from –2
to 2 along the horizontal axis in three figures for the tax-tax scenario. When varying

eSC , we hold the input shares and the other cross-price Allen-elasticities constant (and
satisfy θYi eii + θYj eij + θYk eik = 0 by letting own-price elasticities adjust). In each figure,
one curve represents the primary-case assumption of σ U = 0.25 , while one curve has no
output effect (σ U = 0 ) , and the other has a larger output effect (σ U = 1) .

- 24 Figure 1 shows the percent change in covered carbon dioxide (CY) for a 10
percent increase in the carbon tax, while the sulfur tax remains constant. From equation
(11), we know that the substitution effect (eCC ) strongly influences this outcome, and
thus we observe only small variations in the carbon quantity change for different values
of eSC or σ U . The value of ĈY

on the vertical axis only changes by about one

percentage point, such as from -4.0 to -5.0 percent.
Figure 1: Tax-Tax Sensitivity Analysis: Percent Change in Carbon Quantity

Figure 2: Tax-Tax Sensitivity Analysis: Percent Change in Sulfur Quantity

- 25 Next, Figure 2 shows that the change SO2 quantity varies greatly across different
values of eSC . In fact, the sign and size of Ŝ changes from -3.0% to +2.0% as the
pollutants become strong substitutes. The case with the strong output effect (σ U = 1)
allows consumers to shift away from good Y, which reduces the demand for sulfur.
Lastly, Figure 3 depicts the welfare changes in dollars, and it shows that welfare
can indeed fall as a result of tightening carbon policy when the pollutants are highly
substitutable. A strong output effect (σ U = 1) mitigates that danger to welfare, again
because falling output of Y reduces input demand for sulfur emissions. Total benefits
can be positive or negative, depending on parameter values.
Figure 3: Tax-Tax Sensitivity: Welfare Change (in billions of dollars)

Finally, we observe that the primary-case parameterization leads to some
numerical outcomes that do not differ much between the tax-tax and tax-permit
scenarios. In the first two columns of Table 4, for example, the output change in sector
Y is -0.27% in the tax-tax scenario and -0.26% in the tax-permit scenario. Similarly,
the change in carbon emissions from sector Y is -4.59% in the tax-tax scenario and
-4.56% in the tax-permit scenario. These small numerical differences are due to the
small input shares for sulfur and carbon in sector Y (in contrast, note that welfare
changes for these two scenarios differ more: 0.589% vs. 0.285%).
Therefore, we conduct sensitivity analysis on these pollution share parameters in
Table 6. Column (1) repeats the primary-case from Table 4, while column (2) shows

- 26 results from a numerical example that doubles the sulfur share θYS (from 0.014 to
0.028, while simultaneously adjusting residual parameters). 31 Indeed, if S is interpreted
as “smoke”, to encompass all other pollutants, then the share might well be double that
for sulfur alone. For the tax-tax scenario (panel A), Yˆ and ĈY are unaffected by
increasing the sulfur share alone, since neither θ YS nor any residual parameter appears
in equations (10') and (12). Meanwhile, given the same decrease in output, the higher
sulfur share means that carbon does not fall as much as in the primary case. For the taxpermit scenario in panel B, output and carbon have smaller decreases than in the
primary case. The greater sulfur share reduces the input flexibility for sector Y, and
thus the carbon tax change has less impact. Overall, Table 6 column (2) shows greater
differences between the two scenarios when the sulfur share is larger.
Table 6: Share Sensitivity (% change)

Variable/Policy

Yˆ
ĈY

Sensitivity
Double
Double
Sulfur
Share
Carbon
Share
Primary-case
(θYS = 0.028) (θYC = 0.209)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Panel A: Tax-Tax Scenario
-0.27
-0.27
-0.53
-4.59
-4.44
-4.34
-0.90
-0.90
-1.79
Panel B: Tax-Permit Scenario [Match Tax]
-0.26
-0.25
-0.51
-4.56
-4.38
-4.26
0
0
0

Ŝ

Yˆ
ĈY
Ŝ

Double Sulfur
& Carbon
Shares
(4)
-0.53
-4.18
-1.79
-0.49
-4.02
0

Note: Grey cells indicate exogenously set variable. Each cell is independently rounded.

Table 6 column (3) doubles the primary-case carbon price and the carbon share.
Intuitively, when the share of carbon is larger, the same 10% tax increase leads to
greater percentage changes in output price and quantity. Mechanically, θ YC appears in
We use emissions data to calculate the sulfur and carbon shares, while 1 = θYL + θYC + θYS identifies the
labor share as a residual. The literature and U.S. EPA data provide the cross-price Allen-elasticities
eLS , eLC ,eSC . Yet a profit maximizing firm conforms to aiL + aiC + aiS = 0 , where aij = θYj eij . Thus,
31

(

)

the own-price Allen-elasticities are residuals. For example, eSS = (− 1 θYS )(θYC eSC + θYLeLS ) . A
consequence is that our small θYS implies large eSS . Doubling θYS yields a more reasonable eSS .

- 27 the numerator of all the closed-form expressions. 32 Finally, Table 6 column (4) doubles
both the sulfur and carbon shares. These results combine the greater differences from
column (2) with the greater magnitudes in column (3) to get numerical results that have
larger absolute differences than any of the other three columns.
6

Conclusion

In order to solve analytically for all price and quantity outcomes in general equilibrium,
this paper builds a two-sector model of a closed economy using standard assumptions of
perfect competition, constant returns to scale, mobile factors of production, and perfect
certainty.

Yet we consider two pollutants in the covered sector that may be

complements or substitutes, where either pollutant maybe controlled by a tax or by a
permit system. We find closed-form solutions that show general equilibrium outcomes
for any parameter values, and we provide intuition for our results.
The paper highlights two important ways that pollution taxes and permit policies
are not equivalent. First, the quantity change for a pollutant subject to a tax increase
depends on whether the other pollutant faces a tax or permit policy. Second, if that other
pollutant pays a tax, then general equilibrium effects can increase or decrease its
quantity and impact overall welfare. However, when the second pollutant is subject to a
permit policy, and that policy binds, then welfare does not change via spillover effects.
The model is general enough that it can be applied to many multiple pollutant
problems within and across media. As an example, we conduct a numerical analysis of
the U.S. electricity sector that emits carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide from burning
coal. Our most plausible parameters reflect the U.S. EPA assumption that CO2 and SO2
are complements across the entire sector, and so a tax on CO2 increases welfare by
reducing both pollutants within the covered sector.

The numerical exercise helps

demonstrate the two ways that environmental taxes and permits differ in a general
equilibrium model with multiple pollutants and initially suboptimal policies.

32

Despite these larger differences between columns (1) and (3), the differences within column (3)
between the tax-tax scenario and the tax-permit scenario are similar to the difference within column (1).

- 28 Appendix A: Factor Demand Responses in Sector Y
Here, we derive equations (7) and (8), describing the input demand responses to
changes in input prices. Define the input demand functions from cost minimization:

LY = LY ( pL , pCY , pS , Y )
CY = CY ( pL , pCY , pS , Y )
S = S ( pL , pCY , pS , Y ) .
Next, totally differentiate each input demand function.

dLY =

∂LY
∂L
∂L
∂L
dp L + Y dpCY + Y dp S + Y dY
∂p L
∂pCY
∂p S
∂Y

dCY =

∂CY
∂CY
∂C
∂C
dp L +
dpCY + Y dp S + Y dY
∂p L
∂pCY
∂p S
∂Y

dS =

∂S
∂S
∂S
∂S
dpCY +
dp S +
dY
dp L +
∂p L
∂pCY
∂p S
∂Y

Divide through each equation by LY , CY , and S, respectively, and rearrange.

dLY ∂LY pL dpL ∂LY pCY dpCY ∂LY pS dpS ∂LY Y dY
=
+
+
+
∂pL LY pL ∂pCY LY pCY ∂pS LY pS
∂Y LY Y
LY
dCY ∂CY p L dp L ∂CY pCY dpCY ∂CY pS dpS ∂CY Y dY
=
+
+
+
CY
∂p L CY p L ∂pCY CY pCY
∂pS CY pS
∂Y CY Y
dS ∂S pL dpL
∂S pCY dpCY ∂S pS dpS ∂S Y dY
=
+
+
+
S ∂pL S p L ∂pCY S pCY ∂pS S pS ∂Y S Y
Constant returns to scale production implies that the input demand functions are
homogenous of degree one in Y, so

∂LY Y
∂CY Y
∂S Y
= 1,
= 1 , and
= 1 . Next,
∂Y LY
∂Y CY
∂Y S

the equations can be rewritten using the “hat” notation as:
LˆY = aLL pˆ L + aLC pˆ CY + aLS pˆ S + Yˆ
Cˆ Y = aCL pˆ L + aCC pˆ CY + aCS pˆ S + Yˆ
Sˆ = aSL pˆ L + aSC pˆ CY + aSS pˆ S + Yˆ

where aij is the elasticity of demand for input i with respect to input price j, leaving all
the other inputs constant. Using the algebraic identity aij = θ Yj eij , then:

- 29 LˆY = eLLθYL pˆ L + eLCθYC pˆ CY + eLSθYS pˆ S + Yˆ
CˆY = eCLθYL pˆ L + eCCθYC pˆ CY + eCSθYS pˆ S + Yˆ
Sˆ = eSLθYL pˆ L + eSCθYC pˆ CY + eSSθYS pˆ S + Yˆ .

Finally, because these equations are not independent, subtract the third from the first
and second, respectively, to eliminate Yˆ , and rearrange using the symmetry of the
Allen-elasticities (eij = e ji ) to yield equations (7) and (8).
Appendix B: Derivation of the Welfare Equation
Totally differentiate the utility function:
dU =

∂U
∂U
∂U
∂U
dX +
dY +
dC +
dS
∂X
∂Y
∂C
∂S

Substitute in the first-order conditions (FOCs),

∂U
∂U
= λp X and
= λpY from the
∂X
∂Y

household maximization problem, where λ is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget
constraint. Next, totally differentiate the production functions for X and Y and
substitute the resulting dX and dY into the equation above to get:


 ∂X
∂X
dU = λp X 
dL X +
dC X 
∂C X

 ∂L X
 ∂Y
∂U
∂Y  ∂U
∂Y
dLY +
dCY +
dS  +
dC +
dS
+ λpY 
∂S
∂CY
∂S  ∂C
 ∂LY

.

Continuing, totally differentiate the resource constraint using dL X = −dLY :

 ∂X

(− dLY ) + ∂X dC X 
dU = λp X 
∂C X
 ∂LX

 ∂Y
 ∂U
∂Y
∂Y
∂U
+ λpY 
dLY +
dCY +
dS  +
dC +
dS .
∂CY
∂S  ∂C
∂S
 ∂LY
The profit maximizing FOCs in sector X are p X
the FOCs in sector Y are pY

∂X
∂X
= pCX . Also,
= p L and p X
∂C X
∂L X

∂Y
∂Y
∂Y
= pCY , and pY
= p S . Distribute
= p L , pY
∂CY
∂S
∂LY

p X and pY across terms, and substitute the appropriate FOC:

- 30 dU = −λp L dLY +λpCX dC X
+ λ ( p L dLY + pCY dCY + p S dS ) +

∂U
∂U
dC +
dS .
∂C
∂S

Note that the p L dL Y terms cancel, to leave:
dU = λpCX dC X + λ ( pCY dCY + pS dS ) +

Next, divide through by

∂U
∂U
dC +
dS .
∂C
∂S

λ , and substitute the expressions

dC = dC X + dCY ,

µC ≡ − (∂U ∂C ) λ , and µ S ≡ − (∂U ∂S ) λ into the previous equation to yield:
dU

λ

= pCX dC X + pCY dCY + pS dS − µC (dC X + dCY ) − µ S dS

where µC and µ S are the marginal environmental damages from carbon and sulfur.
Next, divide through by total income I, and employ the “hat” notation, to get the
welfare equation in the text.
Appendix C: Carbon and Sulfur Substitution Elasticity
The EPA’s examination of the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009 (HR
2454, 111th Congress) uses many assumptions in a large complicated model to provide a
long-run projection of future emission quantities and prices for both CO2 and SO2. Our
Table A-1 reports the emission price-quantity pairs from the EPA’s analysis of HR
2454, where panel A is the projected business-as-usual scenario, and panel B makes
projections for a simplified version of the proposed cap-and-trade legislation. 33 We run
a simple regression to “estimate” e SC , using these price and quantity projections as if
they were data. This regression is not based on any observed behavior in response to
price changes; it is only meant to summarize all of the EPA assumptions in the form of
our single e SC parameter. To proceed, integrate the definition of e SC to obtain:
 S
log
 CY

 p 

 = log(c) − eSC log S 

 pCY 

where log(c) is the constant of integration. The definition of

eSC

holds output

constant, and therefore we control for output when we linearly regress this equation

33

See http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/economics/economicanalyses.html for this EPA analysis.

- 31 using the data in Table A-1 panel B. We find a value for e SC equal to -0.6; that is, the
EPA must be assuming, in effect, that the two pollutants are complements. 34
We also need the cross-price elasticities relating the composite clean input (LY)
to each pollutant (CY and S). Considine and Larson (2006) find 0.47 for the long-run
Morishima-elasticity of substitution between labor and sulfur (m LS ) . 35 Assuming for
the moment that e LC = e LS , the theorem below shows that the cross-price Allenelasticity e LS

also equals m LS . Since that was estimated to be 0.47, we use the

rounded value of 0.5 for both eLC and e LS for our numerical example in the text.
Table A-1: U.S. EPA’s Projected Input-Output and Quantity-Price Pairs for SO2
and CO2 Emissions, for Electricity Generating Sector (2006 Dollars)
Total
Total
SO2
SO2
Generation Electricity
Quantity
Price
Output
Cost
(Mtons)
($/ton)
($billions)
(TWh)
Panel A: Business-As-Usual
123.8
4096
4277
283
131.5
4142
4005
255
150.9
4352
3833
308
165.7
4578
3691
415
Panel B: HR 2454
120.7
4056
4627
130
121.1
3966
4119
117
126.5
3930
3818
142
138.1
4044
3523
191

Year

2012
2015
2020
2025
2012
2015
2020
2025

CO2
Quantity
(MMtons)

CO2
Price
($/metric
ton)

2362
2359
2462
2566

-

2272
2164
2065
2008

11.34
13.14
16.95
21.59

(Note: The EPA’s analysis only reports values for the four years included in the table. The sulfur dioxide
quantity-price pairs come from the national Acid Rain Program’s cap-and-trade regime. TWh is a
terawatt-hour or 10^12 watt-hours, a unit of energy.)

Theorem: Let Y (i, j , k ) be a CRTS production function of three inputs for a profit
maximizing firm, let mij denote the cross-price Morishima-elasticity for input i and

34

The standard errors from this regression are misleadingly low, because the EPA’s modeling and
projections are deterministic. Our procedure here does not yield any statistical properties; it only
summarizes the EPA’s assumptions about the many unknown parameters and the chosen model structure.
The actual “estimate” of the elasticity is approximately -0.62, but we simply use -0.6 to avoid
unwarranted claims of accuracy in this estimation.

35

Blackory and Roberts (1989) can be used to show that the Morishima-elasticity of substitution for
quantity i and price j, mij , is related to the Allen-elasticity of substitution by the algebraic identity

(

)

mij = θYi e ji − eii .

- 32 price j, and let eij denote the cross-price Allen-elasticity for quantity i and price j. If

eij = eik , then mij = eij .
Proof: Blackorby and Roberts (1989) show that mij = a ji − aii , where aij

is the

partial elasticity of substitution in production, and where aij = θYj eij . Recall that eij = e ji
, and that θ Yj is the factor share of income for input j in the production of good Y, so

θYi + θYj + θYk = 1 . Also, the condition aii + aij + aik = 0 is a property of the profit
maximizing firm’s optimum, and thus θYi eii + θYj eij + θYk eik = 0 . Under our assumption

eij = eik , it holds that (θ Yj + θ Yk )eij = −θ Yi eii , and:

mij = a ji − aii
= θYi e ji − θYi eii
= θYi eij − θYi eii

= θYi eij + (θYj + θYk )eij
= eij

References
Agee, Mark D., Scott E. Atkinson, Thomas D. Crocker, and Jonathan W. Williams
(2014), “Non-separable Pollution Control: Implications for a CO2 Emissions Cap
and Trade System,” Resource and Energy Economics, 36(1), 64–82.
Allen, Roy. G. D. (1938): Mathematical Analysis for Economists. St. Martin’s Press,
New York.
Ambec, Stefan, and Jessica Coria (2013): “Prices vs. Quantities with Multiple
Pollutants,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66(1), 123-40.
Baylis, Kathy, Don Fullerton, and Daniel H. Karney (2014): “Negative Leakage,”
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 1(1), 51-73.
Blackorby, Charles, and R. Robert Russell (1989): “Will the Real Elasticity of
Substitution Please Stand Up? (A Comparison of the Allen/Uzawa and Morishima
Elasticities,” American Economic Review, 84(4), 1085-89.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Ruud A. de Mooij (1994): “Environmental Levies and
Distortionary Taxation,” American Economic Review , 84(4), 1085–9.
Burtraw, Dallas, Alan Krupnick, Erin Mansur, David Austin, and Deirdre Farrell
(1998): “Costs and Benefits of Reducing Air Pollutants Related to Acid Rain,”
Contemporary Economic Policy, 16(4), 379-400.

- 33 Burtraw, Dallas, Alan Krupnick, Karen Palmer, Anthony Paul, Michael Toman, and
Cary Bloyd (2003): “Ancillary Benefits of Reduced Air Pollution in the US from
Moderate Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Policies in the Electricity Sector,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 45(3), 650-73.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen L. Palmer (2000):
“Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade?,”
Journal of Political Economy, 16(4), 379-400.
Considine, Timothy J., and Donald F. Larson (2006): “The Environment as a Factor of
Production,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 52(3), 64562.
Färe, Rolf, Shawna Grosskopf, Carl A. Pasurka Jr., and William L. Weber (2012):
“Substitutability among Undesirable Outputs,” Applied Economics, 44, 39–47.
Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel (2007): “The General Equilibrium Incidence of
Environmental Taxes,” Journal of Public Economics, 91(3-4), 571-91.
Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel (2010): “The General Equilibrium Incidence of
Environmental Mandates,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(3),
64-89.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert Metcalf (2001): “Environmental Controls, Scarcity Rents,
and Pre-existing Distortions,” Journal of Public Economics, 80(2), 249-67.
Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti (2006): “Did the EPA’s Voluntary Industrial Toxics
Program Reduce Emissions? A GIS Analysis of Distributional Impacts and Bymedia Analysis of Substitution,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, 52(1), 391–410.
Greenstone, Michael (2003), “Estimating Regulation-Induced Substitution: The Effect
of the Clean Air Act on Water and Ground Pollution,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, 93(2), 442-448.
Groosman, Britt, Nicholas Z. Muller, and Erin O’Neill (2011): “The Ancillary Benefits
from Climate Policy in the United States,” Environmental and Resource
Economics, 50(4), 585-603.
Hassett, Kevin, Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert Metcalf (2009): “The Incidence of a U.S.
Carbon Tax: A Lifetime and Regional Analysis,” Energy Journal, 30(2), 155-77.
Holland, Stephen P. (2012a): “Emissions Taxes and versus Intensity Standards: SecondBest Environmental Policies with Incomplete Regulation,” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 63(3), 375-387
Holland, Stephen P. (2012b): “Spillovers from Climate Policy,” in The Design of
Implementation of Climate Policy, Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, editors,
University of Chicago Press.
Karp, Larry (2013): “The Income and Production Effects of Leakage,” Working paper,
University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Kolstad, Charles et al. (2014): “Social, Economic and Ethical Concepts and Measurement”, in Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change, Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Fifth Assessment Report (WGIII).

- 34 Metcalf, Gilbert, and David Weisbach (2009): “The Design of a Carbon Tax,” Harvard
Environmental Law Review, 33(2), 499-556.
Mieszkowski, Peter (1972): “The Property Tax: An Excise Tax or a Profits Tax?,” The
Journal of Public Economics, 1(1), 73-96.
Moslener, Ulf, and Till Requate (2007), “Optimal Abatement in Dynamic Multipollutant Problems When Pollutants Can Be Complements or Substitutes,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(7), 2293-316.
Muller, Nicholas Z. (2014): “Using Index Numbers for Deflation in Environmental
Accounting,” Environment and Development Economics, 19(4), 466–86.
Muller, Nicholas Z., and Robert Mendelsohn (2009): “Efficient Pollution Regulation:
Getting the Right Prices,” American Economic Review, 99(5), 1714-39.
Ren, Xiaolin, Don Fullerton, and John B. Braden (2011): “Optimal Taxation of
Externalities Interacting through Markets: A Theoretical General Equilibrium
Analysis,” Resources and Energy Economics, 33(3), 496-514.
Ross, Martin T. (2008): “Documentation of the Applied Dynamic Analysis of the
Global Economy (ADAGE) Model,” Research Triangle Institute Working Paper
08_01 Durham NC (http://www.rti.org/pubs/adage-model-doc_ross_sep08.pdf).
Schmalensee, Richard, Paul L. Joskow, A. Denny Ellerman, Juan Pablo Montero, and
Elizabeth M. Baily (1998): “An Interim Evaluation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions
Trading,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(3), 53-68.
Sigman, Hilary (1996), “Cross-Media Pollution: Responses to Restrictions on
Chlorinated Solvent Releases” Land Economics, 72(3), 298-312.
Tol, Richard S. J. (2009): “The Economic Effects of Climate Change,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 23(2), 29-51.
U.S. BEA (2009): “National Income and Product Accounts Tables: 1.5.5. GDP”, (link:
http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/SelectTable.asp?Selected=N), Washington,
DC.
U.S. EIA (2009): “Electric Power Monthly: July 2009 [Table 5.2]”, (link:
http://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/archive/pdf/02260907.pdf),
Washington,
DC.
U.S EPA (accessed 2009a): “2009 U.S. Greenhouse Gas Inventory Report”, Table ES2: Recent Trends in U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, (link:
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport09.html),
Washington, DC.
U.S. EPA (accessed 2009b): “National Emissions Inventory (NEI) Air Pollution
Emissions
Trend
Data”,
Sulfur
Dioxide
Annual
Data,
(link:
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/), Washington, DC.
Weitzman, Martin L. (1974): “Prices vs. Quantities,” The Review of Economic Studies,
41(4), 477-91.

