                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INFORMATION, MISALLOCATION AND AGGREGATE PRODUCTIVITY

                                          Joel M. David
                                        Hugo A. Hopenhayn
                                       Venky Venkateswaran

                                        Working Paper 20340
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20340


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Jaroslav Borovicka, Virgiliu Midrigan, Pete Klenow and Laura Veldkamp for their helpful
comments, Andy Atkeson, Yongs Shin, Jennifer La’O, Ben Moll and Bernard Dumas for their insightful
discussions of earlier versions, Cynthia Yang for excellent research assistance, and many seminar
and conference participants. David gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Center for Applied
Financial Economics at USC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joel M. David, Hugo A. Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information, Misallocation and Aggregate Productivity
Joel M. David, Hugo A. Hopenhayn, and Venky Venkateswaran
NBER Working Paper No. 20340
July 2014
JEL No. E44,O11,O16,O47

                                              ABSTRACT

We propose a theory linking imperfect information to resource misallocation and hence to aggregate
productivity and output. In our setup, firms look to a variety of noisy information sources when making
input decisions. We devise a novel empirical strategy that uses a combination of firm-level production
and stock market data to pin down the information structure in the economy. Even when only capital
is chosen under imperfect information, applying this methodology to data from the US, China, and
India reveals substantial losses in productivity and output due to the informational friction. Our estimates
for these losses range from 7-10% for productivity and 10-14% for output in China and India, and
are smaller, though still significant, in the US. Losses are substantially higher when labor decisions
are also made under imperfect information. We find that firms turn primarily to internal sources for
information; learning from financial markets contributes little, even in the US.


Joel M. David                                        Venky Venkateswaran
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Southern California                    Stern School of Business
3620 South Vermont Ave.                              New York University
Kaprielian Hall, 300                                 7-81 44 West 4th St
Los Angeles, CA 90089                                New York NY 10012
joeldavi@usc.edu                                     vvenkate@stern.nyu.edu

Hugo A. Hopenhayn
UCLA
Department of Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hopen@econ.ucla.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20340
1        Introduction
In a frictionless environment, the optimal allocation of factor inputs across productive units
requires the equalization of marginal products. Deviations from this outcome represent a misal-
location of resources and translate into sub-optimal aggregate outcomes, specifically, depressed
levels of productivity and output. A recent body of work empirically documents the presence
of substantial misallocation and points out its potentially important role in accounting for large
observed cross-country differences in productivity and income per-capita. With some notable
exceptions, however, the literature has remained largely silent about the underlying factors
driving this misallocation.
     In this paper, we propose just such a theory, linking imperfect information to resource
misallocation and hence to aggregate productivity and output. Our point of departure is a
standard general equilibrium model of firm dynamics along the lines of Hopenhayn (1992).
The key modification here is that firms choose inputs under limited information about their
idiosyncratic fundamentals, specifically, demand conditions in their own markets. This infor-
mational friction leads to a misallocation of factors across firms in an ex-post sense, reducing
aggregate productivity and output. The size of this effect depends on the residual uncertainty
at the time of the input choice, which, in turn, is a function of the volatility of the fundamental
shocks and the quality of information at the firm level. Our analytical framework enables a
sharp characterization of these relationships and yields simple closed-form expressions linking
informational parameters at the micro-level to aggregate outcomes.
     The second piece of our theoretical framework focuses on the firm’s learning problem. Our
flexible information structure assumes that firms learn from a variety of sources. In addition
to those within the firm (which we will refer to as ‘private information’), firms also observe
movements in their own stock prices, which aggregate the information of financial market
participants about the firm’s future prospects. We capture this aggregation using an explicit
model of financial market trading in the noisy rational expectations paradigm of Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980).1 Informed investors and noise traders trade shares of the firm’s stock,
generating imperfectly revealing equilibrium prices.
     The presence of informative asset prices serves two purposes in our analysis: first, as we
describe next, the informational content of observed market prices is at the core of our empirical
approach and allows us to identify the severity of otherwise unobservable informational frictions.
Second, we are able to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of financial markets to allocative
efficiency through an informational channel, i.e., by providing useful information to decision-
makers within firms. Our analysis is, to the best of our knowledge, the first to measure and shed
    1
        We rely particularly on recent work by Albagli et al. (2011b) for our specific modeling structure.



                                                          2
light on the aggregate consequences of this channel in a standard macroeconomic framework.
    Any attempt at quantifying uncertainty runs into an obvious difficulty - the econometrician
seldom observes agents’ information directly. In our setting, one approach would be to use
the observed degree of misallocation, i.e., dispersion in marginal products. This would lead
to an accurate measure of uncertainty if misallocation was entirely driven by informational
frictions. In reality, however, a host of other factors are likely to contribute to dispersion in
marginal products.2 Without explicitly modeling these factors (and quantitatively disciplining
their magnitudes), disentangling the severity of informational frictions is not a straightforward
exercise. This concern applies more broadly to attempts at inferring uncertainty purely from
production-side moments (i.e., data on inputs and outputs). For example, the volatility of
investment and its covariance with measures of fundamentals are affected by (and therefore,
informative about) firm-level uncertainty, but are also likely to be influenced by other factors.
    One of the contributions of this paper is a novel empirical strategy that is robust to these
concerns. The main insight behind this strategy is that we can draw sharp inferences about the
degree of uncertainty faced by a firm by observing a subset of its information set. Stock market
prices allow us to do just that. The first step is to measure the informational content of prices
and the extent to which input decisions covary with them. The correlation of stock returns with
future fundamentals and investment, respectively, are natural and intuitive candidates. The
second and key step is to note that for a given level of noise, the extent to which firm decisions
comove with the price signal is a function of the overall quality of their information (from all
sources, including those we do not observe). The poorer this quality, the higher is the correlation
between investment and stock market returns. Intuitively, the information contained in stock
returns plays a bigger role in the firm’s investment decision when the firm is more uncertain. It
is worth emphasizing the need to analyze these moments together - the correlation of returns
with investment alone does not tell us much about the extent of uncertainty.3
    For special cases of our model, this intuition can be formalized quite sharply. When firm-level
fundamentals are i.i.d. or follow a random walk, we prove that the informational parameters
of our model are identified by these two correlations (of stock returns and fundamentals and
investment, respectively, as well as the volatility of returns in the latter case). Our use of cor-
relations, as opposed to variances or covariances, makes this strategy robust to some important
perturbations of our baseline model; for example, to the inclusion of additional factors that have
   2
      To cite a few examples, these could be technological factors (e.g., adjustment costs), financial constraints,
taxes or regulations.
    3
      To give a simple example, the correlation between returns and investment can be high either because
firms and investors are both perfectly informed, in which case all firm-level variables are functions of a single
fundamental shock, or alternatively, because firms are poorly informed and therefore learn much from market
prices.



                                                        3
a ‘scaling’ effect on the firm’s capital choice, e.g., distortions that dampen the responsiveness
of investment to fundamentals. For the analytically tractable special cases, we show that the
scaling effects introduced by such distortions do not affect our measure of the total uncertainty
faced by firms, despite generating dispersion in marginal products. Our identification strat-
egy is also robust to the presence of correlation between firm and market information. Again,
we prove this result to be exact in the special cases: here, our measure of firm uncertainty
remains valid for any degree of correlation. In fact, even if the information in stock prices is
fully redundant from the perspective of the firm, implying that firms do not learn anything
new from them, our strategy uncovers the true extent of uncertainty. This is a reassuring find-
ing because it shows that our estimates of the severity of informational frictions are robust to
assumptions about the extent of commonality between firm and market information sets, an
object which is difficult to measure given the richness of information flows between firms and
market participants (financial statements, announcements, regulatory filings, etc.).
     In our quantitative work, we depart from these polar cases and consider an intermediate
level of persistence in fundamentals that is in line with the data. However, we show numerically
that the informational parameters are still well identified by the same set of moments and that
our estimates of uncertainty display a similar robustness to perturbations. In particular, we
demonstrate this robustness by considering the effect of capital adjustment costs as well as
correlation in firm and market signal errors.
     We apply our methodology to data on publicly traded firms from 3 countries - the US, China
and India. Our results show substantial uncertainty at the micro level, particularly in China and
India, leading to significant levels of misallocation. Even in the US, which has the highest degree
of learning, our most conservative estimate for the posterior variance of the firm is about 40%
of the ex-ante, or prior, uncertainty.4 The corresponding estimates for the other two countries
range from about 60-80%. To put these results in context, we compare them to direct measures
of misallocation in our sample and find that informational frictions account for anywhere from
20-50% of observed dispersion in the marginal (revenue) product of capital, a fraction that goes
up once we control for firm-fixed effects. The associated implications for aggregate productivity
and output are then quite significant. In China and India, TFP losses (relative to the first best)
are in the range of 7-10%, while losses in steady state output (again relative to the first best)
range from 10% to almost 15%. The corresponding values in the US are noticeably smaller but
still significant - 4% for productivity and 5% for output. Importantly, these baseline calculations
assume that only investment decisions are made under imperfect information while labor can
adjust perfectly to contemporaneous conditions. In this sense, they are conservative estimates
   4
    Given our AR(1) structure on fundamentals, the prior uncertainty is simply the variance of contempora-
neous innovations.



                                                    4
of the total impact of informational frictions. Assuming that the friction affects labor inputs
to the same degree as capital leads to losses that are substantially higher. For example, in this
case, the gap between status quo and first best increases to about 55-80% in TFP and 80-100%
in output for China and India. We interpret this as an upper bound on the total effect of the
friction, with reality likely falling somewhere in between this and the baseline version.5
    Our framework also enables us to quantify the sources of learning, particularly the contribu-
tion of financial markets. To the extent that prices reflect information not otherwise available
from firms’ internal sources, stock markets provide firms with valuable information and guide
real activity. Note that this does not require investors to know more than firms; only that they
are privy to different information that may also be relevant for firm decisions.6 Here, we arrive
at a striking conclusion - learning from stock prices is at best only a small part of total learn-
ing at the firm level, even in a relatively well-functioning financial market like the US.7 Thus,
the contribution of financial markets to overall allocative efficiency and aggregate performance
through this channel is quite limited. We show that this is primarily due to the high levels of
noise in market prices, making them relatively poor signals of fundamentals.8 A counterfactual
experiment delivering access to US-quality financial markets (in a purely informational sense)
to firms in China and India generates only small improvements in allocative efficiency.9 In
contrast, a significant amount of learning occurs from private sources, i.e., those internal to the
firm. Moreover, disparities along this dimension, that is, in the quality of such information,
are the primary drivers of cross-country differences in the severity of informational frictions,
much more so than access to well-functioning financial markets. This finding, in spirit, parallels
those in Bloom et al. (2013), who highlight the role of manager skill and/or better manage-
ment practices in explaining cross-country differences in performance. Finally, we show that
differences in the volatility of firm-level fundamentals also play a meaningful role in explaining
cross-country differences in the severity of informational frictions. Firms in China and India are
subject to larger shocks to fundamentals than firms in the US, making the inference problem
   5
       We provide suggestive evidence that this is the case using observed dispersion in the marginal product of
labor among US firms.
     6
       The informational content of stock returns and their role in guiding real activity is the focus of an active
body of work in corporate finance, both theoretical and empirical. We will briefly survey this literature later in
this section.
     7
       This is true even under our baseline assumption that the information in stock prices is conditionally
independent of the firm’s own signals, which, in a sense, is the most optimistic case. Allowing for correlation
would further reduce the extent of new information in prices.
     8
       This is related to the concepts of Forecasting Price Efficiency (FPE), namely, to what extent do prices
reflect and predict fundamentals, and Revelatory Price Efficiency (RPE), namely, to what extent do prices
promote real efficiency by providing new information to firms, as defined in Bond et al. (2012). Our results
imply that the poor RPE of stock prices stems from their poor FPE.
     9
       Of course, this does not consider other channels through which informative prices, and more generally,
well-functioning stock markets may improve efficiency. See the discussion in Section 4.4.



                                                        5
more difficult in those countries even without the differences in signal qualities.
    Our paper relates to several existing branches of literature. We bear a direct connection
to recent work on the aggregate implications of misallocated resources, for example, Hsieh and
Klenow (2009), Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), Guner et al. (2008), and Bartelsman et al.
(2013). Indeed, we can map our measure of informational frictions directly into the measures
of misallocation studied in these papers, i.e., into the dispersion in marginal products and the
covariance between firm-level fundamentals (productivity, for example) and activity (i.e., factor
use or output). We differ from these papers in our explicit modeling of a specific friction as
the source of misallocation, a feature we share with Midrigan and Xu (2013), Moll (2014),
Buera et al. (2011), and Asker et al. (2012), who study the role of financial frictions and capital
adjustment costs, respectively. We view our analysis as complementary to those investigating
the role of adjustment costs; specifically, in predicting a sluggish response of investment to
fundamentals, our theory provides a foundation for adjustment costs, one that may help guide
future modeling strategies along these lines and takes a step toward disentangling technological
frictions from informational ones, factors that standard estimates of adjustment costs would
seem to confound.10 As an example, Asker et al. (2012) assume in their baseline specification
that adjustment cost parameters are the same for all countries. Our analysis provides a primitive
that would justify considering cross-country differences in these costs. Our focus on the role
of imperfect information is related to that of Jovanovic (2013), who studies an overlapping
generations model where informational frictions impede the efficient matching of entrepreneurs
and workers.
    Our structure of firm learning holds some similarity with Jovanovic (1982) and our linking
of financial markets, information transmission, and real outcomes is reminiscent of Greenwood
and Jovanovic (1990). The informational role of financial markets has been the subject of much
study, dating back at least to Tobin (1982). We discuss a few particularly relevant examples
below and refer the reader to Bond et al. (2012) for an excellent survey. One strand of this
literature focuses on measuring the informational content of stock prices. Durnev et al. (2003)
show that firm-specific variation in stock returns, i.e., ‘price-nonsynchronicity,’ is useful in fore-
casting future earnings and Morck et al. (2000) find that this measure of price informativeness
is higher in richer countries. A related body of work closer to our own and recently surveyed
by Bond et al. (2012) looks directly at the feedback from stock prices to investment and other
decisions. Chen et al. (2007), Luo (2005), and Bakke and Whited (2010) are examples of studies
that find evidence of managers learning from markets while making investment decisions. Bai
et al. (2013) combines a simple investment model with a noisy rational expectations framework
  10
    Fuchs et al. (2013) investigate another type of informational friction as a foundation for adjustment costs,
namely, adverse selection in the market for existing capital.



                                                       6
to assess whether US stock markets have become more informative over time. Our analysis
complements these papers by placing information aggregation through financial markets into a
standard macroeconomic setting, which allows us to make precise statements about the quan-
titative importance of this channel for information transmission, real activity, and aggregate
outcomes. Our results on the limited role for stock market information bear some resemblance
to the well-known results in Morck et al. (1990), who find a limited incremental role for stock
prices in predicting investment, once fundamentals are controlled for.11 Our focus here is differ-
ent - we are interested in measuring the contribution of stock market information to aggregate
allocative efficiency. In a sense, our analysis provides a structural interpretation of their re-
sults; but more importantly, it allows us to quantify the implications for resource allocations
and aggregate outcomes.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our model of production and financial
market activity under imperfect information. Section 3 spells out our approach to identifying
informational frictions using the two analytically tractable special cases, while Section 4 details
our numerical analysis and presents our quantitative results. We summarize our findings and
discuss directions for future research in Section 5. Details of derivations and data work are
provided in the Appendix.


2        The Model
In this section, we develop our model of production and financial market activity under imper-
fect information. We turn first to the production side of the economy, where we derive sharp
relationships linking the extent of micro level uncertainty to aggregate outcomes. Next, we flesh
out the information structure, including a fully specified financial market in which dispersed
private information of investors and noise trading interact to generate imperfectly informative
price signals.


2.1      Production
We consider a discrete time, infinite-horizon economy, populated by a representative large family
endowed with a fixed quantity of labor supplied inelastically. The aggregate labor endowment
is denoted by N . The household has preferences over consumption of a final good and rents
capital to firms. The household side of the economy is deliberately kept simple as it plays a
limited role in our analysis.
     More precisely, they find very small improvements in R2 when adding stock returns to an investment
    11

regression that already includes fundamentals.



                                                  7
Technology. A continuum of firms of fixed measure one, indexed by i, produce intermediate
goods using capital and labor according to

                                   Yit = Kitαb1 Nitαb2 ,         α    b2 ≤ 1
                                                                 b1 + α

These intermediate goods are bundled to produce the single final good using a standard CES
aggregator
                                      Z                θ
                                                      θ−1
                                                θ−1
                                 Yt =     Ait Yit di
                                                 θ




The term Ait represents an idiosyncratic demand shifter and is the only source of fundamental
uncertainty in the economy (i.e., we abstract from aggregate risk). We assume that Ait follows
an AR(1) process in logs:

                                                                        µit ∼ N 0, σµ2
                                                                                                
                        ait = (1 − ρ) a + ρait−1 + µit ,                                            (1)

where we use lower-case to denote natural logs, a convention we follow throughout, so that, e.g.,
ait = log Ait . In this specification, a represents the unconditional mean of ait , ρ the persistence,
and µit an i.i.d. innovation with variance σµ2 .

Market structure and revenue. The final good is produced by a competitive firm under
perfect information. This yields a standard demand function for intermediate good i
                                                                                 − θ1
                                                                            Yit
                           Yit =   Pit−θ Aθit Yt     ⇒          Pit =                     Ait
                                                                            Yt

where Pit denotes the relative price of good i in terms of the final good, which serves as
numeraire.
    The elasticity of substitution θ indexes the market power of intermediate good producers.
Our specification nests various market structures. In the limiting case of θ = ∞, we have
perfect competition, i.e., all firms produce a homogeneous intermediate good. In this case, the
survival of heterogenous firms requires decreasing returns to scale in production to limit firm
size, that is, α    b2 < 1. When θ < ∞, we have monopolistic competition, with constant
               b1 + α
or decreasing returns to scale. No matter the assumption here, however, firm revenue can be
expressed as
                                                    1
                                       Pit Yit = Yt θ Ait Kitα1 Nitα2                        (2)

where                                                 
                                                   1
                                    αj =        1−         α
                                                           bj       j = 1, 2
                                                   θ

                                                           8
   This framework accommodates two alternative interpretations of the idiosyncratic compo-
nent Ait : as a firm-specific shifter of either demand or productive efficiency. Neither the theory
nor our empirical strategy requires us to differentiate between the two, so we will simply refer
to Ait as a firm-specific fundamental.

Input choices under imperfect information. The key element of our theory is the effect of
imperfect information on the firm’s choice of factor inputs, that is, capital and labor. These are
modeled as static and otherwise frictionless decisions, i.e., firms rent capital and/or hire labor
period-by-period, but with potentially imperfect knowledge of their fundamental Ait . Clearly,
the impact of the informational friction will depend on whether it affects both inputs or just
one. Rather than take a particular stand on this important issue regarding the fundamental
nature of the production process, we present results for two cases: in case 1, both factors of
production are chosen simultaneously under the same (imperfect) information set; in case 2,
only capital is chosen under imperfect information whereas labor is freely adjusted after the
firm perfectly learns the current state.

Case 1: Both factors chosen under imperfect information. In this case, the firm’s profit-
maximization problem is given by
                                        1
                          max         Yt θ Eit [Ait ] Kitα1 Nitα2 − Wt Nit − Rt Kit            (3)
                         Kit ,Nit


where Eit [Ait ] denotes the firm’s expectation of fundamentals conditional on its information set
Iit , which we make explicit below. Standard optimality and market clearing conditions imply

                                            Nit   α2 Rt   N
                                                =       =                                      (4)
                                            Kit   α1 Wt   Kt

i.e., the capital-labor ratio is constant across firms.
     Our empirical analysis uses moments of firm-level investment data and with this in mind,
we use the optimality conditions characterized in (4) to rewrite (3) simply as a capital input
choice problem:                   α2                               
                                   N        1
                                                          α        α2
                         max             Yt θ Eit [Ait ] Kit − 1 +      Rt Kit             (5)
                         Kit       Kt                              α1
where                                                                     
                                                                     θ−1
                                    α = α1 + α2 = (b
                                                   α1 + α
                                                        b2 )
                                                                      θ
Notice that the firm’s expected revenues depend only on the aggregate capital-labor ratio, its
conditional expectation of Ait , and the chosen level of its capital input. The curvature parameter


                                                       9
α depends both on the returns to scale in production as well as on the elasticity of demand,
and will play an important role in our quantitative analysis below. Solving this problem and
imposing capital market clearing gives the following expression for the firm’s capital choice (the
labor choice exactly parallels that of capital):
                                                                              1
                                                       (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α
                                      Kit = R                             1          Kt                 (6)
                                                       (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di

Case 2: Only capital chosen under imperfect information. The firm’s problem now is
                                                                                               
                                                   1
                      max     Eit max         Yt Ait Kitα1 Nitα2
                                                   θ
                                                                                  − Wt Nit − Rt Kit
                       Kit            Nit


and optimizing over Nit gives
                                                  α                                  1
                                                                1                  1−α
                                                        2
                                                            Yt Ait Kitα1
                                                                                        2
                                      Nit =                     θ
                                                                                            (7)
                                           W
Note that, in contrast to (4), capital-labor ratios are now functions of the firm’s fundamental
Ait and chosen level of capital Kit , the former fully observed when making the labor choice
and the latter fixed. Imposing labor market clearing and substituting, we can write the firm’s
capital choice problem as:
                                                    α2
                                                   1−α              1   1
                                             α2             2
                                                                                    h       i
                    max      (1 − α2 )                          Yt   θ 1−α2
                                                                              Eit Ãit Kitα̃ − Rt Kit   (8)
                     Kit                     Wt

where                                              1
                                                                                    α1
                                   Ãit = Ait1−α2 ,                    α̃ =
                                                                                  1 − α2
    Thus, the firm’s capital choice problem here has the same structure as in case 1 (compare
equations (5) and (8)), but with a slightly modified fundamental and overall curvature. This
will make the two cases qualitatively very similar, though, as we will see, the quantitative
implications will be quite different. We mark with a ∼ the transformed objects that are relevant
in case 2, a convention we will carry thoughout this section. The firm’s input choices can be
shown to satisfy
                      h i 1−1 α̃                                                h i 1−α̃α̃
                      Eit Ãit                                               Ãit Eit Ãit
              Kit =  h i 1           Kt ,                          Nit =        h i 1−α̃α̃ N        (9)
                   R           1−α̃                                        R
                      Eit Ãit      di                                       Ãit Eit Ãit     di

    While the capital choiceh looks
                                 i similar to case 1, the labor choice now depends on the joint
distribution of Ãit and Eit Ãit . Despite this, the analysis remains quite tractable and we will

                                                                10
derive simple expressions for aggregate objects.
    To complete our characterization of the firm’s problem and therefore of the production-side
equilibrium in the economy, we need to spell out the firm’s information set Iit . We defer this
discussion to the following subsection and for now directly make conjectures about firm beliefs,
which we will later show to be true. Specifically, we assume the conditional distribution of the
fundamental to be log-normal in both case 1 and 2, i.e.,

                                         ait |Iit ∼ N ( Eit [ait ] , V)
                                                                       
                                         ãit |Iit ∼ N Eit [ãit ] , Ṽ

where Eit [ait ] and V denote the posterior mean and variance of ait in case 1, respectively, and
similarly Eit [ãit ] and Ṽ in case 2. Further, as we will show, the cross-sectional distribution of the
posterior mean Eit [ait ] is also normal, centered around the true mean a with associated variance
σa2 − V. Focusing on case 1 for a moment, the variance V indexes the severity of informational
frictions in the economy and will turn out to be a sufficient statistic for misallocation and the
associated productivity/output losses. It is straightforward to show that V is closely related
to commonly used measures of allocative efficiency. For example, it maps exactly into the
dispersion of the marginal revenue product of capital (in logs),

                                                    2
                                                   σmrpk =V                                                   (10)

Similarly, it has a negative effect on the covariance between fundamentals and firm activity
as examined, for example, in Bartelsman et al. (2013) and Olley and Pakes (1996), i.e., the
                                                 2
                                                a −V
covariance between ait and kit satisfies σak = σ1−α  . Thus, our measure of informational fric-
tions is easily related to measures of misallocation studied in the literature. An analogous
correspondence holds for case 2.

Aggregation. We now turn to the aggregate economy, and in particular, measures of total
factor productivity (TFP) and output. Given our focus on misallocation, we abstract from
aggregate risk and restrict our attention to a stationary equilibrium, in which all aggregate
variables remain constant through time. From here on, we will also assume constant returns to
scale in production, i.e., α
                           b1 + α
                                b2 = 1. Though not essential to our results, this greatly simplifies
                12
the expressions. Relegating the lengthy but straightforward derivations to Appendix A.1 and
                                                      R
A.2, we use (6) and (9), along with the fact that Y = Pit Yit di, as well as standard properties of
   12
      It is straightforward to relax this assumption and work in the more general case; we do so in our derivations
in the Appendix.




                                                        11
the log-normal distribution, to derive the following simple representation for aggregate output:

                                       log Y ≡ y = a + α
                                                       b1 k + α
                                                              b2 n                                (11)

Aggregate TFP, denoted a, is endogenous and is given by

                                                     1
                           Case 1:           a = a∗ − θV                                          (12)
                                                     2
                                                     1
                           Case 2:           a = a∗ − (θb
                                                        α1 + α
                                                             b2 ) α
                                                                  b1 Ṽ                           (13)
                                                     2

where
                                                                    σa2
                                                              
                                   ∗  θ     1             θ
                                 a =     a+
                                     θ−1    2            θ−1       1−α
is aggregate TFP under full information, which is identical in the two cases.
    These expressions are at the heart of our mechanism and reveal a sharp connection between
the micro-level uncertainty summarized by V (or Ṽ) and aggregate TFP: in both cases, ag-
gregate productivity monotonically decreases in uncertainty, with the magnitude of the effect
depending on the elasticity of substitution (i.e., the degree of curvature) θ. The higher is θ, that
is, the closer we are to perfect competition, the more severe are the losses from misallocated
resources. The intuition is easy to see - when goods are highly subsitutable, misallocation is
particularly costly. In case 1, only θ plays a role. In case 2, the relative shares of capital and
labor in the production function also matter. Intuitively, the greater is labor’s share α    b2 (and so
the lower capital’s share α b1 ), the greater the ability of firms to mitigate the effects of imperfect
capital choice by adjusting labor. To take the extreme case, as α       b2 approaches one and so α   b1
zero, the multiplier on Ṽ approaches zero, that is, the informational friction has no effect on
aggregate TFP. This flexibility is absent in case 1, in which both inputs are subject to the same
friction. Notice that the two cases are equivalent at the opposite extreme, i.e. when α         b1 = 1
and α b2 = 0. It is easy to see that for a fixed set of parameters, the coefficient on uncertainty in
case 2 is smaller than that in case 1.
    Holding the aggregate factor stocks fixed, the effect of informational frictions on aggregate
productivity a is also the effect on aggregate output y. However, the aggregate capital stock
in the steady state is not invariant to informational frictions: misallocation reduces incentives
for capital accumulation and so the steady state stock of capital decreases with uncertainty.
Incorporating this additional effect, we obtain the familiar expression showing the amplified




                                                   12
impact of allocative inefficiencies on aggregate output due to changes in the capital stock:
                                                           
                                          dy    da     1
                                              =                                                             (14)
                                          dV    dV 1 − α b1
                                                           
                                          dy    da     1
                                              =                                                             (15)
                                          dṼ   dṼ 1 − αb1

2.2     Information
We have shown that V (or in case 2, Ṽ), i.e., the variance of the firm’s posterior beliefs, is a
sufficient statistic for the impact of informational frictions on resource misallocation and the
resulting consequences for aggregate outcomes. We now make explicit the information structure
in the economy, that is, the elements of the firm’s information set Iit , which in turn will allow
us to characterize V in terms of the primitives of the economy - specifically, the variances of
fundamentals and signal errors.
    The firm’s information set Iit has three elements. The first is the entire history of its
fundamental shock realizations, i.e., {ait−s }∞
                                              s=1 . Within the context of the model, this follows
from the fact that ex-post revenues reveal the fundamental perfectly.13 Second, the firm also
observes a noisy private signal of its contemporaneous fundamental

                                                             eit ∼ N 0, σe2
                                                                              
                                    sit = ait + eit ,

where eit is an i.i.d. mean-zero and normally distributed noise term. The third and last element
of the firm’s information set is the price of its own stock, Pit . The final piece of our theory then
is to outline how the stock price is determined and to characterize its informational content.

The stock market. Our formulation of the stock market and its informational properties
follows the noisy rational expectations paradigm in the spirit of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980).
For our specific model structure, we draw heavily from recent work by Albagli et al. (2011a)
and Albagli et al. (2011b). For each firm i, there is a unit measure of outstanding stock or
equity, representing a claim on the firm’s profits. These claims are traded by two groups of
agents - imperfectly informed investors and noise traders.14
  13
      In our numerical analysis, we interpret a period as relatively long (3 years), making this a very natural
assumption.
   14
      There are several possible interpretations of the precise nature of these agents. One is that they are
intermediaries investing on behalf of the representative family. Some of them are rational, optimizing investors,
while others trade randomly. Because the household cannot distinguish between the two, they co-exist. An
alternative is that they are members of the representative large family, again, with some members trading
rationally and some randomly. The exact interpretation of these agents in the model is not crucial for our
purposes - only that some trade rationally given their information and others randomly, with the net result that



                                                        13
    There is a unit measure of risk-neutral investors for each stock. Every period, each investor
decides whether or not to purchase up to a single unit of firm i’s stock at the current market
price Pit . This assumption is standard in the literature; without it, risk neutral investors would
take unbounded positions in the stock. The market is also populated by noise traders who
purchase a random quantity Φ (zit ) of stock i each period, where zit ∼ N (0, σz2 ) is i.i.d. and
Φ denotes the standard normal CDF. This convenient transformation ensures that the total
demand of these traders is positive and less than one, the total supply.
    Like firms, investors also observe the entire history of fundamental realizations, and in
particular, know ait−1 at time t. They also see the current stock price Pit , or equivalently, place
limit orders conditional on Pit . Finally, each investor j is endowed with an independent noisy
private signal about the firm’s contemporaneous fundamental ait :

                                                                   vijt ∼ N 0, σv2
                                                                                        
                                      sijt = ait + vijt ,

   Our baseline assumption is that the random variables vijt and zit are independent of the
fundamental ait and the noise in the firm’s private signal.15 The total demand of investors for
stock i is then given by
                                                      Z
                           D (ait−1 , ait , Pit ) =         d (ait−1 , sijt , Pit ) dF (sijt |ait )

where d (ait−1 , sijt , Pit ) ∈ [0, 1] is the demand of investor j and F is the conditional distribution
of investors’ private signals. The market clearing condition is

                                          D (ait−1 , ait , Pit ) + Φ (zit ) = 1

    The expected payoff to investor j from purchasing the stock is given by
                                  Z
                                                                          
                  Eijt [Πit ] =        π (ait−1 , ait , Pit ) + β P̄ (ait ) dH (ait |ait−1 , sijt , Pit )

The term π (ait−1 , ait , Pit ) denotes the expected current profit of the firm as a function of history,
the current realization of the fundamental ait and the current stock price Pit .16 The expected
current profit is a function of the current price Pit because it enters the firm’s information set
prices only imperfectly reflect firm fundamentals.
   15
      This implies that the noise in the stock price is orthogonal to the firm’s information and in this sense,
maximizes the potential for learning from prices. We relax this assumption later in our robustness section.
   16
      Given the assumption of an AR(1) structure for fundamentals and an i.i.d. process for zit , the most recent
fundamental realization, ait−1 , is a sufficient statistic for historical information.




                                                              14
and through that, influences firm decisions.17 The distribution H (ait |ait−1 , sijt , Pit ) is investor
j’s posterior over ait and P̄ (ait ) is the expected price in period t + 1, conditional on the current
fundamental ait . Formally,
                                        Z
                          P̄ (ait ) =       P (ait , ait+1 , zit+1 ) dG (ait+1 , zit+1 |ait )

is obtained by integrating the price function P (·) over (ait+1 , zit+1 ) (using the conditional
distribution G). Clearly, optimality implies:
                                                     
                                                      1
                                                               if Eijt [Πit ] > Pit
                           d (ait−1 , sijt , Pit ) =   ∈ [0, 1] if Eijt [Πit ] = Pit                         (16)
                                                     
                                                       0        if Eijt [Πit ] < Pit
                                                     


that is, an investor purchases the maximum quantity allowed (1 share) when the expected payoff
(conditional on her information) strictly exceeds the price, does not purchase any shares when
the expected payoff is strictly less than the price, and is indifferent when the two are equal.
    A rational expectations equilibrium is then a set of functions for prices P (·), expected
profits π (·), investor decision rules d (·), and firm capital choice k (·), such that, for any history
of shocks, (i) π (·) is consistent with firm optimization and the price function P (·); (ii) d (·)
is consistent with investor optimality as in (16) above; (iv) k (·) is optimal given the firm’s
information set; and (v) markets for capital and each firm’s stock clear.
    We conjecture that equilibrium outcomes have the following 2 properties: (a) trading deci-
sions of investors are characterized by a threshold rule, i.e., there is a signal sbit such that only
investors observing signals higher than sbit choose to buy, and (b) the market price Pit is an
invertible function of sbit .18
    Aggregating the demand decisions of all investors, market clearing then implies
                                                                
                                                    sbit − ait
                                        1−Φ                          + Φ (zit ) = 1
                                                         σv

which leads to a simple characterization of the threshold signal

                                                  sbit = ait + σv zit                                        (17)

This defines a monotonic relationship between Pit and sbit , implying that observing the stock
  17
    Appendix A.3 explicitly characterizes π (·) in terms of the firm’s problem studied in the previous subsection.
  18
    Given that we have unbounded shocks, there are always histories where this conjecture does not hold.
However, these realizations are extremely unlikely - in fact, they do not show up at all in any our simulated
sample paths. In this sense, we verify this conjecture in our numerical results.


                                                            15
price is informationally equivalent to observing sbit : in other words, from an informational
standpoint, the stock price is simply a signal of firm fundamentals of the form (17). The
precision of this signal, σ21σ2 , is decreasing in both the variance of the noise in investors’ private
                           v z
signals and the size of the noise trader shock.
    The simple expression for price informativeness in (17) is the key payoff of the structure we
have imposed on stock market trading: we now have a complete characterization of the firm’s
information set and hence the posterior variance V, even without an explicit solution for the
price function. Formally, the firm’s information set is Iit = (ait−1 , sit , sbit ) . It is straightfor-
ward to show that the conditional and cross-sectional distributions are log-normal under this
information set, exactly as conjectured. Direct application of Bayes’ rule implies the following
formula for the conditional expectation of the fundamental ait ,

                                       V                          V        V
                        Eit [ait ] =    2
                                          [(1 − ρ) ā + ρait−1 ] + 2 sit + 2 2 sbit
                                       σµ                         σe      σv σz

where V is the posterior variance given by:
                                                                       −1
                                                  1    1    1
                                        V=           +   +
                                                  σµ2 σe2 σv2 σz2

Thus, V, our sufficient statistic, is increasing in the noisiness of the two signals, private and
market (σe2 and σv2 σz2 , respectively). In the absence of any learning, V = σµ2 , that is, all
fundamental uncertainty remains unresolved at the time of the firm’s input choice. At the
other extreme, under perfect information, V = 0.
   Finally, note that the marginal investor, i.e., the investor whose signal sijt = sbit , must be
exactly indifferent between buying and not buying. It follows then that the price Pit must equal
her expected payoff from holding the stock:
                            Z
                                                                    
                  Pit =          π (ait−1 , ait , Pit ) + β P̄ (ait ) dH (ait |ait−1 , sbit , Pit )
                            Z
                                                                     
                        =        π (ait−1 , ait , sbit ) + β P̄ (ait ) dH (ait |ait−1 , sbit , sbit )

where, with a slight abuse of notation, we replace Pit with its informational equivalent sbit in
the arguments of H (·). Rewriting this equation in recursive form yields a fixed-point charac-




                                                         16
terization of the price function:
                          Z
       P (a−1 , a, z) =     π (a−1 , a, a + σv z) dH (a|a−1 , a + σv z, a + σv z)
                             Z Z                               
                                             0 0        0 0
                          +β         P (a, a , z ) dG (a , z |a) dH (a|a−1 , a + σv z, a + σv z)   (18)

In our numerical analysis, we solve this functional equation using an iterative procedure with a
discrete grid of shock realizations. We then verify that the threshold and invertibility properties
of the equilibrium hold for all points on the grid.


3    Identifying Informational Frictions
The main hurdle in quantifying the effects of uncertainty is imposing discipline on the infor-
mation structure, given that we do not directly observe agents’ signals. One approach would
be to use the model’s implications for observable moments in production-side variables. For
example, the model implies a tight connection between uncertainty and the cross-sectional dis-
persion of investment - see equations (6) and (9). Similarly, equation (10) is a direct mapping
between the dispersion in marginal products and our measure of uncertainty. However, these
relationships rely heavily on the assumption that the capital choice is a static and otherwise
undistorted function of the firm’s expectation of fundamentals. In reality, investment decisions
may be affected, or ‘distorted,’ by a number of other factors. These may originate, for example,
from technological limitations (e.g., adjustment costs), contracting frictions (e.g., financial con-
straints), or distortionary government policies. All of these can lead to dispersion in marginal
products. Quantifying their contribution - whether individually or jointly - to observed cross-
country differences is certainly the overall objective of the growing literature on misallocation,
but one that is well beyond the scope of this paper. Our more limited goal here is to isolate and
quantify the degree of firm-level uncertainty and its particular role in generating misallocation.
    To this end, we develop an empirical strategy that allows us to draw robust inferences about
uncertainty, even without explicitly modeling these other factors. Our approach combines
moments from firm-level production and stock market data to pin down the informational
parameters of our model. In this section, we develop the intuition for that strategy by analyzing
two special cases of our model - when firm level shocks are i.i.d. and when they follow a random
walk. When we return to our general model in the following section, we will verify numerically
that the properties of the special cases analyzed here extend to the general model used there.
    We prove that in these two cases, the informational parameters of our model are identified
by three readily observable moments - the correlations of stock returns with both fundamentals


                                                  17
and investment, and the volatility of stock returns.19 In both cases, we derive intuitive expres-
sions mapping these moments to the informational parameters. Two key insights underlie this
strategy and the choice of moments: first, correlations are invariant to scaling effects, which
makes our strategy robust to the presence of other factors that dampen (or exacerbate) the re-
sponsiveness of investment to fundamentals; second, the Gaussian structure of the model allows
us to say a lot about the extent of uncertainty by looking at the comovement of investment
with any element of the firm’s information set (in our case, this element is stock returns). We
exploit the tractability of the two special cases to analytically demonstrate both these insights.
    We proceed in two steps. We first derive the identification equations in our baseline setup
laid out in the previous sections. We then show that our approach remains valid under two im-
portant modifications: the first introduces other ‘distortions’ into the firm’s investment choice
problem; the second allows for a general correlation structure between firm and market in-
formation. These exercises also serve to highlight some merits of our approach relative to
reduced-form, regression-based strategies used extensively in existing work on the relationship
between stock markets and investment.


3.1     Identification
Transitory shocks. Consider the case where shocks to fundamentals are i.i.d., i.e., ρ = 0
in equation (1). A log-linear approximation of the stock price (around the deterministic case)
leads to20
                              pit ≡ log Pit ≈ ξ Ẽit [ait ] + Constant
            1−β
where ξ = 1−α    and Ẽ [ait ] is the expectation of ait conditional on the marginal investor’s
information set. It is then straightforward to derive21

                                  Ẽit [ait ] = Ẽit [µit ] = ψ (µit + σv zit )

where
                                                         1             1
                                                        σv2
                                                              +     σv2 σz2
                                            ψ=     1           1            1
                                                  σµ2   +     σv2
                                                                    +    σv2 σz2

  19
      Note that we can use the structure of the model to directly back out the fundamental ait from data on
revenues and capital.
   20
      See Appendix A.4 for derivations. From here on, in a slight abuse of notation, we use V to denote the
uncertainty in both case 1 and case 2, where it should be understood that V in case 2 corresponds to Ṽ in the
theory. We similarly use ait to denote the fundamental in both cases and α the relevant curvature parameter.
   21
      Note that both of the signals in the marginal investor’s information set are equal to uit + σv zit .




                                                         18
   Similarly, capital is a log-linear function of the firm’s expectation of the current innovation

                                                Eit [µit ]
                                        kit =              + Constant                                   (19)
                                                 1−α

which is a precision-weighted average of its private signal and the information in prices:

                               Eit [µit ] = φ1 (µit + eit ) + φ2 (µit + σv zit )

where
                                                V                       V
                                        φ1 =        ,          φ2 =
                                                σe2                   σv2 σz2
   From here, we derive the following expressions for the two correlations of interest, that
between returns and changes in fundamentals, denoted ρpa , and between returns and investment,
denoted ρpk :
                                                                     1
                       ρpa ≡ Corr (pit − pit−1 , ait − ait−1 ) = q                        (20)
                                                                       σv2 σz2
                                                                   1 + σ2
                                                                                          µ


                                                                                   1
                   ρpk ≡ Corr (pit − pit−1 , kit − kit−1 ) = r                                      (21)
                                                                             σv2 σz2
                                                                          1 + σ2       1−      V
                                                                                                2
                                                                                               σµ
                                                                                µ

                                                        2 2
    Equation (20) shows that the higher is σσv σ2 z , the noise-to-signal ratio in prices, the lower is
                                                  µ
the correlation of returns with fundamentals. Equation (21) then implies that for a given level
of noise in prices, ρpk is increasing in the firm’s posterior variance σV2 - investment choices covary
                                                                         u
more strongly with the signal when firms are more uncertain. Note that we work with σV2 for
                                                                                                  u
convenience - combined with σu2 and σv2 σz2 (from the expression for ρpa ), this bears a one-to-one
relationship with σe2 , the noise in the firm’s private signal.
    Notice that a high ρpk is not by itself indicative of the degree of uncertainty. Firm choices
can be highly correlated with returns either because they both track fundamentals very closely
or because firms are uncertain.22 Observing ρpa allows us to isolate the effect of the latter. To
see this more clearly, substitute for ρpa in (21) to derive
                                  s                                                      2
                          ρpa          V                          V                 ρpa
                              =     1− 2                ⇒             =1−                               (22)
                          ρpk         σµ                          σµ2               ρpk

   Thus, with i.i.d. fundamentals, the severity of informational frictions is pinned down directly
by the ratio of the correlations, ρρpk
                                    pa
                                       . Under full information, this ratio takes a value of 1. This
  22
    For example, suppose we make prices more informative, i.e., decrease σv2 σz2 . Then ρpk rises even though
uncertainty decreases.


                                                          19
sharp link between the relationship between the correlations and the severity of informational
frictions guides our empirical approach in our quantitative analysis below.23 The more general
version of the model precludes an analytical mapping between these correlations and V, but
numerical simulations reveal a very similar positive relationship between the relative correlation
and V.

Relationship to investment-Q regressions. This special case also leads to a reduced-form
representation of investment as a log-linear function of fundamentals, signal errors and prices:

                                     ∆kit = λ1 (∆µit + ∆eit ) + λ2 ∆pit                                          (23)

where ∆’s denote changes. This is in the spirit of specifications widely used in the empirical
corporate finance literature to examine the role of learning from stock markets. For example,
Morck et al. (1990) regress investment growth on stock returns, sales growth and other con-
trols.24 Our structural model enables us to interpret the coefficients from these reduced-form
regressions in terms of the informational primitives of the economy. For example, consider the
coefficient on stock returns, λ2 :
                                                                           
                                                    1               V
                                           λ2 =                                                                  (24)
                                                (1 − β) ψ          σv σz2
                                                                    2


Equation (24) reveals the same intuition as in (21): λ2 can be high either because firms are
subject to a good deal of uncertainty, i.e., V is large, and so rely heavily on any information
that can be gleaned from markets, or because markets are highly informative, i.e., σv2 σz2 is low.
    The regression implied by (23) consistently identifies the coefficients only in the case of
orthogonality between the error eit and the regressors µit and pit . If the noise terms in the
signals of firms and investors are correlated, this orthogonality assumption is violated, leading
to endogeneity biases in the regression estimates. A similar issue arises if the choice of capital
is affected by additional factors that are correlated with fundamentals.25 As we will show later
in this section, our approach is robust to these concerns.
   23
      For completeness, we show in Appendix A.4 that the volatility of returns and their correlation with fun-
damentals can be used in a final step to separately identify σv2 and σz2 .
   24
      Chen et al. (2007) use Q and cash flow growth as their independent variables.
   25
      Consider, for example, the effects of introducing a ‘correlated distortion’ τit = γuit into the firm’s capital
choice in (19), so that kit = (1+γ)E[µ
                                  1−α
                                      it ]                                              1+γ
                                           + Constant. The coefficient λ2 is given by (1−β)ψ    V
                                                                                              σv2 σz2 . In other words,
inferring V from λ2 requires knowledge of (or at the very least, an adjustment for) γ. Note that ‘uncorrelated
distortions’ will not affect λ2 .




                                                          20
Permanent shocks. Our second special case is that of permanent shocks, i.e., ρ = 1. The
main insights from the i.i.d. case extend to this case as well.26 We start by deriving an
expression for the stock price, which takes a similar form to the i.i.d. case:27

                                                1
                                       pit =       Ẽit [ait ] + Constant
                                               1−α

  We can then derive the following expressions. As in the i.i.d. case, they demonstrate a sharp
mapping between the three moments - ρpk , ρpa and σp2 - and the informational parameters:

                                                 V    ρpk − ρpa
                                                  2
                                                    =                                                         (25)
                                                 σµ       η
                                               σv2 σz2   (1 − η 2 )    η
                                                       =            +     −1
                                                σµ2        2ρ2pa      ρpa
                                      σz2 + 1                 1
                                               σv2 σz2
                                                         =
                                  σz2 + 1 +        2
                                                              η
                                                σµ


              1
                  σµ
where η = 1−α      σp
                      . In contrast to the i.i.d. case, all three moments are now necessary to infer
the extent of uncertainty, but otherwise the intuition is very similar: all else equal, a higher
relative correlation (ρpk − ρpa ) implies greater uncertainty, a lower ρpa higher levels of noise in
prices, and higher return volatility, larger noise trader shocks.


3.2     Robustness
We now turn to two important exercises aimed at demonstrating the robustness of the identifi-
cation strategy outlined above. In the first, we generalize the information structure to allow for
arbitrary correlations between signal errors. In the second, we introduce other factors into the
firm’s investment decision. For simplicity, we discuss only the i.i.d. case here (the Appendix
repeats the analysis for permanent shocks).

An alternative information structure. In our baseline setup, the noise terms in the signals
received by firms and investors are assumed to be orthogonal to each other. This may be an
unrealistic assumption - for example, in practice, firms routinely release forecasts and announce
their investment plans to investors/analysts. This could induce correlation in the signal errors
(specifically, eit , vijt , and zit ), raising a potential concern - this is a source of co-movement
between investment and returns and so may bias the inference of V. However, this turns out
   26
      With permanent shocks and no exit, there is no stationary distribution. Since our goal here is primarily
to provide intuition for our empirical strategy, we ignore this complication and interpret this as a limiting case.
   27
      All derivations are in Appendix A.4.


                                                             21
not to be the case - the ratio of correlations still leads us to the true V. More precisely, (22)
holds for an arbitrary correlation structure between market and firm information.28 Therefore,
our assessment of firm-level uncertainty is not sensitive to assumptions about the structure of
information flows between firms and investors. Note that this only applies to our estimate of
V - our conclusions about the individual variances (σe2 , σv2 and σz2 ) do change with assumptions
about correlations.

Other distortions. So far, we have maintained the somewhat extreme assumption that infor-
mational frictions are the only impediment to marginal product equalization. By abstracting
from other factors that potentially enter the firm’s investment decision, we raise a potential
concern about the validity of our measurement strategy.
    To address this concern, we introduce other distortions drawn from a flexible, albeit stylized,
class. The goal is to incorporate some essential features of these other factors without sacrificing
analytical tractability. Specifically, we directly modify the firm’s optimality condition (19):

                                           (1 + γ) Eit [µit ] + εit
                                   kit =                            + Constant
                                                  1−α

This is equivalent to introducing a ‘distortion’ τit of the form:29

                                                              εit ∼ N 0, σε2
                                                                               
                                     τit = γµit + εit

The parameter γ indexes the extent to which τit covaries with the fundamental µit . For example,
if γ < 0, the distortion discourages (encourages) investment by firms with stronger (weaker)
fundamentals. The second term, εit , captures factors that are uncorrelated with firm-specific
fundamentals. The two parameters γ and σε2 together pin down the amplitude (measured by the
standard deviation) of these distortions and their correlation with fundamentals. We assume
that τit is idiosyncratic (though it is straightforward to add a common component). More
importantly, firms know γ and observe εit , but both objects are unknown to the econometrician.
    To understand how the presence of τit affects our inference strategy, we ask whether the
ratio of the two correlations in equation (22) continues to identify the true extent of uncertainty.
Consider first the case with only ‘correlated distortions,’ i.e., σε2 = 0, γ 6= 0. We show that
equation (22) is unaffected, that is, the ratio of the two correlations still uncovers the true V.30
In other words, equation (22) allows us to measure V directly even if we do not know γ. Note
   28
      See Appendix A.5.
   29
      This flexible specification can capture a rich structure of distortions. For example, it is possible to uniquely
map a set of revenue and capital ‘taxes’ (lognormally distributed  and arbitrarily correlated with fundamentals),
as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009), to the two parameters γ, σε2 .
   30
      Derivations for this section are in Appendix A.6.


                                                         22
that this is despite the fact that γ does contribute to misallocation. For example, the dispersion
in the marginal revenue product of capital (MRPK) is equal to

                                          2
                                               = γ 2 σµ2 − V + V
                                                            
                                         σmrpk

which is increasing in (the absolute value of) γ. Similarly, the covariance between fundamentals
and investment is now                             
                                             1+γ
                                                      σµ2 − V
                                                              
                                    σak =
                                             1−α
    Thus, a strategy which targets these measures directly (i.e., chooses V to match these
moments without adjusting for γ) would lead to a biased estimate of the severity of informational
                                            2
frictions. In particular, inferring V from σmrpk overstates the extent of uncertainty, while using
σak can lead to an upward or downward bias, depending on the sign of γ. Similar concerns also
apply to inferences made directly from the cross-sectional variance of investment or revenue -
these moments also confound the effects of uncertainty with other factors, and so using them
without taking a stand on the nature of these other distortions is problematic. Using the
relative correlation as outlined above, on the other hand, continues to identify the true level
of uncertainty and in that sense, is robust to the presence of distortions which have a scaling
effect on the capital choice.31
    Next, we turn to the case where distortions are uncorrelated with fundamentals, i.e., σε2 6=
0, γ = 0. In this case, we can show
                                              "      2 #
                                        V            ρpa     σε2
                                            =   1 −        +
                                        σµ2          ρpk     σµ2

    The terms inside the square brackets on the right hand side is our estimate of uncertainty
                                                                                               2
using (22). As the expression shows, this underestimates the true extent of uncertainty (by σσε2 ).
                                                                                               µ
In other words, factors uncorrelated with fundamentals tend to make our estimate of V more
conservative, in that we would infer less uncertainty than is truly the case. This is despite the
fact that these distortions exacerbate misallocation, as the following expression shows

                                               2
                                              σmrpk = V + σε2

Again, a strategy of choosing V to directly match observed misallocation would lead to an
overstatement of the severity of informational frictions.32
  31
    However, the effect of uncertainty on aggregate outcomes does depend on γ.
  32
    An important concern, one which applies not just to this paper but to the entire literature on misallocation,
is measurement error (see the discussion in section V of Hsieh and Klenow (2009)). In our setting, classical



                                                       23
   Note that in both instances (correlated and uncorrelated), if the true V were 0 (i.e., firms
were perfectly informed), using (22) would not lead us to a positive estimate. In other words, we
would not find evidence of uncertainty in a full information economy, even one with disperion
in marginal products.


4     Quantitative Analysis
Our analytic results in the previous section demonstrated a tight relationship between the
                       
moments ρpk , ρpa , σp2 and the informational parameters (σe2 , σv2 , σz2 ), and through them, the
degree of micro-level uncertainty. With this intuition in hand, we now return to our general
model and use an identification approach quite similar in spirit to infer these parameters using
data from 3 countries - the US, China, and India. We use the results to quantify the extent
of informational frictions, the degree of resulting misallocation, and the impact on aggregate
outcomes in all 3 countries. Our analysis also sheds light on the role of learning from various
channels, including the role of financial markets in improving allocative efficiency by delivering
useful information to firms. We also make use of the multi-country aspect of our analysis to
perform a number of counterfactual experiments assessing the sources of cross-country variation
in uncertainty and their respective effects on allocative efficiency.


4.1     Parameterization
We begin by assigning values to the more standard parameters in our model - specifically, those
governing the preference and production structure of the economy. Throughout our analysis,
we will hold these constant across countries; cross-country differences will come only from the
parameters governing the stochastic processes on firm fundamentals and learning. Although a
simplification, we feel that this is a natural starting point and allows us to focus on the role of
imperfect information in leading to differences in aggregate outcomes across countries.
   An important issue here is the choice of period length in the model. The focus of this
paper - investment decisions - and our specific modeling choices push us towards larger period
lengths. There is significant empirical evidence of long lags in planning and implementing in-
vestment projects, with estimates of the mean duration time between the planning stage and
project completion of between 2 and 3 years.33 It seems reasonable then to assume that firms
                                                                                                             2
measurement error in yit or kit leads to exaggerated estimates of both the extent of misallocation (i.e., σmrpk   )
as well as the severity of information frictions (i.e., V). Whether the overstatement in the former is more or less
than the latter, however, is ambiguous and depends on parameters.
   33
      The classic reference here is Mayer (1960), who uses survey data on new industrial plants and additions to
existing plants to find a mean gestation lag between the drawing of plans and the completion of construction
of about 22 months. More recently, Koeva (2000) finds the average length of time-to-build lags to be about 2


                                                        24
are required to forecast fundamentals over a relatively long horizon when making large invest-
ment decisions and have only limited flexibility to adjust capital choices ex-post in response
to additional information. One approach would be to explicitly model these lags as well as
other features (such as adjustment costs/irreversibilities) that are likely relevant for investment
decisions over shorter horizons. Largely for tractability, we take a different route and model
the capital choice as a static one, but interpret a period in the model as spanning a relatively
long horizon, specifically 3 years. This makes the omission of explicit lags/irreversibilities, etc.
somewhat less of a concern, while, importantly, allowing us to preserve the simple expressions
linking uncertainty to aggregate outcomes.34
    In line with our choice of period length, we set the discount rate β equal to 0.9. We
assume constant returns to scale in production and set the production parameters α        b1 and α
                                                                                                 b2
to standard values of 0.33 and 0.67, respectively. Given our CRS assumption, firm scale is then
limited only by the curvature in demand, captured by the elasticity of substitution θ. This
will be a key parameter in influencing the quantitative impact of informational frictions. The
literature contains a wide range of estimates for this parameter. We set our baseline value at
6, roughly in the middle of the commonly used range.35 Our choice of θ translates into an
α̃ = 0.62 in case 2 and α = 0.83 in case 1.
    Next, we turn to the country-specific parameters. We begin with those governing the process
on firm fundamentals ait : the persistence ρ and variance of the innovations σµ2 . In both of our
cases, we can directly construct the fundamental for each firm (up to an additive constant) as
revit − αkit , where revit denotes the log of revenues, and the value of α depends on whether
we are in case 1 or case 2.36 We then estimate the parameters of the fundamental process by
performing the autoregression implied by (1), additionally including a time fixed-effect in order
to isolate the idiosyncratic component of the innovations. The resulting coefficient delivers an
estimate for ρ and the variance of the residuals for σµ2 .37
    Finally, it remains to pin down the three informational parameters, i.e., the variances of
the error terms in firm and investor signals σe2 and σv2 , and the variance of the noise trader
shock σz2 . We follow almost directly the strategy outlined above, i.e., target second moments
in the growth rates of firm-level investment, fundamentals, and prices.38 The precise moments
years in most industries, defined as the period between the announcement of new construction and the ensuing
date of completion. Given that this excludes the planning period prior to the announcement date, the total
gestation lag is likely somewhat longer.
   34
      Morck et al. (1990) make a similar argument and perform their baseline empirical analysis using 3-year
spans. They also point out that the explanatory power of investment growth regressions at shorter horizons
(e.g., 1 year) are quite low.
   35
      Additionally, we report our results, at least in case 2, for two other values of θ, namely 4 and 10.
   36
      Substitute either (4) or (7) into (2).
   37
      See Appendix C for details.
   38
      We follow the literature examining the feedback effect of stock prices and use growth rates of investment


                                                      25
we use are the cross-sectional correlations of stock returns with investment growth (denoted
ρpi ) and changes in fundamentals, as well the variance of returns (as above, denoted ρpa and
σp2 , respectively). Importantly, stock returns are lagged by one period, so that the correlations
reflect the comovement of investment and fundamentals with stock returns over the preceding
period. This avoids feedback from investment and fundamentals to returns, the reverse of the
relationship in which we are interested. Table 1 summarizes our empirical approach.

                                    Table 1: Parameterization - Summary
         Parameter           Description                                        Target/Value
          Common
                             Time period                                        3 years
              β              Discount rate                                      0.90
              α
              b1             Capital share                                      0.33
              α
              b2             Labor share                                        0.67
              θ              Elasticity of substitution                         6
     Country-specific                                                       
           ρ                 Persistence of fundamentals                        Estimates of (1):
           σµ                Shocks to fundamentals                             ait = (1 − ρ) a + ρait−1 + µit
                                                                           
              σe2            Firm private signal                            ρpi
              σv2            Investor private signal                         ρpa
              σz2
                                                                            2
                             Noise trading                                   σp



    We use a simulated method of moments (SMM) approach to assign values to the infor-
mational parameters. Formally, we search over the parameter vector (σe2 , σv2 , σz2 ) to find the
combination that minimizes the (unweighted) sum of squared deviations of the model-implied
moments from the target moments. Before reporting the parameter estimates, we provide a
numerical analogue of the identification argument in the previous section. This more general
version of the model does not yield analytical expressions for the moments of interest, but we
show in Figure 1 that the relationships between moments and parameters highlighted above
go through almost exactly. The first panel shows a positive relationship between V and the
relative correlation, as suggested by equations (22) and (25).39 Similarly, in the second panel,
we see that higher levels of noise in prices are associated with lower ρpa , exactly as we saw
(in the analytical cases studied earlier, we used investment, i.e. the growth rate of capital). By working with
growth rates, we partly cleanse the data of firm fixed-effects, which are a significant component in cross-sectional
differences in these variables. See Morck et al. (1990) for a more detailed discussion of these issues.
   39
      Here, we plot the difference in correlations, i.e. ρpi −ρpa , but using the ratio yields a very similar picture. All
moments in the figure are computed using simulated firm-level data from the model as we vary the corresponding
parameter, holding the remaining parameters fixed at their estimated values (for the US).


                                                           26
in the analytical cases.40 Finally, the bottom panel shows that, holding fixed the total noise
(σv2 σz2 ), increasing the size of the noise trader shock makes returns more volatile.

                                   0.2                                                                                             1.4

                                                                                                                                   1.2
          Posterior variance, V




                                  0.15
                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                 Noise in prices
                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                   0.1
                                                                                                                                   0.6

                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                  0.05
                                                                                                                                   0.2

                                    0                                                                                               0
                                         −0.1      0          0.1                                  0.2                              0.2          0.3       0.4       0.5   0.6
                                                Relative correlation                                                                                   Corr(dp,da)


                                                                                    4.5
                                                       Size of noise trader shock




                                                                                     4

                                                                                    3.5

                                                                                     3

                                                                                    2.5

                                                                                     2

                                                                                    1.5

                                                                                     1
                                                                                     0.17   0.18    0.19 0.2 0.21                         0.22
                                                                                                    Volatility of returns


                                                  Figure 1: Identification - Quantitative Model



4.2     Data and Parameter Values
We construct the target moments using data on firm-level production variables and stock returns
from Compustat North America for the US and Compustat Global for China and India. We
focus on a single cross-section of firms in each country for the year 2012. This is the period with
the largest number of observations, particularly so for China and India.41 Note that our data
requirements are quite stringent: due to our focus on 3 year horizons and our use of growth
rates, we require at least 9 consecutive years of data for a firm in order to construct two 3 year
periods and include it in our sample, with 2012 representing the final year of the second period.
  40
     Here, we hold V and the ratio σσvz fixed, so as to focus on the overall informational content of prices.
  41
     This is less of an issue for the US, and so as a robustness exercise, we recomputed the moments using a
larger sample with more years. While there is some time variation, the results are quite similar to those from
the single cross-section.




                                                                                                            27
     We compute the firm’s capital stock kit in each period as the average of its property, plant
and equipment (PP&E) over the relevant 3 years, and investment as the change in the capital
stock relative to the preceding 3 year period. To construct our measure of the fundamental
ait , we compute sales/revenue analogously as the average over the 3 year period and calculate
ait = revit − αkit . First-differencing gives investment and changes in fundamentals between the
two periods. Stock returns are constructed as the change in the firm’s stock price over each
3 year period, adjusted for splits and dividend distributions. In order to be comparable to
the unlevered returns in our model, stock returns in the data need to be adjusted for financial
leverage. To do so, we assume that claims to firm profits are sold to investors in the form of
debt and equity in a constant proportion (within each country). Observed return variances
must then be multiplied by a constant factor in order to make them comparable to returns in
the model, where the factor depends on the ratio of debt to total assets (or alternatively, debt
to equity). Computing the debt-asset ratio from our sample gives average values of about 0.30
in both the US and India, and about 0.16 in China, with corresponding adjustment factors
of about 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. All values reported below reflect this adjustment.42 To
isolate the firm-specific variation in our data series, we extract a time fixed-effect from each
and utilize the residual as the component that is idiosyncratic to the firm. This is equivalent
to demeaning each series from the unweighted average in each time period.43 As mentioned
above, the target moments are computed using returns lagged by one period.44 This avoids
the simultaneity problems associated with comparing price movements to contemporaneous
investment/fundamentals numbers. We trim the 2% tails of each series in order to mitigate
measurement error. Appendix C provides further details on how we build our sample and
construct the variables.
     We report the three target moments in the left hand panel of Table 2 both for case 2 in the
upper panel and case 1 in the lower.45 In both cases, the moments exhibit significant cross-
country variation. The US and India show similar levels of return volatility and a similar relation
between returns and investment growth, but quite different comovements with fundamentals
- returns in the US are more highly correlated with future changes in fundamentals. China
has a return variance that is almost half that of the other two countries, along with the lowest
correlations of returns with investment and fundamentals. As made clear by the analytic results
in Section 3, none of these moments is a sufficient statistic to identify the informational role
  42                                                                                                            2
      In brief, letting d denote the debt-asset ratio, the observed return variances must be multiplied by (1 − d)
to obtain the variance of unlevered returns. We describe the details of the calculations in Appendix C.
   43
      An alternative is to use CAPM β 0 s to remove the aggregate component from individual stock returns. This
approach yields very similar results.
   44
      For example, ρpi is the correlation between 2006-09 returns and investment growth during 2009-12.
   45
      ρpa changes across cases since α affects our estimates of a. The remaining two moments change almost
imperceptibly due to trimming.


                                                       28
of markets or infer the extent of micro-level uncertainty; rather, it is the joint pattern of the
three moments that matters and our explicit modeling of both production and financial market
activity is precisely what allows us to tease this out.
    In the right hand panel of Table 2, we report the resulting parameter values. The parameters
governing the process on fundamentals ρ and σµ are inferred from the regression implied by
(1) as detailed above and the informational parameters from the target moments and SMM
procedure just described. As we would expect from the cross-country variation in the target
moments, the parameter estimates also vary markedly across countries. The US has less volatile
fundamental shocks and lower levels of noise both in private signals at the firm level (lower σe )
and generally in the stock market as well (lower σv and σz ). In the next section, we gauge
the detrimental impact of the estimated frictions on productivity and output and in leading to
differences in these aggregates across countries.

                         Table 2: Target Moments and Parameter Estimates
                                     Target moments                     Parameters
                                     ρpi     ρpa    σp2        ρ      σµ      σe        σv   σz
              Case 2
              US                    0.23    0.18   0.23       0.92   0.45    0.39   0.37     3.50
              China                 0.16    0.06   0.14       0.78   0.51    0.67   0.74     4.24
              India                 0.25    0.08   0.23       0.93   0.53    1.04   0.69     4.36
              Case 1
              US                    0.24    0.10   0.23       0.88   0.46    0.63   0.65     3.16
              China                 0.15    0.02   0.14       0.75   0.53    0.74   1.18     3.14
              India                 0.26    0.00   0.22       0.88   0.55    1.39   1.69     4.14



4.3    Results
We report our baseline results in Table 3. The first three columns present the implied value for
V based on the parameter estimates in Table 2, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of
the underlying fundamental uncertainty, σµ2 , and of the total dispersion in the MRPK in our
           2
sample, σmrpk  .46 In the last two columns, we compute the implied losses in aggregate TFP and
output relative to a full information benchmark. The top panel contains results for case 2, in
which only capital is chosen under imperfect information, and the bottom panel the analogous
results for case 1, in which both capital and labor are. Case 2 is the more conservative scenario
(in the sense that it leads to lower TFP/output losses). We return to this issue in our discussion
below and provide some suggestive evidence that reality likely falls in between the two cases.
  46 2
    σmrpk   is computed as the average of within-industry dispersion in each country.

                                                      29
                              Table 3: The Impact of Informational Frictions
                                                      V         V
                                                                 2
                                                                σµ     2
                                                                         V
                                                                      σmrpk
                                                                              a∗ − a   y∗ − y

                     Case 2 (α = 0.62)
                     US                              0.08      0.41   0.22     0.04     0.05
                     China                           0.16      0.63   0.34     0.07     0.10
                     India                           0.22      0.77   0.48     0.10     0.14
                     Case 1 (α = 0.83)
                     US                              0.13      0.63   0.35     0.40     0.60
                     China                           0.18      0.65   0.39     0.55     0.83
                     India                           0.26      0.86   0.56     0.77     1.15


    Turning to the first two columns, there is substantial uncertainty in all cases: as a percent
of the fundamental uncertainty σµ2 , the residual uncertainty ranges from a low of 41% in the US
to a high of 77% in India in case 2, and similarly in case 1, although China and the US move
much closer together on this score. In other words, firm learning (σµ2 − V) eliminates from a
high of about 60% of total uncertainty in the US to a low of about 20% in India in case 2, with
a generally similar pattern in case 1, although the estimated degree of learning falls in the US
and India. As we would expect from the cross-country variation in the parameter estimates in
Table 2, the level of uncertainty varies systematically across countries: US firms are the most
informed and Indian firms the least, with Chinese firms falling in the middle.
    Next, we ask, how much of total MRPK dispersion do informational frictions account for?
                                                                      2
The answer is a significant portion: as a percentage of the total σmrpk  , V represents between
about 20% and almost 60%, with the share generally lower in the US than in the two emerging
markets. Later, we will decompose the observed MRPK into a firm fixed effect and a transitory
component and assess the role of informational frictions in explaining the latter. In a sense,
this is a more meaningful comparison because informational frictions really cannot speak to
fixed effects, which seem to an important component of observed MRPK dispersion.
    Finally, the last two columns of Table 3 show that the substantial degree of residual uncer-
tainty implies significant losses in productivity and output. Compared to the full-information
benchmark, in case 2, losses in steady state TFP range from 4% in the US (more precisely,
0.04 log-points) to 10% in India, with corresponding output losses of 5% to 14%.47 Estimated
losses are significantly higher in case 1, ranging from 40% to about 80% in productivity and
60% to over 1 in output. In both cases, the US exhibits the smallest losses, reflecting the fact
that US firms exhibit the smallest degree of ex-post uncertainty, and India the largest, with
China falling in the middle. The differential impact of informational frictions leads to signif-
  47
       In what follows, we adopt the convention of referring to log points as percentages.



                                                          30
icant differences between the US and the two emerging markets in productivity and output,
ranging from 3% to almost 40% for the former (across the two cases) and from 5% to over
50% for the latter (subtract a∗ − a and y ∗ − y for the US from the corresponding values for
China and India). These are somewhat modest, however, in comparison to standard measures
of cross-country differences in aggregate TFP and income per-capita, but very much in line
with other estimates based on particular frictions - for example, Midrigan and Xu (2013). In
Section 4.5, we will use the structural parameters of our model to investigate in more detail
the differences in informational frictions across countries; specifically, we perform a number of
counterfactual experiments exploring the potential gains in the emerging markets from having
access to a US-quality information structure.

Case 1 vs Case 2. Table 3 shows that under either scenario, informational frictions have a
significant detrimental impact on aggregate performance, both when comparing the parameter-
ized economies to their full information benchmarks and when comparing the consequences of
these frictions in emerging markets to the US. The magnitude of the effects depend to a great
extent on the nature of the firm’s input decisions, that is, whether all inputs are chosen subject
to the friction or only traditionally quasi-fixed inputs like capital.48 The intuition for these
differences comes directly from equations (12) and (13): in case 1, given the level of uncertainty
V, the aggregate consequences depend only on the elasticity of substitution θ; in case 2, the
relative shares of capital and labor in production also matter. The greater is labor’s share
α
b2 , the greater the ability of firms to mitigate the effects of capital misallocation due to the
informational friction by reallocating labor in a compensating fashion. Any such flexibility is
absent in case 1, in which both inputs are subject to the same friction. Thus, the aggregate
“cost” of a given level of uncertainty is larger in case 1 than case 2.
    To dig a bit deeper into this issue, note from equations (7) and (6) that in case 2, the
marginal revenue product of labor (MRPL) is equalized across firms so that there should be no
dispersion, while in case 1, dispersion in the MRPL exactly equals that in the MRPK. This is a
direct result of our assumptions that in the former, all information is revealed before the labor
choice, while in the latter, labor is chosen under the same limited information as capital. This
implies a tight link between the cases and the ratio of the dispersion in the MRPL to that in the
              σ2
MRPK, i.e., σ2mrpl = 0 in case 2 and = 1 in case 1, which suggests that the empirical counterpart
               mrpk
of this ratio may be useful in assessing how close we are to the two cases. We compute this
ratio for the US firms in our sample, using total employment as an admittedly rough measure
  48
     It is straightforward to extend our methodology to labor moments. The main hurdle is availability of data
on labor inputs, especially in India and China. Even for the US, the coverage and quality of data on labor
variables is lower than for capital.



                                                     31
of labor inputs.49 The ratio is equal to 0.57, suggesting that reality is indeed in the middle of
the two extremes we have analyzed.50 In this sense, we view our results as providing bounds
on the adverse consequences of imperfect information for aggregate performance. Certainly,
an important direction for future work is a more in-depth analysis of the precise nature of the
firm’s input choices.

Transitory MRPK dispersion. Table 3 shows that uncertainty can account for a signifi-
cant portion of the total MRPK dispersion observed in the data, ranging from 20-60% across
countries and cases. Note, however, that the dispersion induced by uncertainty is short-lived.
In the data, on the other hand, there is some evidence of permanent deviations - in other words,
measured MRPK deviations seem to comprise both a firm-specific fixed effect (which we cannot
speak to with our theory) and a transitory component. In a sense, a more appropriate gauge
of the contribution of informational frictions would be a comparison to this latter piece. To do
so, we separate the two components for the US firms in our sample.51 We restrict the sample
to firms with at least 15 years of data and extend the data as far back as 1985, so that we
can construct at least 5 and as many as 10 3-year observations for each firm. We compute the
MRPK for each firm in each period and regress the result on a firm fixed-effect. The residuals
from this regression capture the purely transitory component of MRPK deviations. We then
compute the variance of this object, i.e., the dispersion in the transitory component of MRPK
deviations, and ask how much of this dispersion do informational frictions account for? This
exercise reveals, first, that dispersion in the transitory component is substantial, representing
about one-third of the total. Moreover, our estimated V for the US accounts for about 60% of
the transitory dispersion in case 2, and just about the entirety in case 1, again pointing to the
empirical relevance of informational frictions.52

The effect of curvature. The impact of informational frictions is sensitive to the degree
of curvature, captured here by the elasticity of substitution θ, set equal to 6 in our baseline
computations. Table 4 reports results for case 2 under two alternative values: θ = 4, which is
on the low end of the commonly used range, and θ = 10, which is on the high end. Changes
in θ lead to significant changes in the effects of the friction. Both the estimates of V and their
impact on TFP are lower with a smaller θ, with TFP losses ranging from 2% in the US to 6% in
India and higher, but similarly ordered, output losses. In contrast, the higher value of θ shows
  49 2                                     2
    σmrpl     is computed analogously to σmrpk  .
  50
       Data on the wage bill is available only for a small set of the US firms in our dataset; however, using wage
bill to measure labor input for this small set of firms gives a very similar ratio of 0.53. Reliable employment
data is not available in the emerging markets.
    51
       Sufficient data to perform this analysis are not available in the other two countries.
    52
       We again compute the average of within-industry dispersion.


                                                       32
a more severe aggregate impact, ranging from 8% in the US to 16% in India for TFP and from
11% to almost 25% for output.53 The impact of the friction varies with θ for two reasons: first,
as can be seen in (13), for a given V the aggregate consequences are larger for higher values of
θ (i.e., higher α). Second, the estimated V itself increases with θ, due to the fact that the ρpa
we measure from the data falls as θ increases but the other two moments (importantly, ρpi ) are
unchanged.

            Table 4: The Impact of Informational Frictions - Alternative Values of θ
                                     θ=4                                          θ = 10
                     V      V
                             2
                            σµ      2
                                      V
                                   σmrpk
                                           a∗ − a    y∗ − y        V      V
                                                                           2
                                                                          σµ      2
                                                                                    V
                                                                                 σmrpk
                                                                                         a∗ − a    y∗ − y

   US               0.05 0.25      0.14     0.02      0.03        0.12 0.57      0.31      0.08     0.11
   China            0.13 0.52      0.28     0.04      0.06        0.17 0.63      0.36      0.11     0.17
   India            0.17 0.60      0.37     0.06      0.08        0.24 0.83      0.53      0.16     0.24



4.4     The Sources of Learning
Decomposing V. Table 3 shows that firm learning can be quite significant and potentially
mitigates a substantial portion of the underlying fundamental uncertainty. Here, we explore
the relative importance of the two sources of learning present in our model, i.e., private sources
within the firm versus market prices. We begin by reporting in the left-hand panel of Table
5 the total extent of learning and its aggregate consequences. To do so, we compute the
reduction in V both in absolute and percentage terms due to learning from both channels, i.e.,
∆V = V − σµ2 , and the resulting effects on aggregate productivity and output. The table shows
that total learning can be quite important and translates into significant improvements in TFP
and output: in case 2 these range from 3% in India to 5% in the US for the former and from 4%
to 8% for the latter, with substantially higher gains in case 1.54 Interestingly, the contribution
of learning in China in case 1 appears comparable to that in the US, but this does not imply
that Chinese firms are necessarily as well-informed as US firms: due to the convexity of V, it is
possible that a noisier signal leads to a greater reduction in uncertainty. Intuitively, if there is
simply a greater amount of underlying uncertainty, as is the case in China, even a signal with
identical precision is in a sense more valuable.
  53
      The sensitivity of our results to θ is not particular to our framework, but rather, is common when using
this class of model to study the aggregate implications of misallocation. See, for example, Hsieh and Klenow
(2009), who find that gains from marginal product equalization approximately double in China and India when
moving from θ = 3 to θ = 5.
   54
      Note the difference between these calculations and those in Table 3. There, we compute losses compared
to a full-information benchmark. Here, we are computing gains versus a no-information (about innovations to
fundamentals) benchmark.

                                                     33
                         Table 5: The Importance and Sources of Learning
                                                                               Share from source
                                                  ∆V
                                        ∆V         2
                                                  σµ
                                                            ∆a     ∆y          Private Market
          Case 2
          US                          −0.12 −0.59 0.05 0.08                      0.92         0.08
          China                       −0.10 −0.37 0.04 0.06                      0.96         0.04
          India                       −0.06 −0.23 0.03 0.04                      0.89         0.11
          Case 1
          US                          −0.08 −0.37 0.23 0.35                      0.91         0.09
          China                       −0.10 −0.35 0.30 0.45                      0.96         0.04
          India                       −0.04 −0.14 0.12 0.19                      0.96         0.04
         Notes: The left hand panel shows the total effect of learning, i.e., from all sources: the re-
         duction in V and the corresponding gains in the aggregates (hence the pattern of negatives
         and positives). The right hand panel shows the relative shares of private and market sources
         in total learning.


   To break down the sources of learning, it is easier to work with the inverse of V, i.e., the
total precision of the firm’s information, which lends itself to a simple linear decomposition:

                                          1   1  1   1
                                            = 2+ 2+ 2 2
                                          V  σµ σe σv σz

We focus on the latter two terms, which capture the contributions of private and market
                                                                              2            1/σv2 σz2
learning to overall precision and compute their relative import as 1/σ21/σ    e
                                                                                2 2 and 1/σ 2 +1/σ 2 σ 2 ,
                                                                          e +1/σv σz       e        v z
respectively. In this way, we calculate the fraction of the total increase in precision due to each
source. We report the results in the right hand panel of Table 5. Strikingly, learning is due
overwhelmingly to private sources: at best, markets account for about 10% of the increase in
precision in the US and India, and about half of this in China. Clearly, these results point to
firm private sources as the dominant channel for learning, with markets making only a small
additional contribution. As we will see, the limited informational role of markets will prove to
be a robust finding throughout our analysis.

The role of market information. To explore in greater depth the importance of new
information in stock prices, we recompute V under the assumption that firms learn nothing
from these prices, i.e., that they contain no information. This simply entails sending the noise
in markets, σv2 σz2 , to infinity. The change in V is a measure of the contribution of stock market




                                                       34
information to firm learning, given by
                                                                 −1
                                                        1     1
                                       ∆V = V −           2
                                                            + 2
                                                        σ µ σe

   We report this value in the first columns of Table 6, along with the associated aggregate
consequences. Even for the US, which has the most informative prices, market information
reduces uncertainty only modestly, eliminating about 2% of the fundamental uncertainty, with
associated output gains as small as 0.3% and at a maximum, 2%. For China and India, the
contribution of market-produced information is even smaller, reducing uncertainty by between
0.5% and 2%, which represents a maximum gain in output of about 1%.

                         Table 6: The Contribution of Market Information
                              With both sources                     With only market learning
                                    ∆V                                         ∆V
                         ∆V          2
                                    σµ
                                              ∆a        ∆y          ∆V          2
                                                                               σµ
                                                                                        ∆a       ∆y
      Case 2
      US               −0.004 −0.021 0.002 0.003                  −0.021 −0.107 0.009 0.014
      China            −0.003 −0.010 0.001 0.002                  −0.007 −0.025 0.003 0.004
      India            −0.005 −0.019 0.002 0.004                  −0.009 −0.030 0.004 0.006
      Case 1
      US               −0.004 −0.021 0.013 0.020                  −0.010 −0.051 0.031 0.046
      China            −0.003 −0.009 0.008 0.011                  −0.006 −0.022 0.017 0.026
      India            −0.001 −0.005 0.004 0.006                  −0.002 −0.006 0.005 0.008
     Notes: The table shows the reduction in V due to market information and the corresponding gains
     in the aggregates (hence the pattern of negatives and positives). The left hand panel shows the ef-
     fects of market learning in the presence of private learning and the right hand panel when markets
     are the only source of information.


    Next, we ask whether the limited informational role of markets is due to the level of noise
in prices or to the fact that firms already have considerable information about fundamentals,
mitigating the incremental contribution of market information. This distinction is related to
the concepts of forecasting price efficiency (FPE) versus revelatory price efficiency (RPE) as put
forth in Bond et al. (2012). The former captures the extent to which prices reflect and predict
fundamentals, i.e., the absolute level of information in prices; the latter, the extent to which
prices promote real efficiency by revealing new information to the firm. In our framework, ∆V
in the first columns of Table 6 is the natural measure of RPE, since it is the marginal impact
of the information in prices on uncertainty, given the other sources of firm information. As the
table shows, at the estimated parameter values, markets in all 3 countries exhibit relatively low
RPE. To measure FPE, we compute the reduction in V from the information in stock prices


                                                     35
alone, i.e.,                                                      −1
                                                      1      1
                                          ∆V =          2
                                                          + 2 2          − σµ2
                                                      σ µ σ v σz
    This measures the contribution of market information assuming it is the only source of
learning for firms. We report the results in the right hand panel of Table 6. In general, stock
markets are rather weak predictors of fundamentals - even as the only source of learning, the
information they provide leads to only modest reductions in uncertainty. For the US, which has
the most informative prices, market generated information reduces fundamental uncertainty by
between 5% and 10%. Compare this to the US values in Table 5, where a total of between 35%
and 60% of uncertainty is eliminated. The associated TFP and output effects of markets as a
standalone source of information in the US are, at highest, 3% and 5%, respectively, in case 1.
The aggregate impact of markets is even more modest for the US in case 2, and is lower in the two
emerging markets than in the US in both cases. Even in a forecasting sense then, the efficiency
of stock market prices is fairly low, suggesting that the limited role of market information is in
large part due to its poor quality; in other words, the poor RPE of stock markets can largely
be attributed to their low FPE. Comparing these values to the corresponding ones in the left
hand panel shows that the already modest impact of the information in prices is even further
diluted by the presence of alternative information available to firms, leading in net to the low
levels of RPE shown.
    While the limited informational role of markets is a robust pattern across countries and cases,
these results should be interpreted somewhat cautiously. Our analysis focuses exclusively on
information and decisions over the medium term. It is silent on the role of stock markets in
guiding longer-term, strategic decisions (e.g., the decision to enter a new market or acquire
another company). In fact, one possible source of ‘noise’ in stock returns is information about
the firm’s prospects over a much longer horizon. So long as it is orthogonal to fundamentals
over the medium term, the relevant object for the firm’s current decisions, our strategy will still
lead us to the right measure of uncertainty and the associated misallocation - our estimates for
the specific informational parameters and the informational role of financial markets, however,
are likely to be sensitive to assumptions about the nature of this ‘noise’ term.
    Our analysis also abstracts from the contribution of financial market information in mit-
igating uncertainty about aggregate (or industry) conditions, particularly for outsiders (e.g.,
potential entrants, creditors, regulators, etc.). Explicitly modeling these features in a fully-
fledged general equilibrium environment is a challenging task, but may well be essential for a
comprehensive evaluation of the informational role of well-functioning financial markets.55
  55
       See section 5 in Bond et al. (2012) for a related discussion.




                                                          36
The role of private information. Next, we explore the contribution of learning from infor-
mation generated within the firm (i.e., firm ‘private information’) by performing experiments
analogous to those above: specifically, we calculate the marginal contribution of private infor-
mation to allocative efficiency, both in the presence of market information and when it is the
only source of learning for firms.
    We report the results in Table 7. In contrast to the effect of market learning, firm private
information plays a much larger role in reducing uncertainty and improving aggregate perfor-
mance. Turning to the first set of columns, private information eliminates between about 30%
and 50% of the fundamental uncertainty in the US. The associated aggregate gains are sub-
stantial, ranging from 4-20% for TFP and from 6-30% for output. The corresponding figures
are smaller for China and India in case 2 (although only slightly so in China), reflecting a
worse quality of firm private information in those countries, and are smaller for India in case
1. Having said that, they are still quite significant across countries and are noticeably larger
than the effects of market information. Similar to what we saw in Table 5, the contribution of
private learning in China in case 1 is on par with that in US, again because even a less precise
signal can have more value if the extent of uncertainty is greater.

                       Table 7: The Contribution of Private Information
                                  With both sources              With only private learning
                                        ∆V                                   ∆V
                              ∆V         2
                                        σµ
                                                ∆a      ∆y         ∆V         2
                                                                             σµ
                                                                                     ∆a     ∆y
        Case 2
        US                   −0.10 −0.48 0.04 0.06               −0.11 −0.57 0.05 0.07
        China                −0.09 −0.35 0.04 0.06               −0.09 −0.36 0.04 0.06
        India                −0.06 −0.20 0.02 0.04               −0.06 −0.21 0.03 0.04
        Case 1
        US                   −0.07 −0.32 0.20 0.30               −0.07 −0.37 0.22 0.33
        China                −0.09 −0.33 0.28 0.42               −0.10 −0.38 0.29 0.44
        India                −0.04 −0.13 0.12 0.18               −0.04 −0.14 0.12 0.18
       Notes: The table shows the reduction in V due to private information and the corresponding
       gains in the aggregates (hence the pattern of negatives and positives). The left hand panel
       shows the effects of private learning in the presence of market learning and the right hand
       panel when private sources are the only source of information.


    The right hand panel of Table 7 reports the contribution of firm private information were
it the only source of learning. A comparison of the two panels shows that the values are quite
similar - the presence of market information does not significantly alter the importance of
private information for overall learning.



                                                   37
4.5     Cross-country counterfactuals
Next, we use our estimates to perform a number of instructive counterfactual experiments.
Specifically, we assess the potential gains to China and India from having access to US quality
information, whether through more informative financial markets or from better firm-level
private information. In the first experiment, we compute the change in V and associated
aggregate gains in China and India under the assumption that the informativeness of financial
markets - summarized by σν2 σz2 - is equal to that in the US, leaving all other country-specific
parameters fixed. Second, we perform the same exercise for firm private information, that is,
compute the change in V and aggregate improvements under the assumption that firms in China
and India have the same σe2 as their US counterparts (again leaving the other country-specific
parameters fixed). In a final experiment, we turn away from learning and study the role of
fundamentals in leading to a differential impact of informational frictions across countries; to
do so, we recompute V in China and India assuming that firms in these countries face the same
fundamental shocks as do US firms.
    We report the results from these experiments in Table 8. The top panel shows that delivering
US-quality markets to the emerging economies results in potentially significant yet modest
reductions in uncertainty. As a percent of total fundamental uncertainty, these range from 2%
to 7% (across cases) with a corresponding aggregate impact ranging, for example, from 1% to
6% in output. The middle panel shows that access to US-quality private information would
have a much larger impact, reducing V by as much as 40% of the underlying uncertainty in the
most optimistic case, and, excepting China in case 1 which is an outlier here, more than 25% in
the other cases. The resulting aggregate gains can be substantial, ranging, for example, from
4% to almost 40% in output. Across the board, the gains from accessing US-quality private
information are much larger than from US-quality market information. To the extent that
differences in learning lead to cross-country variation in economic aggregates, these disparities
appear to be largely due to a lack of high quality firm private information, rather than to a lack
of well-functioning (in an informational sense) financial markets in emerging markets. This is
yet another instance of a result we have now seen several times: financial markets play only a
modest informational role in promoting aggregate efficiency.
    Finally, we recompute V in China and India under the assumption that firms in those
countries face shocks of the same volatility as those in the US, i.e., we replace σµ2 in the two
countries with that of the US. We report the results in the bottom panel of Table 8, which
shows that disparities in the volatility of shocks also contribute to differences in the impact of
informational frictions.56 Exposure to a fundamental process such as that in the US reduces V
   56
     Asker et al. (2012) also highlight the role of different firm-specific shock processes in generating misallocation
in a model with capital adjustment costs.


                                                          38
                         Table 8: The Effects of a US Information Structure
                                                   Case 2                                Case 1
                                                   ∆V                                    ∆V
                                        ∆V          2
                                                   σµ
                                                             ∆a     ∆y        ∆V          2
                                                                                         σµ
                                                                                                  ∆a     ∆y
    Market Information
    China                              −0.01 −0.05           0.01   0.01     −0.01 −0.02         0.02   0.02
    India                              −0.02 −0.07           0.01   0.01     −0.01 −0.05         0.04   0.06
    Private Information
    China                              −0.07 −0.26           0.03   0.04     −0.02 −0.08         0.06   0.09
    India                              −0.12 −0.43           0.05   0.08     −0.09 −0.31         0.26   0.39
    Shocks
    China                              −0.02 −0.09           0.01   0.02     −0.03 −0.13         0.10   0.15
    India                              −0.05 −0.19           0.02   0.03     −0.07 −0.24         0.20   0.31
  Notes: The table shows the reduction in V and the corresponding gains in the aggregates (hence the pat-
  tern of negatives and positives) in India and China from having access to US-quality financial market infor-
  mation (top panel), private information (middle panel) and facing US fundamental shocks (bottom panel).


between about 10% and 25% of the underlying uncertainty, leading to TFP and output gains
that are potentially substantial, ranging from 1-20% and 2-30% respectively.57


4.6     Robustness
We now turn to two important robustness exercises. In Section 3, we used our special cases
to demonstrate the validity of our measurement approach under two variants of the baseline
model: first, in the presence of other factors entering the firm’s capital choice decision, and
second, with a richer correlation structure between firm and market information. To explore
the extent to which that intuition carries over to the general model, in this section we conduct
two numerical experiment in the same spirit. Specifically, we explore the effects of (1) an
alternative information structure in which investors observe a noisy signal of the firm’s private
signal (in contrast to the conditional independence of signals in the baseline model), and (2) a
specific friction in the firm’s capital choice, namely adjustment costs. In both experiments, our
goal is to assess how the presence of these alternative factors affects our measure of the severity
of informational frictions; the results from both continue to demonstrate the robustness of our
baseline results.

Correlated information. Recall that in the special cases analyzed in Section 3, our identi-
fication strategy proved robust to an arbitrary correlation structure, i.e., no matter how rich
  57
      These numbers correspond to ∆ (a − a∗ ) and ∆ (y − y ∗ ). Recall that a∗ , the full information productivity
level, is also affected by the size of fundamental shocks, σµ2 .


                                                        39
or complex the flow of information between firms and markets, our measure of uncertainty
remained valid. Here, the lack of an analytical characterization means that we have to re-
sort to numerical experiments to demonstrate a similar robustness. Without direct data on
firm/market information, it is not obvious how to discipline the extent of the commonality of
information. We take a different route and show results from a rather extreme modification of
our baseline information structure - we assume that the signal observed by investors is a noisy
signal of the firm’s private signal, i.e.,

                                             sijt = ait + eit + vijt

    Investors then have 2 sources of information - imperfect readings of the firm’s own infor-
mation and the stock price. Notice that by construction, firms have nothing to learn from
market prices. Despite that, investment and returns will comove in part due to the common
component in the two information sets. We estimate V in this modified version of the model
using the same procedure and data as above. We report the results in Table 9. The estimates
for firm-level uncertainty are very close to those in our base case (which, of course, implies that
the associated aggregate implications are also virtually unchanged). Thus, we conclude that
our estimates of uncertainty are not particularly sensitive to assumptions about correlation in
firm and market information.58

                            Table 9: Uncertainty with Correlated Information
                                                       σe     σv       σz      V     Baseline V
                 US                                   0.37   0.17      8.01   0.08      0.08
                 China                                0.60   0.63      4.65   0.15      0.16
                 India                                0.79   0.45      6.37   0.19      0.22
                Notes: The table shows parameter estimates and the resulting extent of uncer-
                tainty when investors are assumed to observe a noisy signal of the firm’s private
                signal. All parameters not displayed retain the same values as the baseline case.




Capital adjustment costs. In the special case analyzed in Section 3, we showed that our
measure of uncertainty was robust to the presence of other distortions, both correlated and
uncorrelated with fundamentals, that may affect the firm’s capital choice decision. That anal-
ysis, while reassuring, was done with a stylized representation of these factors, primarily for
analytical tractability. To explore this result in the general model, we ask how the presence
of a particular friction, capital adjustment costs, affects our assessment of the severity of in-
  58
       Our estimates of the individual error variances do change, however.



                                                       40
formational frictions.59 We focus on a polar case - an economy where fully informed firms are
subject to convex costs of adjustment. We then take our model with informational frictions to
moments generated from this hypothetical economy - our goal is to see whether our empirical
strategy will lead us to an incorrect inference about uncertainty.
    This experiment requires two modifications to our baseline model. First, following Bloom
(2009), Cooper and Haltiwanger (2006), and Asker et al. (2012), we subject firms to quadratic
                                            2
costs of adjusting capital ζKt−1 KtK−K   t−1
                                       t−1
                                                .60 Second, we assume that firms have full informa-
tion (σe2 = 0) but that stock markets are noisy (σv2 6= 0, σz2 6= 0). We then parameterize and
solve the model in general equilibrium.61 We choose values of (σv2 , σz2 , ζ) to match 3 moments in
the data - the volatility of returns and their correlation with fundamentals, σp2 and ρpa , and the
cross-sectional variation in firm-level investment. The first two were also used in our baseline
analysis to measure the information in prices; the last is added to discipline the adjustment cost
parameter ζ.62 We simulate data using this parameterized model and compute the correlation
of prices with investment (growth), ρpi . Since ρpa is directly targeted, the model-implied ρpi
reveals the extent to which adjustment costs generate a large relative correlation, the statistic
at the heart of our inference about V. Finally, we reestimate the parameters of our model with
informational frictions using this simulated value for ρpi , along with the other two moments
(namely, σp2 and ρpa ).
    We report the results in Table 10.63 The correlation of returns with investment choices
implied by the full-information adjustment cost model is significantly lower than that observed
in the data, leading to the substantially lower values for the relative correlation reported in
the table. In other words, in the absence of firm-level uncertainty, investment decisions covary
much less with stock returns even in the presence of adjustment costs. The relative correlation
numbers suggest that applying our empirical strategy to these simulated moments would result
in substantially lower estimates of V. The third column of the table confirms that this is
   59
       We put particular focus on adjustment costs since Asker et al. (2012) find that these types of costs can
account for a significant portion of MRPK dispersion across industries and countries, whereas Midrigan and
Xu (2013) find much more modest effects stemming from financial frictions. Moreover, our analysis focuses on
large publicly traded firms for whom financial constraints are less likely to be binding.
    60
       We focus on convex costs and abstract from the fixed-type costs also considered in the literature, as the
former are most capable of delivering a configuration of moments that resemble those under informational
frictions. Intuitively, convex costs imply that investment decisions respond to innovations in fundamentals
only in part contemporaneously and then with a lag. This latter feature resembles the pattern implied by
informational frictions.
    61
       Since the firm’s capital choice problem is now a dynamic one, we can no longer analytically characterize the
joint distribution of fundamentals and capital across firms, but rather, solve numerically for this distribution
(and the associated general equilibrium implications) in steady state. We refer the reader to Appendix B for
details.
    62
       This is along the lines of the estimation strategy employed in Bloom (2009), Cooper and Haltiwanger
(2006), and Asker et al. (2012).
    63
       We show in Appendix B the full set of target moments and resulting parameter values.


                                                        41
indeed the case: the estimated V’s from the simulated data are only about one-third of those
in our baseline analysis (compare to the fifth column). The resulting aggregate effects are also
substantially lower: for example, TFP losses are only between 1 and 4%, compared to 4-10% in
our baseline. These results provide some reassurance that our estimates are not simply picking
up the effects of adjustment costs, but are indeed robust measures of firm-level uncertainty.

                       Table 10: A Full-Information Adjustment Cost Model
                         Relative Correlation         Implied Uncertainty          Baseline Uncertainty
                         Data        Model             V          a∗ − a             V          a∗ − a
    US                   0.05        −0.03            0.03         0.01            0.08          0.04
    China                0.10        −0.08            0.06         0.03            0.16          0.07
    India                0.17        −0.02            0.08         0.04            0.22          0.10
 Notes: The table shows the relative correlation of returns with investment growth and returns with funda-
 mentals (ρpi − ρpa ), both as computed from the data and as predicted by the full-information adjustment
 cost model, as well as the implied extent of uncertainty from the latter and from the baseline model. ρpa is
 a targeted moment and so is the same in the data and model.


    While this analysis had the admittedly limited goal of confirming the robustness of our
estimates of uncertainty, it also suggests that both types of frictions (adjustment costs and
imperfect information) might be necessary to match a broader set of empirical moments. Such
a unified framework would also allow us to disentangle their effects on aggregate outcomes as
well as explore how they interact with each other. At some level, it is not even clear that
they should be thought of as two independent frictions: imperfect information leads to delayed
responses to fundamentals and in this sense, provide a deeper theory of adjustment costs.64
Exploring these issues, both theoretically and quantitatively, is an important, if challenging,
direction for future research.


5        Conclusion
In this paper, we have laid out a theory of informational frictions that distort the allocation
of factors across heterogeneous firms, leading to reduced aggregate productivity and output.
Taking this theory to the data, we find evidence of substantial micro-level uncertainty and
associated aggregate losses, particularly so in China and India.65
    64
      Fuchs et al. (2013) provide a microfoundation for adjustment costs based on asymmetric information and
adverse selection.
   65
      Strictly speaking, our sample covers only large, publicly traded firms. However, these are also likely to
be the most well-informed. In this sense, one can view our estimates as a lower bound for the total effect of
information frictions in the economy.



                                                      42
    There are several promising directions for future research. In our modeling approach, we
have aimed to strike a balance between realism and transparency of the economic forces at play
as well as of our empirical methodology. In doing so, we have made a couple of admittedly
extreme assumptions. For example, the investment choice is modeled as a static and otherwise
undistorted decision problem. Similarly, the learning process is rather stark, with perfect
revelation at the end of each period, implying that firms are able to quickly ‘correct’ their past
errors. As a result, investment in any given period includes a component related to the forecast
error in the previous period. When shocks are highly persistent, this adjustment makes a
substantial contribution to investment volatility. These assumptions limit our ability to match
a larger set of micro moments on investment dynamics. Relaxing them is straightforward from a
conceptual standpoint - for example, by introducing financial constraints, adjustment costs, or a
richer stochastic process for fundamentals66 - however, there are substantial computational and
empirical challenges. First, this introduces additional state variables into the firm’s problem
and precludes the simple analytical mapping between uncertainty and aggregate outcomes.
Second, this requires additional data to infer the additional parameters - particularly on the
time series behavior of firm-level investment. This is less of an issue for the US, but in China
and India, both availability and quality of the data decline dramatically as we go back in time.
    Another important direction for future work is towards a deeper theory of differences in
information quality. This is valuable both from a conceptual point of view as well as from
the perspective of designing policies. For example, much of the cross-country variation we
find seems to stem from differences in the quality of firms’ internal information sources and
only marginally from the quality of information from financial markets. These results suggest
that policies aimed at improving the quality of firm-level information may be more fruitful
in improving aggregate performance than those intended to bring financial markets to a level
closer to that in the US. Given that we follow the standard approach of modeling information
as exogenous noisy signals, we are left to speculate on the exact form of such policies. In
our view, the most likely sources of variation in the quality of firm private information are
differences in manager skill and/or information collection/processing within the firm. Under this
interpretation, improving manager training and/or accounting and information systems within
firms holds the most promise of generating substantial gains in aggregate TFP. Our results
also show that a reduction in fundamental volatility would also help mitigate the informational
disadvantage of firms in less developed countries.
  66
    Suppose, for example, that the fundamental ait consists of a persistent component and a purely transitory
one. Then, even if ait−1 is observed perfectly ex-post, firms will need to form beliefs about the persistent
component (e.g., by using a Kalman filter) while forecasting ait . This implies that innovations to the persistent
component are revealed slowly.




                                                       43
References
Albagli, E., C. Hellwig, and A. Tsyvinski (2011a): “Information Aggregation, Invest-
 ment, and Managerial Incentives,” National Bureau of Economic Research working paper
 17330.

——— (2011b): “A Theory of Asset Pricing Based on Heterogeneous Information,” National
 Bureau of Economic Research working paper 17330.

Asker, J., A. Collard-Wexler, and J. De Loecker (2012): “Productivity Volatility
 and the Misallocation of Resources in Developing Economies,” CEPR Discussion Paper No.
 DP8469.

Bai, J., T. Philippon, and A. Savov (2013): “Have financial markets become more infor-
 mative?” FRB of New York Staff Report.

Bakke, T.-E. and T. M. Whited (2010): “Which Firms Follow the Market? An Analysis
 of Corporate Investment Decisions,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1941–1980.

Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2013): “Cross Country Differences
 in Productivity: The Role of Allocative Efficiency,” American Economic Review, 103, 305–
 334.

Bloom, N. (2009): “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 77, 623–685.

Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2013): “Does
 management matter? Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 1–51.

Bond, P., A. Edmans, and I. Goldstein (2012): “The Real Effects of Financial Markets,”
 Annual Review of Financial Economics, 4, 339–360.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2011): “Finance and Development: A Tale of
 Two Sectors,” American Economic Review, 101, 1964–2002.

Chen, Q., I. Goldstein, and W. Jiang (2007): “Price Informativeness and Investment
 Sensitivity to Stock Price,” Review of Financial Studies, 20, 619–650.

Cooper, R. W. and J. C. Haltiwanger (2006): “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
 Costs,” The Review of Economic Studies, 73, 611–633.

Durnev, A., R. Morck, B. Yeung, and P. Zarowin (2003): “Does Greater Firm-Specific
 Return Variation Mean More or Less Informed Stock Pricing?” Journal of Accounting Re-
 search, 41, 797–836.

                                           44
Fuchs, W., B. Green, and D. Papanikolaou (2013): “Adverse Selection, Slow Moving
 Capital and Misallocation,” Slow Moving Capital and Misallocation (October 7, 2013).

Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic (1990): “Financial Development, Growth, and the Dis-
 tribution of Income,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1076–1107.

Grossman, S. J. and J. E. Stiglitz (1980): “On the Impossibility of Informationally Effi-
 cient Markets,” American Economic Review, 70, 393–408.

Guner, N., G. Ventura, and Y. Xu (2008): “Macroeconomic implications of size-dependent
 policies,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 721–744.

Hopenhayn, H. (1992): “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,” Econo-
 metrica, 60, 1127–1150.

Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
 India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1403–1448.

Jovanovic, B. (1982): “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, 649–670.

——— (2013): “Misallocation and Growth,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Koeva, P. (2000): “The Facts About Time-to-Build,” IMF Working Paper.

Luo, Y. (2005): “Do Insiders Learn from Outsiders? Evidence from Mergers and Acquisitions,”
  Journal of Finance, 60, 1951–1982.

Mayer, T. (1960): “Plant and Equipment Lead Times,” The Journal of Business, 33, 127–132.

Midrigan, V. and D. Y. Xu (2013): “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level
 Data,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Moll, B. (2014): “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo
 Capital Misallocation?” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Morck, R., A. Shleifer, R. W. Vishny, M. Shapiro, and J. M. Poterba (1990): “The
 Stock Market and Investment: Is the Market a Sideshow?” Brookings Papers on Economic
 Activity, 1990, 157–215.

Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu (2000): “The Information Content of Stock Markets:
 Why do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements?” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 58, 215–260.


                                            45
Olley, S. and A. Pakes (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
 Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263–97.

Restuccia, D. and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
 with Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707–720.

Tobin, J. (1982): “On the Efficiency of the Financial System,” Lloyd’s Banking Review.




Appendix
A     Detailed Derivations
A.1     Case 1: Both factors chosen under imperfect information
As we show in equation (5) in the text, the firm’s capital choice problem can be written as
                                        α2                                 
                                    N               1                      α2
                       max                      Yt Eit [Ait ] Kitα
                                                    θ
                                                                      − 1+      Rt Kit
                          Kit       Kt                                     α1

and optimality requires
                                        α2
                                  α1       N       1
                             α                  Yt θ Kitα−1 Eit [Ait ] = Rt
                               α1 + α2     Kt
                                        α2                 1
                                   α1      N        1 E [A ] 1−α
                                                       it   it
                 ⇒           α                  Yt θ                   = Kit
                                α1 + α2    Kt            Rt

    Capital market clearing then implies
                                                                                 1
                Z               "        α2                           1   # 1−α Z
                                     N      α1     Yt                     θ
                                                                           1
                    Kit di =                    α            (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di = Kt
                                     Kt  α1 + α2 Rt
                                                 1
                      " 
                           α2            θ1 # 1−α
                        N            α1     Yt               Kt
            ⇒                 α                     =R               1
                        Kt        α1 + α2 Rt           (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di

from which we can solve for                                           1
                                                        (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α
                                         Kit = R                      1        Kt
                                                        (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di



                                                            46
   From here, it is straightforward to express firm revenue as
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                  α
                                                                                           1−α
                                                         1                  (Eit [Ait ])
                              Pit Yit = Ktα1 N α2 Yt θ Ait  R                             1
                                                                                                  
                                                                            (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di

and noting that aggregate revenue must equal aggregate output, we have
                                  Z                                         R                   α
                                                                        1     Ait (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di
                           Yt =        Pit Yit di =   Ktα1 N α2 Yt θ        R               1
                                                                                                   α
                                                                               (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di

or in logs,
                                                  Z                                               Z
              1                                                                α                                   1
          yt = yt + α1 kt + α2 n + log                Ait (Eit [Ait ])        1−α   di − α log        (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di
              θ

   Now, note that under conditional log-normality,
                                                                                               
                                                                                             1
                    ait |Iit ∼ N (Eit [ait ] , V)        ⇒         Eit [Ait ] = exp Eit ait + V
                                                                                             2

The true fundamental ait and its conditional expectation Eit ait are also jointly normal, i.e.
                              "              #          "         # "                            #!
                                   ait                       ā            σ2   σa2 − V
                                                 ∼N                    , 2 a
                                  Eit ait                    ā          σa − V σa2 − V

We then have that
         Z                             Z                                                   
                            α                                       α             1 α
      log Ait (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di = log exp ait +                      Eit ait +           V di
                                                                   1−α            21−α
                                                                           2
                                                  1        1 2 1       α
                                                                                σa2 − V
                                                                                         
                                              =       ā + σa +
                                                1−α        2      2 1−α
                                                    α                1 α
                                                          σa2 − V +
                                                                 
                                                +                            V
                                                  1−α                21−α
                                                  1        1      1 2−α                  1 α
                                              =       ā + σa2 + α              σ 2
                                                                                    − V   +      V
                                                1−α        2      2 (1 − α)2 a              21−α

and                 Z                                                              2
                                        1          1       1                 1                     1 1
              log       (Eit [Ait ])   1−α   di =     ā +                                 σa2 − V +      V
                                                  1−α      2                1−α                      21−α




                                                                  47
Combining these,

                                                                                                1 σa2
              Z                                         Z
                                      α                                     1                           1 α
        log       Ait (Eit [Ait ])   1−α   di − α log           (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di = ā +            −     V
                                                                                                21−α 21−α

   Substituting and rearranging, we obtain the expressions in (11) and (12) in the text,

                                1                           1 σa2    1 α
                       yt =       yt + α1 kt + α2 n + ā +         −        V
                                θ                            1 − α 2 1 − α
                                                            2
                                                  θ        1     θ    σa2     1
                              = α̂1 kt + α̂2 n +     ā +                  − θV
                                                 θ−1       2 θ−1 1−α 2

with aggregate productivity given by

                                                          σa2
                                                       
                                          θ      1    θ          1
                                     a=     ā +                − θV
                                        θ−1      2 θ−1 1−α 2
                                        |          {z         }
                                                                 a∗


   It now remains to endogenize Kt . The rental rate in steady state satisfies

                                                                 1
                                                       R=          −1+δ
                                                                 β

Then, from the optimality and market clearing conditions, we have from (4) that

                                              α1 N   R
                                                   =                  ⇒    K∝W
                                              α2 K   W

i.e., the aggregate capital stock is proportional to the wage. To characterize wages, we return
to the firm’s profit maximization problem

                                               1
                                max          Yt θ Eit [Ait ] Kitα1 Nitα2 − W Nit − RKit
                                Kit ,Nit

which, after maximizing over capital, can be written as
                                                     α1 
                                               α  1−α                                     1
                                                                      1                  1−α
                                                   1
                                                                  Yt Eit (Ait ) Nitα2
                                                            1                                1
                       max      (1 − α1 )                             θ
                                                                                                 − W Nit
                        Nit                     R

Optimality and labor market clearing imply
                          α  1−α  1−α1     α  1−αα1−α  1                1−α 1−α
                             2        1 −α2    1     1   2                       1    2
                                                            Yt θ Eit [Ait ]             = Nit
                           W                  R
                            1−α1
                     α  1−α         α  1−αα1−α Z  1                1−α 1−α
                       2      1 −α2       1     1  2                           1   2
                                                          Yt Eit [Ait ]
                                                            θ
                                                                                     di = N
                      W                 R


                                                                  48
   As before, letting α = α1 + α2 , we see that
         Z                              1−α
                                       1−α      1     1
                            1              1
W ∝           Eit [Ait ]   1−α   di            Yt θ 1−α1
                                                    1
                                                  1−α
           Z                    1
                               1−α    !1−α           1             2                   1
                                                                                           1−α
                           1                   1                    1  σ a − V    1     1       1
    =        exp Eit ait + V        di      Yt 
                                               θ
                                                         = exp ā +              + V Yt θ

                           2                                        2 1−α         2
                                          1
                   1 σa2 − αV
                                  1−α
                                    1       1
    =     exp ā +               Yt θ

                   2   1−α

or in logs,
                                                                               σa2 − αV
                                                                                         
                                          1                   1 1                                   1 1
                           w∝                         ā +                                      +            yt
                                       1 − α1              1 − α1 2              1−α                θ 1 − α1
   Recalling that
                                                                               dk   dw
                                                 K∝W                 ⇒            =
                                                                               dV   dV
which, in conjunction with (11) and (12), implies
                                                 
                                       dy          dk      1
                                          = α̂1         − θ
                                       dV          dV      2
                                                                      
                                               α̂1       1 α      1 dy    1
                                          =            −        +        − θ
                                            1 − α1       2 1 − α θ dV     2

                                                                                                                   θ
and finally, collecting terms and rearranging, and using the fact that α
                                                                       b1 =                                          α,
                                                                                                                  θ−1 1
                                                                                                                          we obtain

                                               dy   1    1      da 1
                                                  =− θ        =
                                               dV   2 1 − α̂1   dV 1 − α̂1

A.2     Case 2: Only capital chosen under imperfect information
The firm’s labor choice problem can be written as
                                                             1
                                               max         Yt θ Ait Kitα1 Nitα2 − Wt Nit
                                                Nit


and optimality requires
                                                            α                          1
                                                                       1             1−α
                                                                 2
                                                                     Yt Ait Kitα1
                                                                                          2
                                                 Nit =                 θ

                                                              W




                                                                      49
   Labor market clearing then implies
                                 Z            Z 
                                                  α2 θ1        1
                                                           α1 1−α2
                                     Nit di =       Y Ait Kit      di = N
                                                  W t
                                                                           1
                                                          (Ait Kitα1 ) 1−α2
                                 ⇒      Nit = R                           1      N
                                                          (Ait Kitα1 ) 1−α2 di
                          1
                                             α1
   Letting Ãit = Ait1−α2 and α̃ =          1−α2
                                                 ,    we have

                                                                   Ãit Kitα̃
                                                     Nit = R                     N
                                                                   Ãit Kitα̃ di

which implies
                                                           !α2 −1
                                                   α̃
                                 1         Ã it K
                Wt    = Yt Ait Kitα1 α2 R
                                 θ                 it
                                                         N
                                           Ãit Kitα̃ di
                                     Z               1−α2          1       α1
                                                                                 α2 −1
                          α2      1
                                                α̃                α   1−α    1−α
                      =        Yθ       Ãit Kit di         Ait Kit1 Ait 2 Kit 2
                        N 1−α2 t
                                     Z               1−α2
                          α2      1
                                                α̃
                      =        Y  θ
                                        Ãit Kit di
                        N 1−α2 t

   From here, it is straightforward to express the firm’s capital choice problem as in (8):
                                                            α2
                                                           1−α       1   1
                                                     α2        2
                                                                                h i
                          max        (1 − α2 )                     Yt θ 1−α2 Eit Ãit Kitα̃ − Rt Kit
                          Kit                        Wt

Optimality requires
                                               α2
                                             α2 1−α2 θ1 1−α
                                                          1      h i
                     Rt       = (1 − α2 )            Yt     2
                                                              Eit Ãit α̃Kitα̃−1
                                            Wt
                                              1   α2 1
                                  (1 − α2 )α̃ 1−α̃ α2 1−α2 1−α̃ θ(1−α21)(1−α̃)  h i 1−1 α̃
                                
           ⇒     Kit          =                                   Yt             Eit Ãit
                                      R             Wt




                                                                   50
   Capital market clearing then implies
                             1   α2 1
                (1 − α2 )α̃ 1−α̃ α2 1−α2 1−α̃ θ(1−α21)(1−α̃)  h i 1−1 α̃
      Z                                                    Z
      Kit di =                               Yt               Eit Ãit     di = Kt
                    R             Wt
                  h i 1−1 α̃
                   Eit Ãit
     ⇒ Kit =                        Kt
               R  h i 1−1 α̃
                  Eit Ãit       di

and we can rewrite the labor choice as
                                                                      h i 1−α̃α̃
                                           Ãit Kitα̃            Ãit Eit Ãit
                                 Nit = R                 N   =        h i 1−α̃α̃ N
                                           Ãit Kitα̃ di       R
                                                                 Ãit Eit Ãit     di

   Combining the solutions for capital and labor, we can express firm revenue as
                                         h i 1−1 α̃        α 1             h i 1−α̃α̃      α 2
                           1
                                   
                                     E it  Ã it
                                                              
                                                                  
                                                                        Ã it  E it    Ã it
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
          Pit Yit     = Yt Ait
                           θ
                                      h i 1−1 α̃ Kt   R                     h i 1−α̃α̃ N 
                                 R E Ã
                                
                                                       di              Ãit Eit Ãit        di 
                                       it     it
                                                                  h i α11−      +α2 α̃
                                                                                     α̃
                                                              α2
                           1                           A   Ã
                                                         it it    E it Ã it
                              α    α
                      = Yt θ Kt 1 N 2   h i 1                 α1           h i 1−α̃α̃ α2
                                       R                1−α̃           R
                                            Eit Ãit         di           Ãit Eit Ãit        di
                                                            h i 1−α̃α̃
                           1                          Ã it Eit Ãit
                      = Yt θ Ktα1 N α2   h i 1          α1         h i 1−α̃α̃ α2
                                        R          1−α̃         R
                                          Eit Ãit      di         Ãit Eit Ãit    di

                                                   R
and again using the fact that yt = log                 Pit Yit di, we can write

       1
                                             Z         h     i 1−1 α̃                        Z                h i 1−α̃α̃
   yt = yt + α1 kt + α2 n − α1 log                 Eit Ãit               di + (1 − α2 ) log       Ãit       Eit Ãit       di
       θ

   Again, we exploit log-normality to obtain
           Z                h i 1−α̃α̃         Z   
                                                                   α̃              1 α̃
                                                                                              
     log       Ãit       Eit Ãit       di = log exp ãit +            Eit ãit +          Ṽ di
                                                                 1 − α̃            2 1 − α̃
                                                 1        1      1 2 − α̃  2              1 α̃
                                             =        ã + σã2 + α̃              σ  − Ṽ    +          Ṽ
                                               1 − α̃     2      2 (1 − α̃)2 ã                2 1 − α̃




                                                               51
and similarly,
                         Z               i 1−1 α̃            Z                   1−1 α̃
                                    h                                           1
                   log         Eit Ãit               di = log    exp Eit ãit + Ṽ           di
                                                                                2
                                                                    1         1 σã2 − Ṽ    1 1
                                                              =          ã +            2 +          Ṽ
                                                                  1 − α̃      2 (1 − α̃)     2 1 − α̃
                                                                   ait
   Combining, and using the fact that ãit =                      1−α2
                                                                       :

                                    h i 1−1 α̃
                                   Z                               Z       h i 1−α̃α̃
                   −α1 log      Eit Ãit         di + (1 − α2 ) log Ãit Eit Ãit          di
                                      (1 − α2 ) 2 1 (1 − α2 )(2α̃ − α̃2 )  2
                                                                            
                   1 − α2 − α1                                                           
                 =              ã +            σã +                          σ ã − Ṽ
                       1 − α̃             2           2        (1 − α̃)2
                   1 − α ā          (1 − α2 ) 2 1 α1  2                
                 =                +            σã +            σã − Ṽ
                   1 − α̃ 1 − α2         2            2 1 − α̃
                        1 1            1  α 1
                 = ā +        σ2 −            (1 − α2 )Ṽ
                        21−α a 21−α

   Substituting and collecting terms, we obtain expressions (11) and (13) in the text,

                                                                                 σa2
                                                                           
                                      θ       1                        θ              1
                 yt = α
                      b1 kt + α
                              b2 n +     ā +                                        − (θb
                                                                                         α1 + α
                                                                                              b2 ) α
                                                                                                   b1 Ṽ
                                     θ−1      2                       θ−1       1−α 2

   with aggregate productivity given by

                                                σa2
                                             
                                θ      1    θ          1
                           a=     ā +                − (θb
                                                          α1 + α
                                                               b2 ) α
                                                                    b1 Ṽ
                              θ−1      2 θ−1 1−α 2
                              |          {z         }
                                                         a∗


                                                                                                           R        h i 1−α̃α̃
   To endogenize Kt , we begin by characterizing the steady state wage W in terms of                           Ãit Eit Ãit     di
       1
and Y θ :
                                   Z                   1−α2
                    α2         1
       W =                 Y   θ        Ãit Kitα̃ di
                  N 1−α2
                                   (Z                   α2                           1−α̃α̃ )1−α2
                α2    1            (1 − α2 )α̃ α2 1−α2 θ(1−α )
                                                                  1
                                                                             h     i
            =   1−α
                     Yθ      Ãit                              Y      2 E
                                                                           it Ãit           di
              N    2                    R        W
                                     α1         α α̃             Z        h i 1−α̃α̃ 1−α2
                α2    1   (1 − α2 )α̃ 1−α̃  α2  1−2 α̃ θ1 1−α̃α̃
            =        Yθ                                 Y              Ãit Eit Ãit            di
              N 1−α2          R              W




                                                                   52
   and rearranging,

       α  1−α 1−α̃              α1
                       (1 − α2 )α̃ 1−α1 1−αα2 α̃
                                                                1   1
                                                                         Z                h i 1−α̃α̃  (1−α1−α
                                                                                                               2 )(1−α̃)
                                                                                                                   1
           2       1
  W =                                    α2
                                               1
                                                  Y             θ 1−α1
                                                                              Ãit       Eit Ãit      di
       N 1−α2              R
                                    1−α
      Z       h i 1−α̃α̃  1−α      1   1    1
    ∝     Ãit Eit Ãit        di        Y θ 1−α1
           (                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                            ) 1−α
                                                                            1−α
                             1 2 1 2α̃ − α̃2  2
                                                                                                               1
                    1                                     1 α̃                                         1
       =    exp          ã + σã +               σ − Ṽ +               Ṽ       Y                     θ
                  1 − α̃     2      2 (1 − α̃)2 ã             2 1 − α̃
                                                                    1
                                                                    1−α
                    1         1          2   1 α̃(1 − α2 )       1       1
       =   exp ā +                     σa −               Ṽ Y θ
                    2 (1 − α2 )(1 − α̃)      2 1 − α̃

   or in logs,
                             
                        1                1     1        1          1 α̃(1 − α2 )            1 1
         w∝                       ā +                       σa2 −                     Ṽ +          yt
                     1 − α1              2 (1 − α1 ) (1 − α)       2 (1 − α1 )(1 − α̃)      θ 1 − α1

   As before,

                                           dk    dw     1 α̃(1 − α2 )        1 1 dy
                  K∝W              ⇒           =     =−                    +
                                           dṼ   dṼ    2 (1 − α1 )(1 − α̃) θ 1 − α1 dṼ

   and substituting into the derivative of aggregate output,
                                  
                                  
                 dy           dk      1
                     = α̂1          − (θb  α1 + α
                                                b2 ) α
                                                     b1
                 dṼ          dṼ     2
                                                               
                               1 α̃(1 − α2 )          1 1 dy       1
                       = α̂1 −                    +               − (θb
                                                                      α1 + α
                                                                           b2 ) α
                                                                                b1
                               2 (1 − α1 )(1 − α̃) θ 1 − α1 dṼ    2

   Finally, collecting terms and rearranging, and using the facts that 1 − α = (1 − α̃) (1 − α2 )
      θ
        
and θ−1   α1 = α b1 , we obtain
                                                                                             
                              dy     1                1      da                       1
                                  = − (θb
                                        α1 + α
                                             b2 ) α
                                                  b1       =
                              dṼ    2               1−αb1   dṼ                   1 − α̂1

A.3     The stock market
Here, we connect expected profits π (·) in the price function to the firm’s problem. For brevity,
we only show the derivation for case 1 (case 2 is very similar). The firm’s profit is




                                                           53
                    α2                        
               N             1                α2
    =                      Yt Ait Kitα
                             θ
                                         − 1+      RKit
               Kt                             α1
                    α2                               1         !α               1
               N             1           (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α      α2     (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α
    =        Yt Ait R        θ
                                     1     Kt     − 1+                              1     RKt
               Kt                                              α1
                                                                    R
                       (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di                            (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di
                                        !α                                    
                                                                            α2
        α2
        N       1         Kt                                   α
                                                                       1 +  α1
                                                                                  RKt                   1
    =        Yt θ R                        A    (E   [A    ]) 1−α −                       (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α
                                  1          it   it    it                          1
        Kt
                                                                    R
                    (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di                               (Eit [Ait ]) 1−α di
      |             {z                   }                          |       {z          }
                                   Γ1                                                         Γ2
                                   α                          1
    = Γ1 Ait (Eit [Ait ])         1−α    − Γ2 (Eit [Ait ])   1−α




   From the definition of the firm’s information set,

                                    Eit [Ait ] = E [Ait |ait−1 , ait + eit , ait + σv zit ]
                                                 V
                                               =     ρ (ait−1 − ā)
                                                 σµ2

   The profit function π (·) is obtained after integrating out the noise term in the firm’s signal
                                                    Z                                                    
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                    αeit
        π (ait−1 , ait , ait + σv zit ) = Γ1 Ait (E [Ait |ait−1 , ait + eit , ait + σv zit ])    dΦ1−α
                                                                                                     σ
                                             Z                                                       e
                                                                                              1      eit
                                          −Γ2 ((E [Ait |ait−1 , ait + eit , ait + σv zit ])) 1−α dΦ
                                                                                                     σe

A.4        Special cases: Identification
Transitory shocks. A log-linear approximation of prices (around the deterministic case):67

  P exp (pit ) = Ẽit AK α exp (ait + αkit ) − Ẽit RK exp (kit ) + β Ẽit Pit+1 + Const.
 ⇒ P + P pit ≈ AK α − RK + βP + AK α Ẽit (ait + αkit ) − RK Ẽit kit + β Ẽit P pit+1 + Const.
                                                           Ẽit [Eit ait ]
            P pit ≈ AK α Ẽit ait + (αAK α − RK)                           + β Ẽit P pit+1 + Const.
                                                              1−α
                      = AK α Ẽit ait + β Ẽit P pit+1 + Const.
                        AK α
               pit    =       Ẽit ait + β Ẽit pit+1 + Const.
                         P

where Ẽ denotes the marginal investor’s expectations.
   Guess-and-verify
  67
       The aggregate constant multiplying revenues is normalized to 1.



                                                                   54
                                          pit = ξ Ẽit ait + Const.

Substituting,

                             AK α                                                             Y   1−β
     ξ Ẽit ait + Const. =        Ẽit ait + βξ Ẽit ait+1 + Const.         ⇒            ξ=     =
                              P                                                               P   1−α

   Variances (of growth rates):

                                                                                       σv2 σz2
                                                                                              
           σp2                                  2 2
                                                      σµ2    σv2 σz2       2 2
                                                                                                 σu2
                                                                       
                 ≡   Var (pit − pit−1 ) = 2ψ ξ                 +         = 2ψ ξ 1 + 2
                                                                                        σµ
                                                                                                  2
                                                                 2 2                           1
           σk2 ≡                                                          2 2   2 2 2
                                                                                     
                     Var (kit − kit−1 ) = 2 (φ1 + φ2 ) σµ + φ1 σe + φ2 σv σz
                                                                                           1−α
                                        2            2              2
                          1
                         σe2
                               + σ21σ2 σu2 + σ12 σe2 + σ21σ2 σv2 σz2  1 2
                                    v z                   e          v z
                 =   2                                          2
                                                                                 1−α
                                          
                                                1      1     1
                                              σµ 2 + σ2 + σ2 σ2
                                                        e   v z
                                  1        1
                                                    !                          2
                                        +
                                                                         
                                 2
                               σv σz2     σe2
                                                         2      2
                                                                            1
                 =   2 1             1         1      σµ = 2 σµ − V
                          σ  2  +   σ 2 +  σ σ2   2                        1−α
                             µ    e     v z

           σa2   ≡ Var (ait − ait−1 ) = 2σµ2

   Covariances (of growth rates):



     Cov (p, k) ≡ Cov (pit − pit−1 , kit − kit−1 )
                                                            
                                   2         2 2
                                                        1
                = 2ξψ φ1 + φ2 )σµ + φ2 σv σz
                                                      1−α
                                                          
                            1      1       2       1       2 2
                           σe2 +  2  2
                                 σv σz
                                         σ µ +    2  2
                                                 σv σz
                                                         σ  σ
                                                           v z
                                                                 
                                                                    1
                                                                                
                                                                                    1
                                                                                       
                                                                               2
                = 2ξψ             1
                                                                        = 2ξψσµ
                                  σ2
                                       + σ12 + σ21σ2               1−α             1−α
                                          µ     e      v z


     Cov (p, a) =     2ξψσµ2




                                                      55
   The correlations:

                               Cov (p, a)            2ξψσµ2                 1
                    ρpa =                 =q                            =q
                                 σ p σa                            
                                             4ψ 2 ξ 2 σµ2 + σv2 σz2 σµ2    1+                σv2 σz2
                                                                                              σµ 2


                               Cov (p, k)                2ξψσµ2
                    ρpk =                 =q
                                 σp σk                             
                                             4ψ 2 ξ 2 σµ2 + σv2 σz2 (σu2 − V)
                                                 1
                         = r                                  
                                            2 2
                                      1 + σσv σ2 z   1−     V
                                                             2
                                                            σµ
                                               µ



   The volatility of returns:
                                                  2                                        !2
                                σz2             2 2
                                                                              σz2 + 1
                                                     
                2     2              +1      σ v σ z                                              1 2
               σp = ξ                     1+           σu2 = ξ 2                                     σ
                          2      σv2 σz2
                         σz + 1 + σ 2          σ  2
                                                  µ                          σz2 + ρ12            ρ2pa µ
                                           µ                                            pa




Permanent shocks. We start with the price function, (suppressing the time subscript and
normalizing the GE term multiplying revenues to 1),

                            P (a−1 , a, z) = Ẽ (ea K α − RK) + β ẼP (a, a0 , z 0 )

   For small information frictions, profits are approximately

                                                                     a
                                                   ea K α − RK ≈ e 1−α

   Substituting,
                                                             a
                                 P (a−1 , a, z) ≈ Ẽe 1−α + β ẼP (a, a0 , z 0 )

   Guess
                                                                         a
                                            P (a−1 , a, z) = P̂·Ẽe 1−α

   To verify the guess

                                                                   a0
                                     a         a
                                                                     
                             P̂·Ẽe 1−α ≈ Ẽe 1−α + β P̂·Ẽ Ẽ0 e 1−α
                                                        a                          a
                                           = Ẽe 1−α + β P̂·ẼΦ (u0 , z 0 ) · Ẽe 1−α
                                                                             a
                                           = 1 + β P̂·ẼΦ (u0 , z 0 ) Ẽe 1−α

where Ẽ0 denotes the expectation of marginal investor in the following period, which in turn is
a function Φ of the future shock realizations (u0 , z 0 ). Since (u0 , z 0 ) are iid, our guess is verified.


                                                            56
                                                                          1
                                  log P (a−1 , a, z) = Const. +              Ẽa
                                                                         1−α
or equivalently,
                                        1
                                      pit−1 =
                                            Ẽit−1 ait−1 + const.
                                      1−α
   Next, when ρ = 1, firm and investor beliefs are given by

                     Eit ait = ait−1 + Eit µit                 Ẽit ait = ait−1 + Ẽit µit ,

which leads to

                                       1             1
                            pit =         ait−1 +          ψ (uit + σv zit ) + Const
                                    1−α            1−α
                   (1 − α) kit    = ait−1 + φ1 (µit + eit ) + φ2 (µit + σv zit ) + Const.

where the coefficients ψ, φ1 and φ2 are the same as in the i.i.d. case. In growth rates,

         ∆ait = µit
                   1                         1
         ∆pit =        (ait−1 − ait−2 ) +        ψ (µit + σv zit − µit−1 − σv zit−1 )
                1−α                       1−α
                   1                       1
              =        (1 − ψ) µit−1 +         ψµit + ξψσv (zit − zit−1 )
                1−α                      1−α
 (1 − α) ∆kit = (ait−1 − ait−2 ) + (φ1 + φ2 ) (µit − µit−1 ) + φ1 (eit − eit−1 ) + φ2 σv (zit − zit−1 )
                 = (1 − φ1 − φ2 ) µit−1 + (φ1 + φ2 ) µit + φ1 (eit − eit−1 ) + φ2 σv (zit − zit−1 )

   Second moments (of growth rates):
                                2                            2                        2
                           1                2              1                         1
           σp2   =             (1 − ψ)      +   σµ2                +2ψ 2 σµ2       ψ 2 σv2 σz2
                          1−α                             1−α                       1−α
                            2 
                                                         σv2 σz2
                                                                
                         1       2                2
                 =             σµ 1 − 2ψ + 2ψ (1 + 2 )                                                (26)
                        1−α                                σµ
                           2
                         1
           σk2 =                 (1 − φ1 − φ2 )2 σµ2 + (φ1 + φ2 ) σµ2 + 2φ21 σe2 + 2φ22 σv2 σz2
                                                                                               
                                                                                                      (27)
                        1−α
                            2 
                                                                      V2       V2        V2
                                                                                               
                         1         2      2
                                                        2
                 =               σµ − 2 σµ − V + 2σµ − 4V + 2 2 + 2 2 + 2 2 2                         (28)
                        1−α                                           σµ       σe       σ v σz
                           2
                         1
                 =             σµ2                                                                    (29)
                        1−α

   Thus, the variance of investment is invariant to uncertainty ! This is because, with persis-


                                                          57
tence, undoing the effects of past forecast errors also contributes to investment volatility. When
shocks are permanent, this exactly offsets the contemporaneous dampening that occurs due
to imperfect information. Thus, with permanent shocks, uncertainty shifts the timing of the
response of capital to fundamentals, but not the overall magnitude.
    Covariances:

                         1
       Cov(p, a) =           ψσµ2
                       1−α
                             2
                           1
                                   (1 − ψ) (1 − φ1 − φ2 ) σµ2 + ψ (φ1 + φ2 ) σµ2 + 2ψφ2 σv2 σz2
                                                                                               
       Cov(p, k) =
                         1−α
                             2
                           1
                                   (1 − ψ − φ1 − φ2 ) σµ2 + 2ψ (φ1 + φ2 ) σµ2 + 2ψφ2 σv2 σz2
                                                                                            
                   =
                         1−α
                             2
                           1
                                   (1 − ψ − φ1 − φ2 ) σµ2 + 2ψ σµ2 − V + 2ψV
                                                                                
                   =
                         1−α
                             2
                           1
                                    V + ψσµ2
                                             
                   =
                         1−α

   Directly,
                                                                              2
                                               1                            1
                            Cov(p, k) −               Cov(p, a)    =                  V
                                            1−α                            1−α
                                                    
                                                 1
                                ρpk σp σk −            ρpa σp σa   =
                                              1−α
                                                  
                                  1              1
                    ρpk σp σu             −            ρpa σp σu   =
                                1−α           1−α
                                                       
                                                    1
                                  (ρpk − ρpa )             σp σµ   =
                                                  1−α

   Re-arranging yields the expression in the text.

                                    V    (ρpk − ρpa ) σp
                                     2
                                       =                 (1 − α)
                                    σµ         σµ

   Correlations:




                                                   58
                                                 V
                                           ψ+     2
                                                 σµ
                    ρpk = r                                        
                                                          σv2 σz2
                           1 − 2ψ + 2ψ 2 1 +               σµ 2


                                     ψ                                                      1
                    ρpa = r                                      = r                   2
                                                          σv2 σz
                                                               2                                     2 2
                           1 − 2ψ + 2ψ 2 1 +               σµ 2
                                                                                  1
                                                                                  ψ
                                                                                       − 1 + 1 + 2 σσv σ2 z
                                                                                                         µ



        Then,
                                                                              V
                               ρpk     1 V                                     2
                                                                              σµ                ρpa
                                   =1+                   ⇒          ψ=     ρpk             =
                               ρpa     ψ σµ2                               ρpa
                                                                                  −1             η
                                                                                      σv2 σz2
        Given ψ, we then use the expression for ρpa to solve for                       σµ 2 :



                                                             1
                                        ρ2pa =           2         2 2
                                                     η
                                                   ρpa
                                                       − 1 + 1 + 2 σσv σ2 z
                                                                       µ
                                                                  2
                                      σv2 σz2
                                                           
                                                   1     1 η                1
                                  ⇒             =      −       − 1        −
                                       σµ2        2ρ2pa 2 ρpa               2
                                                      (1 − η 2 )    η
                                                =         2
                                                                 +     −1
                                                        2ρpa       ρpa

                                                                           σz2 +1
        Finally, combining this with the definition of ψ ≡                         2 σ2
                                                                                  σv   z
                                                                                           allows us to disentangle σz2 and
                                                                        σz2 +1+      2
                                                                                   σµ

σv2 .


A.5         Correlated signals
Here, we present alternative, more direct derivations of equations (22) and (25), which rely only
on conditional normality and not on the correlation structure.

Transitory shocks. We start with the i.i.d. case. Then, pit is an i.i.d. random variable,
uncorrelated with past and future realizations of ait .



                Cov (pit − pit−1 , ait − ait−1 ) = Cov (pit , ait ) + Cov (pit−1 , ait−1 )
                                                    = 2Cov (pit , ait ) = 2Cov (pit , Eit ait + $it )
                                                    = 2Cov (pit , Eit ait ) + 2Cov (pit , $it )
                                                    = 2Cov (pit , Eit ait )

                                                          59
where $it denotes the firm’s forecast error, which is uncorrelated with firm information - in
particular, with any element in the firm information set. Therefore, Cov(pit , $it ) = 0. Note
that this is true independent of the correlation structure between pit and the other elements of
                                                      1
that information set. Now, we use Cov(pit , kit ) = 1−α Cov(pit , Eit ait ) and divide both sides of
the equation by σp σa to get


               Cov (pit − pit−1 , ait − ait−1 )   2Cov (pit , kit ) (1 − α) σk
                                                =
                           σp σ a                          σp σ a           σk
                                                  Cov (pit − pit−1 , kit − kit−1 ) (1 − α) σk
                                                =
                                                               σ p σk                  σa
                                           ρpa    (1 − α) σk
                                       ⇒        =
                                           ρpk        σa

   Since
                                 2                 2
                             1                     1
               σk2                       2
                                                         2 σµ2 − V
                                                                   
                     =           2σ (Eit ait ) =
                            1−α                   1−α
                             2                      2                       
                           1        2        V        1       2                  V
                     =           2σµ 1 − 2 =                σ (ait − ait−1 ) 1 − 2
                         1−α                σµ       1−α                        σµ
                             s
               σk        1         V
           ⇒         =        1− 2
               σa      1−α         σµ

   Combining yields (22).

Permanent shocks. Next, consider the case with ρ = 1. Investment now becomes

                      (1 − α) (kit − kit−1 ) = ait−1 + Eit uit − ait−2 + Eit−1 uit−1
                                             = Eit uit + uit−1 − Eit−1 uit−1



                                            1                   
                                   pit   =      ait−1 + Ẽit uit
                                           1−α
                                            1                       
                                         =      ait−1 + ψ̃Epit (uit )
                                           1−α

where Epit (uit ) is the expectation conditional on pit alone. Here, we make use of the fact that
the marginal investor’s expectation is proportional to Epit . The constant of proportionality ψ̃
depends on the variance parameters, but, as we will see, will play no role in the determination


                                                    60
of V. Stock returns are given by:

            (1 − α) (pit − pit−1 ) = ait−1 + ψ̃Epit uit − ait−2 − ψ̃Epit−1 uit−1
                                    = uit−1 + ψ̃Epit uit − ψ̃Epit−1 uit−1
                                                         
                                    = ψ̃Epit uit + 1 − ψ̃ uit−1 + ψ̃ uit−1 − Epit−1 uit−1
                                                                                          


   Define
                                    ωit−1 ≡ Eit−1 uit−1 − Epit−1 uit−1

    Since ωit−1 is in the firm’s information set, it must be orthogonal to the firm’s forecast error
$it−1 ≡ uit−1 − Eit−1 uit−1 . We can use this to write the forecast error component in stock
returns as the sum of two orthogonal components

                           uit−1 − Epit−1 uit−1 = (uit−1 − Eit uit−1 ) + ωit−1
                                               = $it−1 + ωit−1

   Substituting into the expression for the growth rates, we get



              (1 − α) (kit − kit−1 ) = Epit uit + ωit + $it−1
                                                          
                                            p
              (1 − α) (pit − pit−1 ) = ψ̃Eit uit + 1 − ψ̃ uit−1 + ψ̃ ($it−1 + ωit−1 )




   Covariances
                                                                     
                                                                  1
      Cov (∆p, ∆a) =        Cov (pit − pit−1 , ait − ait−1 ) =           ψ̃V ar (Epit uit )
                                                                 1−α
                                   2                            2 
                                1                  p            1             
     Cov (∆k, ∆p) =                    ψ̃V ar (Eit uit ) +              1 − ψ̃ Cov (uit−1 , $it−1 )
                              1−α                             1−α
                                     2
                                  1
                            +             ψ̃V ar ($it−1 )
                                1−α
                                                               2                        2
                                1                              1                           1
                       =              Cov (∆p, ∆a) +                   1 − ψ̃ V +                ψ̃V
                              1−α                            1−α                        1−α
                                                               2
                                1                              1
                       =              Cov (∆p, ∆a) +                 V                               (30)
                              1−α                            1−α

   Which gives us



                                                   61
                                                                               2
                                                 1                           1
                            ρkp σp σk =                   ρpa σp σµ +                  V
                                                1−α                         1−α
                                                                               2
                        1                        1                           1
                           ρkp σp σµ =                    ρpa σp σµ +                  V
                       1−α                      1−α                         1−α
                                                           1
                            ρkp σp σµ = ρpa σp σµ +           V
                                                          1−α

   Re-arranging yields equation (25).


A.6     Other distortions
Distortions affect the capital choice

                                           (1 + γ) Eit ait + εit
                                   kit =
                                                 1−α

but have only a second order effect on profits. Therefore, our approximations for stock prices
are unaffected under both cases, i.e. under iid and permanent shocks. In other words, the only
moments affected by distortions are Cov(p, k) and σk . With only correlated distortions, both
these moments are scaled by 1 + γ. Uncorrelated distortions have no effect on Cov(p, k) but
increase σk .

Transitory shocks. With correlated distortions, since both Cov(p, k) and σk are scaled up
by the same factor, ρpk remains unchanged:

                        Cov (p, k)                2ξψσµ2 (1 + γ)
               ρpk =               =q
                          σp σ k     4ψ 2 ξ 2 σµ2 + σv2 σz2 (σu2 − V) (1 + γ)2
                                                           

                                     2ξψσµ2                                        1
                      = q                                    = r                             
                           4ψ 2 ξ 2 σµ2 + σv2 σz2 (σu2 − V)                   2 2
                                                                        1 + σσv σ2 z   1−   V
                                                                                             2
                                                                              µ             σµ


the same as before.




                                                    62
   With uncorrelated distortions,

                              Cov (p, k)                  2ξψσµ2
                     ρpk    =            =q
                                σp σ k                            
                                            4ψ 2 ξ 2 σµ2 + σv2 σz2 (σu2 + σε2 − V)
                                                      1                                   ρpa
                            = r                                           =q
                                                                                                  σε2
                                             2 2
                                       1 + σσv σ2 z     1−    V
                                                                   +
                                                                         2
                                                                        σε         1−      V
                                                                                            2
                                                                                           σµ
                                                                                                +    2
                                                                                                    σµ
                                                               2
                                                              σµ         2
                                                                        σµ
                                               µ



                                                                   V                        σε2
so that using (22) will yield an underestimate of                   2
                                                                   σµ
                                                                        by an amount         2.
                                                                                            σµ


Permanent shocks. With correlated distortions, equation (30) becomes
                                                                                                       2
                      Cov (∆k, ∆p)                      1                                      1
                                   =                     Cov (∆p, ∆a) +                                        V
                         1+γ                           1−α                                    1−α
                                                                     2
                                 ρpk σp σk       1                 1
                                              =     ρpa σp σµ +          V
                                  1+γ           1−α               1−α
                            
                      1
                                 ρpk σp σµ =
                     1−α

yielding the same relationship between V and the other moments as before. In other words,
using equation (25) leads us to the correct V.
    With uncorrelated distortions, we still have
                                                                                    2
                                                   1                              1
                              ρpk σp σk =                    ρpa σp σµ +                    V
                                                  1−α                            1−α

                1
                     p
but now σk =   1−α
                         σµ2 + 2σε2 . Substituting,
                                          s                 
                                                       σε2                          1
                              ρpk σp σµ      1+2                 = ρpa σp σµ +         V
                                                       σµ2                         1−α

so that now, the formula (ρkp σp − ρpa σp ) σµ underestimates                      V
                                                                                  1−α
                                                                                      .




                                                             63
B      Adjustment Costs
When firms are fully informed but subject to capital adjustment costs, the dynamic optimization
problem of the firm is characterized by the value function:
                                                                                      2
                                                                             Kit                                
    V Ãit , Kit−1 = max        GÃit Kitα̃    − Kit − ζKit−1                       − 1 + βEV Ãit+1 , (1 − δ) Kit
                     Kit ,Nit                                                 Kit−1

    To characterize G and Ãit , we start with the firm’s labor choice problem
                                                                              1
                      max Pit Yit − W Nit = max Yt θ Ait Kitα1 Nitα2 − W Nit
                       Nit                                      Nit


where α’s are as defined in (2). Optimizing over Nit and substituting back into the objective
gives                                                    α2
                                                   α  1−α      1   1
                                                     2
                      Pit Yit − W Nit = (1 − α2 )           2
                                                              Yt θ 1−α2 Ãit Kitα̃
                                                    W
where α̃ and Ãit are defined as in case 2 in the text. We can then solve for

                                                                h α α2                     1
                                                                                     1   i 1−α
                                                                      2                       2
                                       G = (1 − α2 )                              Yt θ
                                                W
    Next, using the firm’s labor optimality condition, labor market clearing implies
                                             1
                                      α  1−α               1   1
                                                                      Z
                                           2        2
                                                        Yt   θ 1−α2
                                                                          Ãit Kitα̃ di = N
                                       W

from which we can solve for

                       α  α2                 Z                      1−α
                                                                         θ−1
                                                                            2 (1−θα )
                                                                                   2
                                       1                                                          θ
                          2
                                    Yt =
                                       θ
                                                    Ãit Kitα̃ di                            N θ−1 α2 (1−α2 )
                        W

and so

                                                        Z                         1−θα
                                                                                     θ−1
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                  θ
                                G = (1 − α2 )                  Ãit Kitα̃ di                 N θ−1 α2

   Note that under full information, the production side of the economy is completely decoupled
from stock markets, so we can now solve the model laid out above. Starting with a guess for
the general equilibrium term G, we solve for the value functions (using a standard iterative
procedure and a discretized grid for capital), simulate to obtain the steady state distributions
and verify that our initial guess for G is consistent with that distribution. If not, we update
the guess and iterate until convergence.


                                                                 64
    We then solve for stock prices, again using the conjecture that the informed investors follow
a threshold rule. Proceeding exactly as in the baseline model, we can then derive the following
functional equation for the price:
                                          Z
       P (ait−1 , kit−1 , ait , zit ) =     π (ait , kit−1 ) H (ait |ait−1 , ait + σv zit , Pit )
                                             Z
                                          +β P̄ (ait , k ∗ (ait , kit−1 )) H (ait |ait−1 , ait + σv zit , Pit )

    The model is parameterized as described in the text. Table 11 reports the full set of target
moments and parameter estimates. Notice that the first two columns are identical to those in
Table 2 (case 2). σk2 denotes the variance of investment rates, which is used to pin down the
size of the adjustment cost ζ.

                   Table 11: Targets and Parameters - Adjustment Cost Model
                                                Target moments                    Parameters
                                                 ρpa      σp2     σk2         ζ       σv      σz
                   US                           0.18    0.23     0.10       0.45     0.37    4.25
                   China                        0.06    0.14     0.15       0.18     1.00    4.00
                   India                        0.08    0.23     0.10       0.52     0.69    6.36




C     Data
We use annual data on firm-level production variables and stock market returns from Compustat
North America (for the US) and Compustat Global (for China and India). For each country,
we exclude duplicate observations (firms with multiple observations within a single year), firms
not incorporated within that country, and firms not reporting in local currency. We build three
year production periods as the average of firm sales and capital stock over non-overlapping
3-year horizons (i.e., K2012 = K2010 +K2011
                                         3
                                            +K2012
                                                   , and analogously for sales). We measure the
capital stock using gross property, plant and equipment (PPEGT in Compustat terminology),
defined as the “valuation of tangible fixed assets used in the production of revenue.” We then
calculate investment as the change in the firm’s capital stock relative to the preceding period.
We construct the firm fundamental ait as the log of revenue less the relevant α (which depends
on the case) multiplied by the log of the capital stock. Finally, we first-difference the investment
and fundamental series to compute investment growth and changes in fundamentals.
    Stock returns are constructed as the change in the firm’s stock price over the three year
period, adjusted for splits and dividend distributions. We follow the procedure outlined in the

                                                         65
Compustat manual. In Compustat terminology, and as in the text, using pit as shorthand for
log returns, returns for the US are computed as
                                                                                     
                              PRCCMit ∗ TRFMit                   PRCCMit−1 ∗ TRFMit−1
              pit = log                              − log
                                 AJEXMit                             AJEXMit−1

where periods denote 3 year spans (i.e., returns for 2012 are calculated as the adjusted change
in price between 2009 and 2012), PRCCM is the firm’s stock price, and TRFM and AJEXM
adjustment factors needed to translate prices to returns from the Compustat monthly securities
file. Data are for the last trading day of the firm’s fiscal year so that the timing lines up with
the production variables just described. The calculation is analogous for China and India, with
the small caveat that global securities data come daily, so that the Compustat variables are
PRCCD, TRFD, and AJEXDI, where “D” denotes days. Again, the data are for the last trading
day of the firm’s fiscal year.
     To extract the firm-specific variation in our variables, we regress each on a time fixed-effect
and work with the residual. This eliminates the component of each series common to all firms in
a time period and leaves only the idiosyncratic variation. As described in the text, we limit our
sample to a single cross-section, namely 2012, and finally, we trim the 2% tails of each series.
It is then straightforward to compute the target moments, i.e., σp2 , ρpi , and ρpa . As described
in the text, we lag returns by one period, so that, e.g., ρpi is the correlation of 2006-09 returns
with investment growth from 2009-12.
     To estimate the parameters governing the evolution of firm fundamentals, i.e., the persis-
tence ρ and variance of the innovations σµ2 , we perform the autoregression implied by (1). Here
we use annual observations on ait at a 3-year frequency in order to simplify issues of time
aggregation. We estimate the process using our data from 2012 and 2009. We include a time
fixed-effect in order to isolate the idiosyncratic component of the innovations in ait . Differences
in firm fiscal years means that different firms within the same calendar year are reporting data
over different time periods, and so the time fixed-effect incorporates both the reporting year
and month. The results from this regression deliver an estimate for ρ and σµ2 , from which we
trim the 1% tails.
     Our leverage adjustment is as follows: we assume that claims to firm profits are sold to
investors in the form of both debt and equity in a constant proportion (within each country).
This implies that the payoff from an equity claim is Sit = Vit −Dit−1 , where Vit is the value of the
unlevered firm and Dit−1 = dEt [Vit ], where d ∈ (0, 1) represents the share of expected firm value
in the hands of debt-holders. In other words, firm value is allocated to investors as a debt claim
that pays off a constant fraction of its ex-ante expected value and as a residual claim to equity
holders. The change in value of an equity claim is then equal to ∆Sit = ∆Vit and dividing both


                                                 66
sides by the ex-ante expected value of the claim (i.e., the price) S = V − dV , where V = Et [Vit ],
gives returns as ∆SS it = (1−d)V
                           ∆Vit
                                 . Taking logs and computing variances shows σv2it = (1 − d)2 σs2it ,
i.e., the volatility in (unlevered) firm value is a fraction (1 − d)2 of the volatility in (levered)
equity returns. To assign values to d in each country, we examine the debt-asset and debt-
equity ratios of the set of firms in Compustat over the period 2006-2009. Because these vary to
some degree from year to year and depend to some extent on the precise approach taken (i.e.,
whether we use debt-assets or debt-equity and whether we compute average ratios or totals),
we simply take the approximate midpoints of the ranges for each country, which are about 0.30
for the US and India and 0.16 for China, leading to adjustment factors of about 0.5 and 0.7,
respectively.




                                                 67
