NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL INCREASING RETURNS,
HYSTERESIS, REAL WAGES
AND UNEMPLOYMENT

Olivier J. Blanchard
Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 2034

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1986

We are grateful to Michael Emerson for useful discussions and to
Lousie Sheiner for research assistance. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2034
October 1986

Fiscal Increasing Returns, Hysteresis, Real Wages and Unemployment

ABSTRACT

European unemployment is widely regarded as a problem of excessive real

wages. This view as it is usually expressed carries the disturbing implication
that there is a sharp conflict between the interests of those currently
employed and the unemployed because it suggests that increases in employment

will require reductions in the real wages of those currently employed. The
first part of this paper shows that increases in employment in Europe are
likely to be associated with rising real take-home pay for workers because of

fiscal increasing returns. Increases in employment and output will make
possible reductions in taxes sufficiently large to offset any effects of
diminishing returns to labor.

The second part of the paper considers alternative explanations for the
failure of nominal wages to adjust so as to restore full employment and their

implications for the efficacy of fiscal policies. It concludes that under a
variety of plausible conditions tax cuts would succeed in stimulating
employment.

Olivier J. Blanchard
Department of Economics

MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

European unemployment is widely regarded as a problem of excessive real

wages. The conventional wisdom is that at current real wages with the current
capital stock, the labor force cannot all be employed profitably. This
conclusion is often illustrated by the calculation of wage gaps, estimates of
the amount by which real wages would have to fall for full employment in Europe

to be restored, given the levels of the capital stock and technology. The
efficacy of expansionary aggregate demand policy is a subject of controversy,

with those who see it as useful often acknowledging that it can only succeed by

reducing real wages. Skeptics suggest that real wages are sufficiently rigid
that demand polices will not succeed in reducing real wages appreciably and
will therefore increase prices but not employment.

The real wage view of the unemployment problem as it is usually stated
carries the disquieting implication that there is a sharp conflict between the
interests of those currently employed and those currently unemployed. It
implies that a return to full employment in Europe will require sacrifices on

the part of workers who are currently employed. Many policy discussions focus
on methods of getting currently employed workers to accept reductions in their

standard of living so that more people can be employed. It is hardly
surprising that labor organizations, which represent primarily those with jobs,

do not enthusiastically join these discussions. Thus, for half a decade now
policymakers have tried to bring about real wage reductions through the use of
contractionary demand policies. The results have not been encouraging.
Unemployment has doubled in the EEC from its already high 1980 level.

In the first part of this paper we question the validity of the view that
a return to full employment requires sacrifices on the part of currently

-2-

employed workers. We note that it depends critically on the assumption of
diminishing returns in the production of output for private consumption. As
long as there are diminishing returns, durable increases in the level of
employment necessarily imply reductions in the amount of output available per

worker at least as long as profits do not decline. With increasing returns
however, increases in employment will lead to more than proportionate increases
in output--making possible increases in the consumption of employed workers.

Increasing returns may arise through a number of channels. While discussions
of increasing returns usually focus on the form of the production function, we
focus on fiscal increasing returns arising from the presence of a large public

sector. This may well be, for macroeconomics, the most important type of
increasing returns.

If, as unemployment decreases, government spending does not increase in
proportion with economic activity, an assumption which is particularly likely
to hold in Europe at the present time, government spending is just like a
public fixed cost. An increase in output allows for a decrease in tax rates,

and an increase in after-tax wages given pre-tax wages. We show the effect to

be quantitatively substantial. Indeed, we think it very likely that in the
major European countries an increase in employment would be associated with

increases in after tax real wages. Conversely, if after tax real wages are
fixed, tax cuts might well prove so expansionary as to be self financing.
If an increase in employment is consistent with an increase in real wages
and can make both the currently unemployed and the currently employed workers

better off, why doesn't it take place? We take this question up in the second

-3-

part of the paper. Ultimately, the answer must be found in the failure of
nominal wages to decline sufficiently in the face of unemployment. A decline in
nominal wages and prices would eventually lead to an increase in aggregate
demand and an increase in output and employment, together with higher real
take-home wages. But this has not happened; indeed, one of the major
developments over the last five years in Europe has been the increase in the
level of unemployment consistent with no pressure on wages, the increase in the

"NAIRU". The problem of explaining why universally beneficial increases in
employment do not take place becomes that of explaining the high current level
of the NAIRU.

A popular explanation for the high level of the NAIRU has been the

rigidity of real wages at excessively high levels. We consider the
implications of this view for tax policy, but ultimately conclude that it does
not provide a fully satisfactory explanation for the persistence of high

unemployment. Relying on our earlier work (Blanchard and Summers 1986) we
therefore consider theories of macroeconomic hysteresis. The essential element
of these theories is the assumption that wages are mostly set in the interests

of currently employed insiders, not of unemployed outsides. We have shown in
our previous work how these theories can easily explain the increase in the

NAIRU in line with the increase in actual unemployment. More importantly here,
when this assumption is coupled with the assumption of decentralized wage
bargaining, it generates exactly the type of nominal wage rigidity that needs
to be explained. While a general decrease in nominal wages would be beneficial
to all, insiders and outsiders alike, no individual group of insiders has an

-4-

incentive to decrease its nominal wage, given the nominal wages bargained by
the other group; it would only lead to the hiring of some outsiders, an outcome
that is not beneficial to the insiders.

We conclude by considering the implications of our analysis for economic

policy. In the absence of strong policy measures, European unemployment is
likely to remain high for the foreseeable future. If however, by demand
expansion or social contracts, policy can increase employment, a return to
steady full employment is possible without asking concessions from the

currently employed. We argue that whatever explanation is provided for the
current high level of unemployment, substantial tax cuts are likely to have a
significant positive impact on employment and need not be associated with more
than a temporary increase in budget deficits.

Section I. Fiscal increasing returns

In this section we examine fiscal increasing returns- - the increasing

returns arising from the fixed nature of the government's claim on the
economy's output. In order to focus ot the effects of fiscal increasing
returns, we assume perfect competition in the goods market, constant returns to
scale in capital and labor, and that the capital stock is fixed over the

horizon being analyzed. These are not our preferred assumptions but are
familiar and so permit us to isolate the implications of fiscal increasing
returns.

Relaxing them by allowing for increasing returns in the production

function and imperfect competition in product markets, or for the accumulation

-5-

of capital, would strengthen the conclusions reached here.

We assume that the government acts so as to maintain the level of the
budget deficit constant as unemployment is reduced. On the spending side, we
allow for the fact that employment expansion reduces spending on unemployment
insurance and welfare, but neglect the possibility that increased revenues from
economic expansion would be used to create new government programs. This latter
assumption seems appropriate at this stage, given the political climate in
Europe. Our assumption that increases in output would not lead to changes in
budget deficits seems fairly realistic for the medium term analysis

contemplated here. Recent decreases in output have actually been associated
with declines in budget deficits. Budget deficits, adjusted for inflation,
have slowly gone down, from -2.9% of GDP for the EC average in 1982 to a
forecast -1.7% for 1986. Such levels are well below levels which would require
urgent further adjustment.

The relationships between real wages, employment and taxes are then given
by the simple system:

(1)

Y — F(L)

(2)

G-bw0(l-t0)(L-L0) —

(3)

F'(L) — w

;

F'>O, F"O

tY

Equation (1) is a production function, giving output as a function of
employment with a given capital stock. Equation (2) gives the government budget
constraint, with spending on the left, and revenues on the right. Spending is a

-6-

decreasing function of the level of employment, as unemployment insurance
decreases with the level of employment. The parameter b represents the
replacement rate provided by unemployment insurance expressed as a fraction of
after tax wages)- Taxes are assumed to be levied on output, or equivalently on
both wage and profit income. The tax rate t is therefore endogenously
determined by the need to finance government spending, which itself declines
with employment. Equation (3) gives the relation between employment and wages
which follows from profit maximization under perfect competition.

Employment and after tax real wages

One cannot, in the absence of a labor supply or wage setting equation,
determine from (1) to (3) both the wage and the level of employment. But one
can derive the relation between the two. Using (1) to (3), the relation between
employment and the take home pay of workers, wh, is given by

(4)

Wh —

(l-t)w

—[(F(L)-G+bw0(l-t0)(L-L0)J(F'(L)/F(L))

Under strictly decreasing returns, wh is first an increasing and then a
decreasing function of L. When employment is low, the decrease in taxes which
follows from a larger tax base dominates the effect of decreasing returns in
production. When employment is high, the effect of decreasing returns

1 We assume that unemployment insurance is a fraction of the after tax real
wage at some given employment level, for example full employment. Thus, if the
real wage increases, the replacement rate decreases. An alternative assumption
is that the replacement rate is constant. This leads to slightly more complex
algebra below but has little effect on the results.

-7-

dominates. The relation between wh and L is depicted in Figure 1.
Differentiating equation (4) and manipulating the result, the condition
for being on the upward sloping portion of the locus in Figure 1 and thus for
take home pay to be an increasing function of the level of employment can be
expressed as

(5)

g >

[(a/a)-b(l-a)]/[1-a-i-(a/ci)-b(l-a)]

where g represents the government's share of output, a is the share of
capital in output, b is the replacement rate provided by unemployment insurance
and a represents the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor in
production.

In the Cobb-Douglas case, if the effect of increases in employment on
government spending is neglected, (b-O), equation (5) reduces to the condition
that g > a, that the government's share exceeds the share of profit in CNP, a

condition almost certainly satisfied in every European country. With a lower
elasticity of substitution, condition (5) is still likely to be satisfied,
especially when account is taken of the effects of increases in employment on

the level of government spending. For example, assuming a capital share a of
.25, a replacement rate b of .5, and a government share of .4, condition (5)

will be satisfied as long as a >.28, a condition which appears reasonable given
most estimates of aggregate production functions. The following table gives the
critical value of g for different values of a, a and b. g must be larger than
the value given in the table for wh and L to be positively related.

-8-

Table 1. Critical values of g such that wh is an increasing function of L;
.25

b—

.0

.33

.67

.33

.50

.40

.25

.67

.33

.11

.0

1.0

.25

.0

.0

While the appropriate choice of parameter values is not clear, it appears

likely that condition (5) will be satisfied. Thus, ncreases in employment in
Europe are likely to coincide with higher after tax real wages. This is
because the resulting increase in the size of the tax base and the implied
lower tax rates will more than offset any reduction in the marginal product of
labor.

Taxes and Employment

This conclusion raises further questions. If the government was to pursue
expansionary policies, would not the effects on employment be magnified by the
further reduction in tax rates due to the increase in employment? Could a tax

cut even pay for itself? Addressing these questions requires us to close the
model by adding a labor supply or wage setting equation to equations (1) to
(3). We shall present in the next section a macroeconomic analysis of these

issues. Here, we just consider two simple alternatives, the case of a fixed

-9-

after tax real wage (a horizontal labor supply curve), and that of an inelastic
supply of labor at a given level of employment (a vertical labor supply curve).

We start out by looking at the case of a rigid after tax real wage, so
that we draw a horizontal labor supply curve in Figure 1. This could result

from extensive indexing. Alternatively, McDonald and Solow (1981) among others
have argued that it could be the outcome of bargaining between unions and

firms. Letting Wr be the fixed reservation wage, so that wh Wr we can solve
for equilibrium employment as a function, of wr and C. In this case it is clear

that there are in general two equilibria; both yield the same amount of revenue
and the same after tax real wage; but they differ with respect to the level of
employment. One of the equilibria is to the left of the point where take home
pay is maximized: the marginal product of labor is high, but tax rates are also
high. The other is to the right, the marginal product of labor is lower but

this is offset by lower tax rates. As long as both equilibria are at less than
full employment, the equilibrium E' in Figure 1 is obviously superior to the
equilibrium E" since it involves the same level of take home pay for workers
and increased employment. At the superior equilibrium E', tax revenues are an
increasing function of the tax rate.

The comparative static properties of the two equilibria are quite
different. A decrease in G leads to a shift upwards of the after tax real wage
employment locus. It leads therefore to a decrease in employment if the economy
is initially at the low employment equilibrium, and an increase in employment
if the economy is at the high employment equilibrium. It is also straighforward

to show that, for the case where bO, small decreases in the tax rate starting
from the inferior equilibrium E" increase tax revenues while, starting from E',

they decrease tax revenues. The comparative static properties of E" are

FIGURE 1. TAKE HOME PAY AS A FUNCTION OF EMPLOYMENT

Ea
FIGURE 2. THE CASE OF INELASTIC LABOR SUPPLY.

L

L

0

L

L

/

-10-

therefore rather strange and one is led to question whether E" is a stable
equilibrium. Indeed it is not: starting at E", a reduction in employment leads
to a tax increase, leading to further declines in employment and a downwards
spiral; an increase in employment leads to a tax decrease, a further increase
in employment and an upward spiral.2
We have already argued that European economies are probably operating in

the range where take home pay is an increasing function of employment. This
rules out the equilibrium E'. While it is tempting to conclude that economies
will instead operate at the equilibrium E", we have seen that this is unlikely,

as E" is unstable. The correct conclusion is that, if the after tax real wage
is really rigid, economies will either gravitate to the favorable stable
equilibrium E' or will instead spiral downwards with ever increasing tax rates.
It is difficult to predict the effects of decreases in tax rates or other

expansionary policies in such a situation. They may, if large enough, change a
downward spiral in an upward spiral, but it is difficult to predict the
conditions under which this will occur.
These conclusions of course depend heavily on the assumption of real wage

rigidity. If wage were instead set to maintain the current level of
emDlovment, even with the employment level far smaller than full employment, an
assumption we shall argue later to be unfortunately closer to the truth in
Europe, we would have the case depicted in Figure 2. Reductions in taxes would
have no effect at all on employment and would simply lead to proportionate

2 The behavior of the Massachusetts economy over the last five years - which
because of labor mobility within the US, largely takes its after tax real wage
as given, is perhaps an actual example of such a virtuous circle. While
obviously other factors than taxes are at work, Massachusetts' relative tax
burden has decreased from above to below the national average, and output has
sharply increased, increasing tax revenues.

-11-

reductions in revenues. Even in this case however, if an employment expansion
was achieved somehow, say by shifting LL to L'L', it is still the case that it
would allow for an increase in workers' take home pay.

Some empirical evidence

We end this section by first documenting the increase in tax rates which
has taken place with the actual increase in unemployment, as it provides a kind
of reverse experiment to the increase in employment and the decrease in tax
rates we have discussed above. Secondly, we derive more realistic estimates of
the decrease in tax rates which would be made feasible by a decrease in
unemployment. These estimates are based on estimated Okun's law relations.
Table 2 gives the total share of tax revenues in GNP, and an estimate of
the ratio of employees' take-home pay to employers' labor costs calculated from
direct information on tax rates for the main EC countries for selected years
from 1970 to 1984. The data show a consistent increase in the tax wedge in all

countries. While many factors other than unemployment explain this increase,
especially in the earlier part of the period, the increase since 1980 is

substantial

-

and probably mostly due to the relative shrinking of the tax base.

Table 3 answers the following question. Suppose that unemployment were
reduced by 1 percentage point and the historical Okun's law relationship

between unemployment and output held up. How large an increase in real take
home pay would result if real product wages remained constant? Alternatively,
how far could product wages decline with after tax real wages remaining

constant? Estimates of Okun coefficients differ sometimes substantially
depending on whether one regresses output on unemployment or unemployment on

Table 2. Tax Burdens in Europe 1970-1984

Tax revenues/GDP

Tax wedge

UK
1970
1975
1980
1984

39.9
39.7
39.5
42.0

.32
.46

38.9
43.3
45.3
46.4

.40

30.7
31.6
38.1

.40
.38
.38

45.4

.43

.50
.52

Germany
1970
1975
1980
1984

.45
.49

.51

Italy
1970
1975
1980
1984

France
1970
1975
1980
1984

39.8
41.2
46.6
49.8

Sources
Column (1) is from the Annual Report of the EEC, November
1985, Table 45. Column (2) is constructed from the data appendix of
the special issue of Economica, forthcoming, on unemployment.

Table 3. The impact of a 1% reduction in unemployment of after tax real wages

(1)

(2)

Okun coefficient Okun coefficient
(optimistic)

(3)

t/(1-t)

(4)

(5)

(l)x(3)

(2)x(3)

(pessimistic)

UK

4.3

1.5

.71

3.1

1.0

Germany

3.6

2.7

.99

3.6

2.7

Italy

6.2

3.3

.83

5.1

2.7

France

5.5

3.8

.96

5.3

3.6

Notes : The number in column (1) is obtained by taking the reciprocal of the
slope coefficient b in the regression U — a + b Y, estimated with annual data
for the period 1961-1985. The number in column (2) is obtained from the in
verse regression. The value of t/(l-t) is calculated using data on total
government receipts as a share of GDP, using the Annual Report of the EEC,
November 1985, table 45.

-12-

output3.

To avoid taking a stand on the issue of what specification is

appropriate, we present estimates obtained under both sets of regressions. Even
using pessimistic estimates, the potential for after tax wage increases is
substantial, varying between 1% for the UK and 3.6% for France per point of
unemployment reduction. It is extremely unlikely that product wages would have
to decline by amounts nearly this large in order to achieve reductions of 1% in
unemployment.

It seems clear that an expansion, if it could be engineered, would benefit

both employed and unemployed workers. The question which remains is how this
expansion could be engineered. This question is closely related to the problem
of why, given that it would make the employed and unemployed alike better off,

the economy does not spontaneously return towards full employment. We take
this issue up in the next section.

3 Note that estimated Okun's law coefficients suggest a much greater impact of
unemployment on GNP than is implied by the model presented earlier. This
reflects the phenomena of short run increasing returns, changes in hours
worked, and increased labor force participation which are neglected in the
model.

-13-

Section II.

The persistence of unemployment

In the previous section, we argued that reductions in unemployment are
likely to come with increases in the take home pay of employed workers. This
raises the central problem of explaining why unemployment endures given that

reductions would make both the employed and the unemployed better off. In
order to consider this issue and to assess the efficacy of alternative policies
directed at reducing unemployment, we begin by embedding the labor market model
of the preceding section within a standard aggregate demand-supply
macroeconomic framework.

The standard framework

We assume that the level of aggregate demand depends on the level of real
money balances and on fiscal policy. Fiscal policy is summarized by the
deficit, which we take to be G-tY (that is, we ignore the presence of
unemployment insurance--we put b-C in equation (2) of the previous section-and ignore the presence of public debt). Thus
(6)

YD...D(ctyM,p)

The aggregate demand curve, for given values of G, t and M is drawn in
Figure 3.

To derive aggregate supply, we follow the analysis of the first section by
assuming that firms are competitive and employ labor to the point where

marginal productivity and real wages are equal. For short run analysis, we
close the model by postulating that nominal wages are rigid at the level W*.

FIGURE 3: THE STANDARD CASE

P

D

C

B

L

P

E'

E''

L

-14-

The implied short run aggregate supply, for given values of W* and t is
depicted in Figure 3. For the long run, we initially make the standard
assumption that labor supply is inelastic and so L=L0.

The short run equilibrium is at point A, with employment LA. Associated
with it is a fiscal deficit (or surplus). For any given level of deficit, say
the level associated with this short run equilibrium, we can, using the
analysis of the previous section and the locus derived in Figure 1, draw the
after tax real wage consistent with a given level of employment. This is done
in the lower part of Figure 3 and the after tax real wage associated with the
short run equilibrium is given by point E'. The long run equilibrium is
somewhere on the vertical line going through L0. If C and t are constant, the
long run equilibrium is at point B, with a smaller deficit than at point A .

If

the tax rate t is varied so as to maintain a constant deficit as employment
goes to L0, the equilibrium is at a point like C, and the after tax real wage
is at point E".

If LA is less than L0, the process of adjustment is likely to be as

follows: unemployment puts pressure on nominal wages, and the decline in
nominal wages shifts the aggregate supply curve to the right, increasing
employment. If the government maintains a constant fiscal deficit, tax rates
decrease. As we have drawn Figure 3, full employment is associated with higher
after tax real wages.

The relatively slow rate of decline in inflation in many countries makes
it unlikely that the European economies are operating far above the current
natural rate of unemployment, that LA is far below L0 in Figure 3. Thus, one
must conclude that the natural unemployment rate is probably not far from the
actual rate. Indeed, most econometric evidence suggests that the natural and

-15-

actual unemployment rates have roughly increased in tandem since the early

70's. There are two logically consistent explanations for this fact, each with
different policy implications. We study them in turn.

Supply shocks, real wage rigidity and unemployment

The first explanation is that adverse supply shocks have pushed up the
equilibrium rate and that the actual rate of unemployment has simply followed
in tow. This argument is necessarily coupled with claims that real wages are

rigid. For if real wages were flexible, supply shocks would not lead to
changes in the level of unemployment.

If real wages are indeed rigid, even in the short run, we are back to the
case analyzed earlier in Figure 1. We have seen that there are two levels of
employment for any given after tax real wage. European economies are likely to
be at levels of employment such that there is a positive relation between
employment and take home pay; they are, however, unlikely to be at the lower,
unstable equilibrium. In principle, a sufficient cut in taxes may lead the
economy to the preferred equilibrium or to any level below it, if the higher
equilibrium is at more than full employment. Tax cuts may then pay for

themselves or more than pay for themselves. If, in addition to the long run
rigidity of real wages, there is also some short run nominal rigidity, there is
then scope for using demand policies to increase employment and make feasible
in turn the reduction in taxes.

We are, however, skeptical of this line of explanation for the current
levels of unemployment. While supply shocks may have merit as an explanation
for European unemployment in the 1970's, they cannot be the explanation for

-16-

what has happened in the 1980's.4 Supply conditions may not have been very

favorable in 1980, but they have not gotten worse since then. Supply shocks
taken alone do not appear sufficient to account for the doubling in both actual
and equilibrium unemployment since 1980. This leads us to the second logical
explanation of sustained high unemployment: adverse demand and supply shocks
have increased the actual rate; this increase has in turn increased the
equilibrium rate. We refer to theories which allow for a strong dependence of
the equilibrium rate on the actual rate as hysteresis theories.

Hysteresis in unenrnlovment

Hysteresis may result from the adverse effects of economic downturns on
both physical and human capital accumulation, from the adverse effects of long
term unemployment on workers' incentives to work, and from wage setting
mechanisms which give employed workers disproportionate power in determining

wages. All these effects probably play some role in creating a dependence of
equilibrium on actual unemployment. We focus here on theories emphasizing the
nature of the wage setting mechanism because we suspect that it is the most
important channel of persistence.

In Blanchard and Summers (1986), we have put forward a theory of wage
setting which is based on the distinction between insider and outsider workers
stressed in a series of contributions by Lindbeck and Snower (1984, for

4 The role of supply shocks combined with real wage rigidity is the subject of
Bruno and Sachs (1985). For a detailed and informative analysis of the role of
supply shocks in the 1970's and 1980's, see Layard and Nickell (1986) for the
UK and the papers in the special issue of Economica on unemployment (1986) for
the other countries.

-17-

example).5 In unionized settings, this distinciton arises because the union
determines the wage, only taking account of the interests of the median worker
who is employed. We argue that the same phenomenon is also at work in non-union
settings; in such settings, unemployed workers will be disenfranchised if
currently employed workers have a significant amount of job specific capital or
if they can credibly threaten to withhold cooperation from workers hired at low

wages. To see the force of this point, consider how rarely firms replace their
entire work force with low wage workers. In most cases the threat to do so is
not credible. Note also how unsuccessful the introduction of the two tier
system has been in Europe.

The macroeconomic implications of the assumption that wage bargaining is
mainly in the interest of the currently employed are easily seen. Returning to
our basic model, assume that the economy is composed of N identical competitive
firms each producing subject to diminishing returns, and let us ignore for the
moment issues of fiscal policy and taxes. Thus:
(7) Y1

F(L) and

(8) F'(L1) — Wi/P

where i refers to firm i. Aggregate demand is given by
(9) y — YD(M/p)
and we assume, to start with, that M is known at the time of wage setting.
Each firm inherits

workers who were employed by the firm in the

previous period. Assume that incumbent workers at each firm have sufficient
power to set wages at the highest possible level consistent with there all

5 A closely related model has been developed independently by Gottfries and
Horn (1986). Sachs (1985) has also studied the macroeconomic implications of
hysteresis.

-18-

remaining employed. They will therefore choose a wage such that
F' (L1)

Wi/P

If they set a nominal rather than a real wage, wage setters must compute
the appropriate value of P. As we have assumed M to be known, and given that
all firms are identical, P is in turn given by
YD(M/p)

N F(L)

Note the characteristics of the equilibrium. Whatever number of workers

were employed last period will be employed this period : L will be equal to

L, whatever L. Put another way, aggregate supply will be vertical at a level
of employment equal to last period's employment. This obviously comes from the
assumption that the unemployed do not take part in the wage bargaining. If they
did, higher unemployment would lead to lower nominal wages, lower prices,

higher real money balances and output and employment until full employment was
reestablished.

But this does not happen here. Note that the equilibrium just described is

a Nash equilibrium under our maintained assumptions. Any group of workers that
deviated from it by raising its wage would make itself worse off, as workers

would be laid off. On the other hand, reductions in wages would create
additional employment for others but not for group members and would therefore

not be desirable. This simple model exhibits hysteresis in the sense that any
history of employment levels that is inherited is perpetuated as a unique Nash
equilibrium.

If the model is extended to allow for uncertainty in either aggregate

demand or technology, and if nominal wages are set before the resolution of
this uncertainty, the results extend straightforwardly. Given nominal wage
rigidity, aggregate supply is upward sloping. But, in expected value, the level

-19-

of employment is equal to last period's employment.6 High unemployment last
period implies high expected unemployment this period.

In Blanchard and Summers (1986), we show how a theory along the lines of
the one sketched above can explain the European unemployment record, with the
increase in equilibrium unemployment being mostly due to supply shocks in the
70's and demand shocks in the 80's. We show that, in addition to explaining how
high unemployment can persist, such a theory can account for a number of

aspects of recent experience. In particular, we show that under certain
assumptions, the theory predicts that employment will evolve as a random walk

regardless of the processes followed by supply or demand shocks. Employment in
the major European countries has in fact evolved as a random walk over the last
15 years. We also show that the theory implies that accelerations in inflation
should be much more closely related to changes in the rate of unemployment than
to its level- - an implication which is supported by data for Europe over the

past 25 years.

Hysteresis, real wages and fiscal o1icy

Under the assumption of decreasing returns to labor and no taxes, the
smaller the level of employment the higher the real wage and the better off the
workers who remain employed. Thus, an increase in employment does not make both
the employed and the unemployed better off. However, this result is easily

6 This statement is an oversimplification. The presence of uncertainty
complicates the decision problem of insiders, and expected employment may well
be different from previous emploment (see Blanchard and Summers 1986). There
remains however a strong dependence of this period's aggregate supply curve on
last period's actual employment.

-20-

overturned when we reintroduce fiscal increasing returns and incorporate the
analysis of the first section. If we assume that the government has a fixed
level of spending which it raises through a proportional tax on all output, the
tax rate is a decreasing function of employment. If as we argued in the first

section, the effect of reduced taxes on take home pay exceeds the effects of
diminishing returns, it follows that equilibria associated with higher levels

of employment involve higher after tax real wages. In this case, all workers
would be better off if those who are currently employed accepted a nominal wage
reduction: the price level and the tax rate would fall enough to make after tax

real wages increase. But it is still not in the interests of workers at any
one firm to cut their wages. The economy is therefore locked into an inferior
equilibrium. In terms of Figure 2 earlier, the economy is stuck at the low LL
while everybody would be better off if the economy was at L'L' instead.

Hysteresis and the Efficacy of ExDansionary Policy

What does the hysteresis theory imply about the efficacy of expansionary

policies in reducing employment? We first consider the case where there are no
nominal rigidities. In this case, depicted in Figure 4, the aggregate supply
curve is vertical at the previous level of employment. Incumbent workers will

simply raise wages if expansionary policies are attempted. While incumbent
workers collectively would be better off if they did not increase nominal wages
in the face of expansionary policies, each individual group of incumbent
workers has an incentive to raise its own wages.

Allowing for some nominal rigidity as in Figure 5, so that product wages
are set before policies are chosen, gives expansionary policy scope to increase

FIGURE 4

HYSTERESIS WITHOUT NOMINAL RIGIDITY

L

L'

B

AD'

FIGURE 5

HYSTERESIS WITH NOMINAL RIGIDITY

AS

AD'

AD

P

-21-

employment. A decrease in tax rates, for example, shifts aggregate demand,
because of a higher deficit at any employment level, and aggregate supply,

because of the decrease in tax rates. Expansionary policy can therefore shift
the economy from A to a point like F. Because of the dependence of the

subsequent level of wages on the number of incumbent workers, any employment

gains produced by expansionary policies are likely to be durable. The crucial
question becomes the horizon over which it is possible to surprise workers and
change employment through demand policies. The experience of the last few years
suggests that this horizon may be long enough to allow expansionary policies to

have significant effects on employment. Certainly the contractionary policies
of the last several years have had significant and protracted adverse effects
on the level of employment.

Assuming that the economy's current state is dominated by another
equilibrium with higher employment, higher after tax real wages and the same
fiscal deficit, and assuming nominal wage rigidity in the short run, can a
decrease in tax rates take the economy from the current equilibrium to the
other? To answer this, we return to Figure 3. In Figure 3, the current
equilibrium is at point A, the preferred one at a point like C. To go from A to
C requires shifts in both aggregate supply and in aggregate demand. This has
the following implications:

A decrease in tax rates which did not shift the short run aggregate supply
curve, such as a decrease in direct taxation (which would not affect the
aggregate supply if the nominal wage was fixed), would lead to an equilibrium
such as D, with higher employment, but a higher deficit as well. A decrease in
taxes levied on firms would instead shift the aggregate supply, decrease the
price level at any level of employment, increase real money balances and lead

-22-

to a lower deficit at the level of employment L07. Thus, on these grounds, cuts
in payroll taxes levied on firms are preferable to income tax cuts.

While cuts in taxes levied on firms will in general shift both aggregate
demand and short run aggregate supply, there is no guarantee that the resulting
equilibrium will be the prefered one, point C. It is in particular
straightforward to show that C, the point at which the deficit is unchanged, is
attained only if the net effect of aggregate supply and aggregate demand is to
decrease the price level given nominal money. This suggests that fiscal policy
may usefully be reinforced by monetary policy. The preferred equilibrium can
then be achieved without a decrease in the price level.

7 Poterba, Rotemberg and Summers (1986) provide evidence that reductions in
indirect taxes in fact have more substantial effects on output than do
reduction in direct taxes on laborers. They also find that reductions in
prices result from reductions in indirect taxes unlike reductions in direct
taxes.

-23-

III. Conclusions

It appears clear that there exist equilibria with higher employment,

higher take home pay for employed workers, and lower government budget deficits

than the equilibrium where Europe now sits. The problem for policy is to make
the transition. Our analysis suggests that tax cuts are very likely to be
effective. Depending on the way in which product wages are set, it is
conceivable that they could be self financing without any accomodating policy

changes. More likely, tax cuts would lead to deficits in the short run, and
would require expansionary monetary policies to realize their full supply side
benefits. But the end result would be increases in employment and real wages
without increases in government budget deficits.

There is a broader point as well favoring the use of tax reductions as an
element of policy packages directed at combatting unemployment.

Asking

workers to restrain wage demands on the promise that if they all comply, tax
rates will be able to fall and increases in employment and real wages will
result is probably hopeless. But it ñiay be possible to trade wage restraint
for tax reductions explicitly, especially in countries where collective
bargaining is relatively centralized.

This is likely to require some

willingness to accept increased budget deficits at least in the short run.

The alternative line of attack on unemployment is to pursue policies
which enfranchise as many of the unemployed as possible and reduce the power of

incumbents. Worksharing plans which increase the number of employed workers
may have the effect of enlarging the incumbent groups that set wages thereby

-24-

leading to lower wages, and greater employment. An obvious alternative policy
is measures to reduce the power of unions and insider groups more generally and

thereby allow outsider workers to have a larger impact on wage bargains. These
measures are likely to be much more socially acceptable if the case can be made
that increases in employment will not be associated with reductions in the

compensation of the currently employed. Tax cuts are likely to make this
proposition much more credible to the affected workers.

-25-

REFERENCES

Blanchard, 0. and L.H. Summers, (1986) "Hysteresis and the European
Unemployment Problem," forthcoming NBER Macroeconomics Annual (ed. S.Fischer)

Blanchard, 0. and L. H. Summers (1987) "Hysteresis in Unemployment"
forthcoming in European Economic Review.
Bruno, M. and J. Sachs (1985), "Economics of Worldwide Stagflation", Oxford,
Basil Blackwell

Gottfries N. and H. Horn, (1986) "Wage Formation and the Persistence of
Unemployment", WP 347, Institute for International Economic Studies, Stockholm
Layard, R. and S. Nickell, (1986) "The Performance of the British Labour
Market", paper presented at the Chelwood Gate Conference on the British
Economy, May
Lindbeck, A. and D.J. Snower, (1984) "Involuntary Unemployment as an InsiderOutsider Dilemma", Seminar Paper No. 282, Institute for International
Economics, Stockholm

Poterba,J. J. Rotemberg and L. Summers, (1986) "A Tax Based Test for Nominal
Rigidities" American Economic Review, September
Sachs, J., (1985), "High Unemployment in Europe", Harvard mimeo

