                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE GEOGRAPHY OF FINANCIAL MISCONDUCT

                                         Christopher A. Parsons
                                            Johan Sulaeman
                                           Sheridan Titman

                                         Working Paper 20347
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20347


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




We especially thank Jonathan Karpoff, Allison Koester, Scott Lee, and Gerald Martin for making their
data on financial misconduct available. We also thank Serdar Dinc, Ray Fisman, Francisco Gallego,
and seminar participants at Southern Methodist University, 2014 SFS Cavalcade, 2014 NBER Corporate
Finance Workshop, and the 7th International Conference at Finance UC for useful comments and
suggestions. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Christopher A. Parsons, Johan Sulaeman, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Geography of Financial Misconduct
Christopher A. Parsons, Johan Sulaeman, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 20347
July 2014
JEL No. G0,K42,M41,R0

                                           ABSTRACT

We find that a firm’s tendency to engage in financial misconduct increases with the misconduct rates
of neighboring firms. This appears to be caused by peer effects, rather than exogenous shocks like
regional variation in enforcement. Effects are stronger among firms of comparable size, and among
CEOs of similar age. Moreover, local waves of financial misconduct correspond with local waves
of non-financial corruption, such as political fraud.


Christopher A. Parsons                           Sheridan Titman
University of California at San Diego            Finance Department
Rady School of Management                        McCombs School of Business
Wells Fargo Hall, Room 4W115                     University of Texas at Austin
9500 Gilman Drive #0553                          Austin, TX 78712-1179
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553                          and NBER
caparsons@ucsd.edu                               titman@mail.utexas.edu

Johan Sulaeman
Department of Finance
Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist University
PO Box 750333, Dallas, TX 75275-0333
sulaeman@smu.edu
1        Introduction

Traditional models of crime begin with Becker (1968), which frames the choice to engage in

misbehavior like any other economic decision involving cost and beneﬁt tradeoﬀs. Though

somewhat successful when taken to the data, perhaps the theory’s largest embarrassment

is its failure to account for the enormous variation in crime rates observed across both time

and space. Indeed, as Glaeser, Sacerdote, and Scheinkman (1996) argue, regional variation in

demographics, enforcement, and other observables are simply not large enough to explain why,

for example, two seemingly identical neighborhoods in the same city have such drastically

diﬀerent crime rates.1 The answer they propose is simple: social interactions induce positive

correlations in the tendency to break rules.

        This paper extends the literature by examining geographical patterns in white collar

crime. We begin by documenting a strong geographic eﬀect: the average rates of ﬁnancial

misconduct varies substantially across U.S. cities, and over time within these cities. Then, in

the second part of the paper, we seek to better understand the mechanism. In particular, we

try to distinguish between managers being subject to common local inﬂuences like enforce-

ment, and managers inﬂuencing each others’ behavior through peer eﬀects. Our ﬁnal analysis

studies how stock prices react when ﬁnancial misconduct of neighboring ﬁrms is exposed. As

we will see, when a fraud event becomes public, stock prices in the area tend to dip, most

strongly for ﬁrms that will later be targeted themselves.

        The source of our data is the hand-collected sample of over 1,000 events of ﬁnancial

misconduct compiled by Karpoﬀ, Koester, Lee, and Martin (2013). Examples of corporate

misbehavior include misrepresenting a ﬁrm’s earnings, failing to disclose relevant news, trad-

ing on proprietary information, and spreading false rumors to depress the stock price of a

potential takeover target. See section 2 for more detail.

        Our benchmark analysis shows that among the largest twenty cities in the U.S., ﬁnancial

misconduct is exposed at dramatically diﬀerent rates. For example, averaged over 1970-2010,

about 1 in 190 ﬁrms headquartered in Indianapolis, Seattle, and Minneapolis are prosecuted

for misconduct in a typical year, whereas ﬁrms based in Dallas (1:62), St. Louis (1:61), and
    1
        For a theoretical justiﬁcation of this idea, see Sah (1991).
Miami (1:60) are investigated nearly three times as often. Virtually none of these diﬀerences

is due to industry clustering within cities, as shown in the bottom panel (B) of Figure 1.

       With these basic patterns established, the next (and largest) part of the paper attempts to

shed light on the mechanism, drawing heavily on Manski (1993). The ﬁrst possibility is that,

for lack of a better term, cities diﬀer in terms of the “types” of their inhabitants, owing to

long-standing factors like cultural origin (e.g., Minnesota being home to many Scandinavian

descendants), wealth, or religion.2 In the second alternative, what diﬀers across cities is

not so much the people, as much as their local environment, such as economic conditions or

enforcement. Finally, the propensity for ﬁnancial misconduct may spread within a region via

peer eﬀects, or more speciﬁcally, through interpersonal interactions.

       Our attempt to distinguish between these mechanisms starts by arguing that exogenous

diﬀerences among city cultures is, at best, an incomplete explanation. Speciﬁcally, in section

3.2 we extend our analysis to include time-series variation within cities and show that time

series movements in the tendency to be prosecuted for ﬁnancial fraud have strong regional

patterns. That is, after accounting for (say) the fact that ﬁrms headquartered in Seattle have

lower than average fraud rates over our sample, we ﬁnd that Seattle’s food and beverage

providers (Starbucks), online retailers (Amazon), senior living providers (Emeritus), and

software ﬁrms (F5 Networks) tend to commit ﬁnancial misconduct during the same times,

despite operating in very diﬀerent lines of business. Static or slow-moving regional factors

provide a poor account of such dynamics.

       We next examine the potential impact of environmental factors in section 4. One possibil-

ity is that a city’s prospects – think Detroit versus San Francisco – may inﬂuence a manager’s

incentives to invest in reputation or social capital. Yet, we ﬁnd little relation between ﬁnan-

cial misconduct and measures of city health like population or income growth, and more

importantly, their inclusion does not attenuate the eﬀect of a ﬁrm’s local peers (section 4.1).

A second possibility is regional ﬂuctuation in enforcement eﬀorts. Although this provides
   2
    A good example of such long-lived cultural inﬂuences can be gleaned from Fisman and Miguel’s (2007)
study of parking ticket violations in New York City for U.N. diplomats, an interesting laboratory because diplo-
mats were, over the sample period, immune from any prosecution. Even for diplomats residing in the United
States for many years, standard country-level corruption measures remained strong predictors of violations
(and remediation of any violations that do occur).



                                                       2
a good explanation for why ﬁnancial misconduct may be exposed simultaneously within a

region (which we also observe), it does not account for coordinated initiations of ﬁnancial

misconduct. Indeed, in section 4.2, we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst years of ﬁnancial misconduct occur-

rences are highly clustered within regions, even for those that are later detected at diﬀerent

times.

   Our ﬁnal approach (section 4.3) involves tests that rule out any generic regional factor

by construction. We begin by identifying metropolitan areas containing a single, dominant

industry, such as Houston (energy) or San Francisco (software). Then, we use industry-level

variation as an instrument for the fraud rates of ﬁrms in these dominant industries, e.g., using

the fraud rates of Oklahoma’s Chesapeake Energy to instrument for Houston’s Apache. The

ﬁnal step is to relate fraud rates of ﬁrms outside the dominant sector (e.g., a pharmaceutical

ﬁrm in Houston) to the instrumented fraud rates of the city’s dominant industry players.

That we ﬁnd a strong relation here is diﬃcult to reconcile with local environmental eﬀects of

any form.

   In section 5, we conduct further analysis that lends more direct support to the idea

that peer eﬀects between managers is, at least in part, responsible for the observed regional

correlations in ﬁnancial misconduct. First, we divide a ﬁrm’s local neighbors into groups,

based on the: 1) similarity of market capitalization, and 2) similarity of the CEO’s age. The

idea of each is to identify proxies for the strength of local interaction. Matching on size seems

intuitive (even across industries), given that the largest ﬁrms in an area – think Google, Wells

Fargo, and Genentech in the Bay Area – are likely to share linkages on corporate boards,

civic organizations, and so forth. The intuition behind age matching is similar, i.e., a CEO

in his 40s is more likely to socially interact with CEOs in the same age range, versus those

thirty years his senior.

   Conﬁrming this intuition, we ﬁnd striking results. Large ﬁrms are sensitive only to the

ﬁnancial misconduct of other large local ﬁrms; likewise, small ﬁrms are sensitive only to the

behavior of other small local ﬁrms. The results are somewhat weaker for the age-matching

results, though young CEOs are roughly twice as sensitive to the behavior of other young

(local) CEOs, versus their more mature counterparts.


                                               3
   Our second test considers the possibility that CEOs – particularly those of large public

ﬁrms – likely interact regularly with elected oﬃcials. If so, and if ethical norms are transmitted

through social interactions, then we might expect misbehavior in the corporate arena to

correlate with misbehavior of public servants. Not only is this true on average across cities

(see Figure 2), but also over time within each city. This relation is particularly strong for

large ﬁrms, whose executives are most likely to interact with elected oﬃcials. As before, such

regional ebbs and ﬂows are diﬃcult to explain with static regional factors, moreover, because

there is little (though not zero) overlap between the relevant enforcement bodies, we interpret

this as additional evidence against regionally correlated enforcement driving the results.

   The paper concludes in section 6 with an analysis of stock price reactions to local waves

of ﬁnancial misconduct. That is, when a ﬁrm is targeted by the SEC, do stock prices of

its neighbors drop, either because the market expects them to also be targeted, or because

of negative externalities? The answer is a qualiﬁed yes. When examining all of an investi-

gated ﬁrm’s local neighbors, we observe a small negative announcement return, but this is

not statistically signiﬁcant. However, for the smaller set of neighboring ﬁrms that are sub-

sequently investigated for fraud, the negative reaction is quite signiﬁcant. Thus, the market

appears capable not only of recognizing the existence of fraud waves, but also of identifying

the speciﬁc local ﬁrms most susceptible.

   Our results are directly related to studies investigating the causes and consequences of

ﬁnancial misconduct. A number of factors have been identiﬁed as being relevant, including

ﬁrm performance (Harris and Bromiley (2007)), manager or director career concerns (Fich

and Shivdasani (2007)), compensation arrangements (Erickson and Maydew (2006)), institu-

tional monitoring, and the strength of enforcement (Kedia and Rajgopal (2011)). Our study

contributes by identifying the behavior of a ﬁrm’s local peers as a ﬁrst-order determinant of

corporate misbehavior, over both long and short horizons.

   Our results also contribute to the literature on urban agglomeration. Beginning with

Marshall (1880), economists have sought to understand the reasons behind spatial clustering

of ﬁrms of individuals, most recently de-emphasizing geographical features (e.g., river access),

and shifting focus to “people-based” externalities like knowledge spillovers, or pooling of labor


                                                4
markets that improve ﬁrm-worker matches.3 While on net, the existence of cities suggests

that the beneﬁts of agglomeration tend to outweigh the costs, our results suggest that not all

externalities are positive. For just as proximity facilitates the spread of disease, the spillover

of ideas and social norms can permit the diﬀusion of both prosocial and antisocial behavior.



2        Data

2.1       Financial misconduct

The primary source for our fraud data is Karpoﬀ, Koester, Lee, and Martin (2013), hereafter

KKLM, which details their hand-collection of over 10,000 events related to cases of corporate

fraud and/or ﬁnancial misconduct. Here, we provide a brief summary of the types of fraud-

ulent events included in their dataset, and refer the reader interested in further detail (e.g.,

regarding the data collection method itself and comparison with other measures of fraud) to

their paper.

        KKLM aggregate information from four databases: 1) Government Accountability Oﬃce

(GAO), 2) Audit Analytics (AA), 3) Securities Class Action Clearinghouse (SCAC), and

4) Securities and Exchange Commission’s Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases

(AAERs). The ﬁrst two sources contain (mostly) information on ﬁnancial statement “re-

statement” announcements, and therefore are good sources for detecting a ﬁrm’s attempt

to manipulate earnings.4 The third, the SCAC, maintains a registry of Federal class action

securities litigation; accordingly, compared with the data from the ﬁrst two sources, this

database reﬂects a wider variety of corporate misbehavior including accounting fraud, fraud-

ulent transfers in mergers and acquisition, misrepresentation, and insider trading. The last

source, the AAER, contains releases announcing enforcement or action “expected to be of

interest to accounts.” There is substantial overlap among all four primary sources, both in

terms of events covered and timing (see KKLM, section 2.3).

        A signiﬁcant advantage of the KKLM data is that it distinguishes between dates when
    3
    See Duranton and Pagu (2004) for an excellent review of this literature.
    4
    However, as KKLM describe in detail, up roughly 80-90% of restatements are, in fact, unintentional errors,
and thus, do not correspond to attempted ﬁnancial fraud. Their dataset distinguishes between intentional
and unintentional errors by linking misstatements to subsequent SEC action.


                                                      5
a ﬁrm commits fraud (the “violation period”) and the dates these actions became public

(the “revelation period”). Most of our analysis focuses on the violation period and examines

correlations in the tendency to conduct fraud within a given geographic area. However, some

of our tests exploit the revelation dates as well, allowing us, for example, to detect stock price

reactions of nearby ﬁrms to announcements of fraud investigations.

   Table 1 contains summary statistics related to our fraud measures. In Panel A we present

variables deﬁned at the ﬁrm-year level, while Panels B and C show those deﬁned at the area-

year and industry-year level, respectively. At the ﬁrm level, most of our analysis considers

F raudi,a
      j,t , a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j, operating in indus-

try i, in area a, during year t. The average value of F raud is 0.0146 across all years and

ﬁrms, indicating that at any point in time, 1-2% of ﬁrms are engaging in ﬁnancial miscon-

duct. Because in most cases, such behavior lasts several years, we deﬁne a second variable,

F raudInitiations, which takes a value of one during the ﬁrst year of a ﬁnancial misconduct

event, and zero otherwise. As seen, the average value of F raudInitiations is much lower,

0.0034, indicating that only about 1:300 ﬁrms initiates ﬁnancial misconduct in a typical year.

   At the city (Panel B) and industry (Panel C) levels, fraud is deﬁned using rates instead

of dummy variables, e.g., the average fraud rate for Seattle in the year 2001 is simply the

sum of F raud of ﬁrms headquartered in Seattle in year 2001 divided by the number of ﬁrms

headquartered in Seattle that year. The same applies to the industry-level average. As

expected, the means for city- and industry-level fraud rates are similar to the average at the

ﬁrm level (F raud), but there is substantial variation across both industries and cities, as well

as over time. We return to these cross-industry and cross-city patterns in the next section.


2.2   Firm location

Our dataset includes ﬁrms headquartered near any of the twenty largest metropolitan areas

in the United States. The speciﬁc variable we use is ADDZIP listed in COMPUSTAT, which

is the current zip code of each ﬁrm’s headquarters or home oﬃce. Although this convention

means that our dataset excludes ﬁrms once headquartered in one of our twenty areas but

that now reside elsewhere, ﬁrms move infrequently so very few observations are lost.


                                                6
    The geographic unit we use is an “Economic Area,” as deﬁned by the U.S. Bureau of Labor

Statistics. EAs are larger than metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), and are designed to

capture regions within which workers commute. Examples of economic areas are Dallas-

Arlington-Fort Worth, Washington D.C.-Columbia-Baltimore, and San Francisco-Oakland-

San Jose. We use the term “area” and “city” interchangeably throughout the paper.


2.3   Other variables

Our tests also employ a number of standard control variables, all of which are obtained from

standard sources. Stock returns are from CRSP and ﬁrm fundamentals from COMPUSTAT.

Most of our fraud regressions include lagged stock returns, size (total assets), leverage (total

liabilities over total assets), market-to-book ratio, and cash ﬂow (EBITDA to assets). The

summary statistics are shown in Table 1.



3     Geography and ﬁnancial misconduct

In this section, we establish the basic empirical foundation on which the rest of the paper

builds, quantifying the extent to which ﬁnancial misconduct tends to be regionally clustered.

We begin in subsection 3.1 with a simple non-parametric analysis showing that city ﬁxed

eﬀects load signiﬁcantly in linear probability models predicting ﬁrm level ﬁnancial miscon-

duct. Subsection 3.2 extends the analysis to a logistic framework, a more appropriate model

given the discrete nature of the dependent variable. Here, we also control for various ﬁrm,

industry, and market determinants of corporate fraud, focusing on the fraud-related activities

of a ﬁrm’s local peers as the covariates of interest.


3.1   Variation in ﬁnancial misconduct across cities

As a ﬁrst step, we quantify the ability of year, industry, and area ﬁxed eﬀects to explain

the total variation observed in ﬁnancial misconduct. Observations are at the ﬁrm-year level,

with our dependent variable, F raudi,a
                                   j,t , taking a value of one if ﬁrm i in industry j and area

a commits fraud or other ﬁnancial misconduct in year t. For now, we include each year the



                                               7
ﬁrm commits fraud. We will later separately consider the ﬁrst year that fraud is committed.

   We are interested in the change in explanatory power as we progressively add and subtract

various vectors of ﬁxed eﬀects in OLS regressions of ﬁrm-level fraud events. The results are

shown in Table 3. The ﬁrst column includes only year eﬀects, and thus accounts for time-

series eﬀects that may inﬂuence the aggregate rate of the prosecutions of ﬁnancial misconduct.

Examples of such factors might include changes in enforcement, macro eﬀects, or changes

in the sample composition over time, say, toward industries more apt to engage in fraud.

Regardless of the speciﬁc reason, year ﬁxed eﬀects are highly signiﬁcant, with an F -statistic

equal to 16.78, far exceeding the 1% threshold. Note, however, that the R2 is small, with

year eﬀects explaining less than 0.5% of the total variation in ﬁrm-level ﬁnancial misconduct.

   The second column replaces year ﬁxed eﬀects with industry ﬁxed eﬀects. Here too, the

R2 is quite low, but the signiﬁcance of the industry ﬁxed eﬀects is strong, far exceeding the

1% threshold, indicative of persistent cross-industry diﬀerences in ﬁnancial misconduct. The

industry with the highest average fraud rate over our sample is software, with approximately

1.9% of ﬁrm-years being associated with a fraud event. At the other end of the spectrum,

the health care and energy sectors are least likely to commit ﬁnancial fraud, with rates less

than half the software industry (0.87% and 0.83% respectively).

   The third column focuses on area ﬁxed eﬀects, and thus, captures diﬀerences in the average

rates of ﬁnancial misconduct across our twenty diﬀerent economic areas. These patterns can

be understood by examining Table 2, which shows the average rates of ﬁnancial misconduct by

economic area. Midwestern cities Indianapolis, Cleveland, and Minneapolis have the lowest

rates of ﬁnancial misconduct in our sample, with an average annual fraud rate of 0.6%, which

is less than half the overall average of 1.3%. At the other extreme, Texas is home to two of

the three highest oﬀenders in Dallas and Houston, exceeded only by Miami, the only city with

an average annual fraud rate exceeding 2%. Column 3 of Table 3 formalizes these diﬀerences

in a uniﬁed framework, and, as indicated by the F -statistic of 5.33 (versus a 1% threshold of

1.91), suggests that there exist persistent diﬀerences in ﬁnancial misconduct among cities.

   Columns four through six report regressions that include various combinations of year,

industry, and city ﬁxed eﬀects. In most cases, the R2 are approximately additive, indicating


                                              8
that variation across cities, industries, and over time is largely independent. In the ﬁnal

column, all three families of ﬁxed eﬀects are signiﬁcant with area eﬀects, as before, easily

exceeding the 1% threshold for statistical signiﬁcance.


3.2   Variation in ﬁnancial misconduct within cities

Although the ﬁxed eﬀects regressions in Table 3 indicate long-lived diﬀerences in the fraud

propensities of ﬁrms located across diﬀerent geographic regions, one objection may be a lack

of ﬁrm, industry, or market-level controls. For example, ﬁrms headquartered in some regions

may be concentrated in a particular sector, or may diﬀer in capital structure, performance,

size, or other factors potentially related to fraud incentives. To address this concern, we

estimate logistic models of ﬁrm-level fraud events:

                                                              1
        P r(Fraud i,a
                  j,t ) =                                                                             .   (1)
                                  −(δ+β1 Fraud −i,a          i,a           i,−a             i
                                               p,t +β2 Fraud p,t +β3 Fraud p,t +β4 Controls j,t−1 )
                            1+e

Here, P r(F raudi,a
                j,t ), is the probability of ﬁrm j being investigated for ﬁnancial misconduct

in year t, and as before (and throughout the paper), subscript i refers to the Fama and

French-12 industry classiﬁcation, and a to economic area. The main coeﬃcient of interest is

β1 , measuring whether, at a given point in time (t), ﬁrm j is more likely to commit fraud

when local ﬁrms outside its industry (−i) commit more fraud. Similarly, β2 measures the

inﬂuence of the fraud rate of the ﬁrm’s same-industry, local peers (F raudi,a
                                                                          p,t ). Together, these

coeﬃcients capture the extent to which a ﬁrm’s (potentially time-varying) local environment

inﬂuence the likelihood it engages in ﬁnancial misconduct.

   As mentioned above, the main beneﬁt of estimating Equation (1) is the ability to control

for various ﬁrm, industry, and market factors potentially correlated with a ﬁrm’s location.

While we cannot use ﬁxed eﬀects in logit regressions, we include as a control variable the

yearly average of fraud rates for ﬁrms in the same industry (i), but located outside the ﬁrm’s

city (a). Yearly ﬂuctuations in F raudi,−a
                                      p,t capture industry dynamics, implying that any local

eﬀects (β1 and β2 ) are identiﬁed net of these. Additional Controls include the average fraud

rates of ﬁrms in the overall market, as well as various ﬁrm-level characteristics: one-year



                                                       9
lagged stock returns, total assets, market-to-book ratio, leverage, and cash ﬂows.

   To give a speciﬁc illustration of our methodology, and provide some intuition about what

each coeﬃcient measures, suppose that we are trying to predict the likelihood that San Fran-

cisco Bay Area technology ﬁrm Google commits fraud in a given year (say 2005). In this case,

we would control for the fraud rates in the technology sector, measured outside the Bay Area

in 2005, for instance Seattle-based Microsoft or IBM (headquartered in New York), captured

by β3 . We also control for the overall rate of corporate fraud, including the thousands of

ﬁrms operating outside of the ﬁrm’s industry (−i) and outside of the ﬁrm’s metropolitan area

(−a), e.g., Austin’s Whole Foods, Arkansas’s Wal-Mart, Memphis’s Federal Express, and so

on. After controlling for these, as well as Google’s fundamentals like recent stock returns and

size, we are interested in whether local ﬁrms – both in and outside the technology sector –

predict Google’s fraudulent activity. Local SF ﬁrms outside the technology industry might

include clothing retailer Gap, food producer Del Monte, or pharmaceutical-biotechnology

ﬁrm Genentech (β1 ). Yahoo! is an example of a ﬁrm sharing both Google’s industry and

location (β2 ).

   Consider the results presented in Panel A of Table 4. In the ﬁrst column, our estimate

of β1 is 8.11, with a t-statistic of 4.79, which indicates that an increase of 1% in the con-

temporaneous fraud rates of a ﬁrm’s local, non-industry peers increases the odds ratio of it

committing fraud by about e.0811 −1 ≈ 8.45%. Against a baseline average fraud rate of 1.46%,

this implies a fraud rate of about 1.59%, with an equal sized reduction (to about 1.31%) for

a one percent decrease in surrounding ﬁrms’ average fraud rates. The interquartile range of

F raud−i,a
      p,t is 0% to 1.72%, translating to a shift of about 17% in the baseline average.

   Also, though not our main focus, note that most of the control variable coeﬃcients are in-

tuitive. Larger ﬁrms are more likely to be prosecuted for fraud (the payoﬀ is likely larger from

investigating), as are growth ﬁrms (who likely have more incentive to manipulate earnings

because they tend to raise more capital). Stock returns are high prior to fraud investigations,

which is consistent with fraudulent accounting being, at least temporarily, eﬀective in fooling

the market.

   In the second column, we estimate ﬁrm-level fraud sensitivities to industry fraud rates.


                                              10
With an estimated coeﬃcient of about 13 (t = 4.29), the industry eﬀect is larger, though not

dramatically, than the area eﬀect. The third column considers ﬁrms in the same industry

and area. Here, the coeﬃcient is signiﬁcant, but the magnitude is small. Column 4 includes

all three fraud portfolios in the same speciﬁcation, with all three maintaining statistical

signiﬁcance at the 1% level. Using the estimates in this column, the two local portfolios

seem to contain about as much information as does the single, non-local industry portfolio.

Moreover, most (about 80%) of the signiﬁcance of the local portfolios comes from ﬁrms

outside the ﬁrm’s dominant sector.
                                                −i,a
   The ﬁfth column adds to the model F raudp           , the average rate of ﬁnancial misconduct

in each city. This control accounts for the cross-city diﬀerences identiﬁed in Tables 2 and

3, and leaves our primary variable of interest, F raud−i,a
                                                      p,t to capture variation within cities.

This only strengthens the coeﬃcient on the dynamic peer variable (t=4.76), conﬁrming the

statistical signiﬁcance of the peaks and troughs within each contour of Figure 1 (or more

appropriately, within each individual city).

   To highlight the economic magnitude of these correlations, the ﬁnal column (6) shows the

results when the fraud portfolios are converted to discrete variables, like the ﬁrm-level fraud

indicator. In each case, “High Fraud” takes a value of one if the average fraud rate for the

respective portfolio exceeds 1.2% (the sample median across all three), and zero otherwise.

As seen, the coeﬃcients are relatively similar across the three area/industry portfolios. The

coeﬃcient on the local, non-industry portfolio indicates that for local fraud rates above 1.2%,

fraud rates are elevated by about 46%, or about 67 basis points against a benchmark average

fraud rate of 1.46%.

   Moving to the bottom panel (B), we conduct a similar analysis, but instead, consider only

the ﬁrst year of each corporate fraud event, denoted as FraudInitiations. To appreciate how

this variable is constructed, if a ﬁrm is ex post prosecuted for ﬁnancial misconduct involving

the years 1997, 1998, and 1999, FraudInitiations takes a value of one only in 1997, and

zero otherwise. We apply this convention to both the dependent and explanatory variables,

allowing us to speciﬁcally focus on the initial decision to engage in corporate fraud.

   Compared to Panel A, there are two main diﬀerences. First, the eﬀect of a ﬁrm’s local,


                                               11
non-industry neighbors on fraud initiations is larger. Although the average rate of fraud

initiations is (of course) lower than when both initiations and continuations are jointly con-

sidered, the estimates in Panel B indicate that a 1% increase in fraud initiations by a ﬁrm’s

local neighbors increases by about 26%, over twice the magnitude observed in Panel A. Sec-

ond, neither the local nor non-local industry portfolio seems to matter much, although the

pure industry portfolio is marginally signiﬁcant. Although one might suspect low power for

these portfolios given that fraud initiations are relatively rare, this concern should also apply

to the local, non-industry portfolio, which displays a very strong eﬀect.

        To summarize our results thus far: ﬁnancial misconduct occurs in local waves, rising and

falling within cities (Table 4 and Figure 1), and the average rate of ﬁnancial misconduct

diﬀers from city to city (Tables 2 and 3). Further, the dynamic nature of local fraud waves is

not consistent with slow trending city-level attributes such as diﬀerences in wealth, culture,

religion, or ethnic background (e.g., the high percentage of Scandinavian descendants occupy-

ing Minnesota) since these do not ﬂuctuate appreciably year-to-year.5 We will re-emphasize

this point occasionally in further tests, but proceed under the notion that insofar as identi-

fying the underlying mechanism, the more important distinction is between local peer eﬀects

and time-varying environmental factors like changes in enforcement. The next section deals

speciﬁcally with this issue.



4        Common environmental inﬂuences

As mentioned above, the tendency for locally headquartered ﬁrms to engage in ﬁnancial

misconduct at roughly the same time poses a challenge to explanations based on static, ex-

ogenous factors. On the other hand, it is more diﬃcult to distinguish between local managers

inﬂuencing each others’ behavior per se (endogenous eﬀects in Manski’s taxonomy), versus

simply responding to common environmental (contextual ) shocks. The goal of this section is

to make headway on this distinction.

        First, in subsection 4.1, we consider whether correlations in ﬁnancial misconduct are
    5
    In unreported robustness, we have experimented with various measures of religious participation as controls
in Table 4; none approaches statistical signiﬁcance, while the estimates for the peer variables remain virtually
unchanged.


                                                      12
related to measures of city health. Using the model presented in Table 4 as the starting

point, we include numerous measures of local economic conditions as explanatory variables,

measured at both leads and lags. As we discuss below, ﬂuctuations in the local economy may

change the incentives to engage in ﬁnancial misconduct, either directly or indirectly. Yet,

these variables have very little impact on our results.

    A second type of contextual eﬀect could stem from regional ﬂuctuations in enforcement,

which is particularly relevant given that we do not observe misbehavior directly. To assess the

relative importance of regional ﬂuctuations in enforcement versus the underlying behavior,

we exploit the diﬀerential timing between when ﬁnancial misconduct begins, and when it is

detected. Our conclusion from this analysis is that correlated enforcement does not entirely

account for our main ﬁndings.

    While these tests address speciﬁc types of contextual eﬀects, they are not exhaustive.

Accordingly, in our ﬁnal tests, we introduce an instrument that rules out the eﬀect of any

local environmental inﬂuence by construction. This sets the stage for our ﬁnal tests (Section

5) that provide direct support for peer eﬀects as determinants of corporate misbehavior.


4.1     Local demographic and economic trends

This section analyzes the impact of local economic variables on the propensity for managers

to engage in ﬁnancial misconduct. There are a number of reasons to expect a relation.

Perhaps the most direct is a type of reputation/horizon eﬀect, whereby managers of growing

cities take a longer term perspective compared to managers of struggling cities. Intuitively,

investments in local reputation may have less time to pay oﬀ in declining cities, compared to

cities with brighter futures.6

    In addition, local policy variables such tax rates or subsidies to ﬁrms headquartered nearby

are undoubtedly aﬀected by local economic health. Whether ﬁrms are responding similarly

to common economic shocks or to policy variables downstream of these shocks, accounting

for trends in population, wages, and employment gives a sense for the importance of these
   6
     Note that this may also be related to peer eﬀects, whereby social penalties vary with the intensity of others’
misbehavior; here, we consider only the role played by exogenous changes in managers’ eﬀective horizons that
are a function of city health.



                                                        13
local factors.

      To explore these issues, we augment Equation (1) with controls for population growth,

employment growth, and per capita wage growth, all measured annually within each economic

area. We report this analysis in Table 5. As in the prior analysis, we consider separately all

(Panel A) and only ﬁrst (Panel B) years involving ﬁnancial misconduct separately. To ease

comparison, the ﬁrst column reproduces the penultimate column of Table 4. Then, in the

second column, we add ﬁve controls for population growth, starting from two years prior to

the event date (t − 2) and continuing through two years afterward (t + 2). Lagged values are

intended to control for the impact of historical changes in population, whereas future values

are a (noisy) proxy for expectations of future population growth. None of the population

variables predict ﬁnancial misconduct, and moreover, have virtually no eﬀect on the other

variables.

      A similar picture emerges in the second and third columns, which incorporate, respec-

tively, locally measured employment growth (also with two year leads and lags) and per-capita

wage growth. When all ﬁfteen covariates are included simultaneously, only contemporaneous

employment growth approaches statistical signiﬁcance (t=−1.95), entering with a negative

sign (as expected).7 More importantly, though modestly reduced in magnitude (9.33 versus

7.89), the coeﬃcient on F raud−i,a
                              p,t remains highly statistically signiﬁcant (t=3.98).

      As a further test, we split the sample by the median market capitalization, with estimates

for ﬁrms above the median (Large) and those below (Small ) shown in columns 6 and 7,

respectively. Intuitively, the idea is that all else equal, larger ﬁrms should be less sensitive

to the ﬂuctuations in local economic factors: whereas it seems far-fetched that population

growth in Atlanta could play a meaningful role in any of Coca-Cola’s major business decisions,

this may be reasonable for ﬁrms with more localized businesses (e.g., a small Atlanta-based

consulting ﬁrm). Accordingly, the importance of local economic variables might be expected

to diﬀer between ﬁrms of diﬀerent sizes.

      Although the last column provides some, albeit very weak, evidence that small ﬁrms are

more sensitive to local economic factors, the more important comparison between columns
  7
      The ﬁfteen covariates are jointly signiﬁcant.



                                                      14
6 and 7 suggests that if anything, large ﬁrms are more sensitive to the behavior of nearby

peers. Given that large ﬁrms appear completely insensitive to local economic forces (none of

the ﬁfteen covariates is signiﬁcant), this result is diﬃcult to reconcile with regional economic

shocks driving the local correlations in the ﬁnancial misbehavior that we observe.


4.2    Correlated Enforcement

In addition to local economic and demographic trends, a second type of local contextual eﬀect

might be enforcement eﬀorts correlated at the regional level. Recall that we do not observe

actual occurrences of ﬁnancial misconduct, but rather instances when formal enforcement

action is brought against a ﬁrm. Without further analysis, it is ambiguous whether a city’s

executives are actually committing ﬁnancial misconduct during the same times, or whether

they are simply caught simultaneously. The goal of this subsection is to help separate these

two eﬀects.

   To better appreciate why geographically clustered “whistle blowing” may be a plausible

explanation for our results, it is useful to revisit which parties typically expose ﬁnancial

misconduct. Dyck, Morse, and Zingales (2010) tracks 216 cases of corporate fraud in detail,

paying speciﬁc attention to how these events became public. Their headline ﬁnding is that

no one entity plays a dominant role: industry regulators, law ﬁrms, equity holders, the

national media, and industry competitors all bring ﬁnancial misconduct to light, with none

being responsible for more than 20% of detections. Perhaps the most surprising result is the

relatively minor role played by the SEC, which blew the whistle on merely ten cases, or 7%

of the total.

   For us, the most important question is whether whistle blowers concentrate their forensic

eﬀorts on speciﬁc cities, and during certain times. In a few cases, one can construct plausible

stories. For example, if equity holders are biased toward hold stocks of local companies,

this may increase the scrutiny on local management. (However, home bias would seem more

relevant for the cross-sectional evidence, and less so for regional ebbs and ﬂows of ﬁnancial

misconduct.) A similar argument might be made for auditors, if their clients tend to cluster in

certain regions. Finally, although the SEC appears relatively unimportant in fraud detection,


                                              15
a “tough” oﬃcer rotating to a local oﬃce may heighten the chance that fraud is detected

and/or prosecuted (Kedia and Rajgopal (2011)).

   On the other hand, it is harder to imagine a purely geographic motive for most of the

remaining players. The ﬁnancial media, for example, exposed almost one-sixth of fraud

cases, but this exclusively occurred at the national level (e.g., Wall Street Journal ) rather

than local level (e.g., Houston Chronicle). Likewise, whistle blowers in a ﬁrm’s supply chain

–clients, competitors, and even its own workforce– would appear motivated to expose fraud

in a particular company, not in a geographic area. Industry regulators may have an incentive

to concentrate in industry clusters (e.g., energy ﬁrms in Houston), but recalling that we are

interested in local correlation in ﬁnancial misconduct across industries, it is less obvious how

ﬂuctuations in industry enforcement provide a satisfactory account of our main results.

   In any regard, the analysis here attempts to distinguish between local shocks to en-

forcement and/or whistle blowing, and local correlations in the underlying (mis)behavior by

executives. Our main question: for a set of misconduct events exposed in the same year, are

the start dates for these events abnormally clustered by region? For example, take the set of

misconduct events exposed in the year 2006. In this particular “vintage” of fraud exposures,

some will be relatively young (i.e., having started in 2005), others slightly older (starting in

2004), and others even more longstanding (2003 and before). By asking whether exposure

vintages in diﬀerent regions are disproportionately populated by older (or younger) events,

this analysis tests for local correlations in fraud initiations, holding constant the timing of

enforcement.

   For this test to have any power, there must be suﬃcient variation in initiation dates

within a given year of exposure. Fortunately, there is. Although only a few cases (about

5%) are detected in the same year as they begin, there is considerable mass in events of one

(25%) and two (27%) years’ duration. Duration for the remaining events range from three

to eighteen years, with no single duration accounting for more than 15% of our observations

(and most less than 1%). Accordingly, we focus our analysis on frauds that begin one or two

years prior to detection, capturing a little more than half of our total sample.

   In the ﬁrst row of Table 6, we start with a simple peer eﬀects regression of ﬁnancial


                                              16
misconduct exposures similar to Equation (1), irrespective of when each event is determined

to have begun. This analysis does not, of course, distinguish between correlated behavior

and correlated detection, but serves as a benchmark for the following tests that do. The

dependent variable is F raudExposedi,a
                                   j,t , a dummy variable which takes a value of one if a

ﬁrm j’s ﬁnancial misconduct is exposed in year t. As before a refers to area and i to industry.

Also as before, the covariate of interest (F raudExposed−i,a
                                                        p,t ) captures the corresponding rate

for the portfolio (p) of the ﬁrm’s local neighbors (a) that operate outside its primary industry

designation (−i). The positive, statistically signiﬁcant estimate (t = 2.61) indicates a local

synchronicity for the revelation of ﬁnancial misconduct. Yet, as discussed above, this is

consistent with either correlated detection eﬀorts or correlated misbehavior.

   Rows two and three allow us to reﬁne the interpretation. In the second row, the dependent

variable is F raudExposedi,a            i,a
                         j,t |F raudInitj,t−1 , an indicator variable that takes a value of one

if, and only if, the ﬁnancial misconduct that ﬁrm j initiated in the previous year (t − 1)

becomes exposed in year t. The dependent variable takes a value of zero otherwise, including

time t exposures of ﬁnancial misconduct determined to have begun in prior years, e.g., t − 2,

t − 3, etc.. The dependent variable in row three, F raudExposedi,a            i,a
                                                               j,t |F raudInitj,t−2 , is deﬁned

identically, except that ﬁnancial misconduct events beginning two years prior to exposure

(t − 2) are substituted for those starting one year prior (t − 1).

   To capture local correlation in starting dates for ﬁnancial misconduct in a given exposure

vintage, we construct two mutually exclusive local covariates: F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                                                                            p,t |F raudInitp,t−1

and F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                 p,t |F raudInitp,t−2 . We include both covariates in rows two and three.

The identifying assumption is that if correlated whistle blowing is responsible for the com-

mon revelation of ﬁnancial misconduct (as shown in column 1), then there should be little

diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients. In other words, during an enforcement “sweep” of say,

Atlanta-based ﬁrms in 1998, there is no reason why frauds starting in 1997 are more likely

to be exposed than those beginning in 1996, unless the actual incidence of (here) one-year

frauds are more prevalent. On the other hand, correlation in the underlying behavior would

predict strong signiﬁcance of the “diagonals” in rows two and three, with exposure of younger

(older) frauds being related to the exposure rates of younger (older) frauds of neighboring


                                              17
ﬁrms.

   We ﬁnd consistent evidence in columns two and three. In the analysis of frauds be-

ginning one year prior to the exposure date (column 2), only local frauds also beginning

one year prior seem to matter. Although not signiﬁcant at conventional levels (t = 1.57),

the point estimate for F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                                    p,t |F raudInitp,t−1 is six times the magnitude for

F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
             p,t |F raudInitp,t−2 , the latter exhibits virtually no relation to the dependent

variable (t = 0.18).

   The evidence is considerably stronger in the third column. Mirroring the results in the sec-

ond column, when predicting frauds starting two years ago, F raudExposedi,a
                                                                        j,t |F raudInitj,t−2 ,

the eﬀect of other local frauds of the same age, F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                                                              p,t |F raudInitp,t−2 , is about

twice as strong compared to those starting one year ago, F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                                                                      p,t |F raudInitp,t−1 .

The diﬀerence in statistical signiﬁcance is even larger (t = 6.69 versus t = 1.53). Also, the

diﬀerence in these coeﬃcients is signiﬁcant at the 1% level.

   Overall, the evidence in Table 6 suggests that while regionally correlated whistle-blowing

may provide a partial explanation for our results, executives seem to be initiating ﬁnan-

cial misconduct at the same time. Importantly, this is not direct evidence of –although is

consistent with– peer eﬀects between local managers.


4.3     Addressing environmental eﬀects using instrumental variables

In this section, we continue this line of reasoning, but design tests intended to remedy any

generic local, environmental inﬂuence. We use our earlier ﬁnding that ﬁnancial fraud is related

to industry as well as location ﬁxed eﬀects to construct an instrument that captures the eﬀect

of local peers, but is unrelated to local environmental factors. The tests in this section exploit

the fact that some of our cities represent industrial clusters, having a disproportionate number

of ﬁrms in a single industry. Among the twenty cities we study, four have at least 30% of their

market capitalizations (averaged over the total years in the sample) concentrated in a single

Fama-French 12 industry: Houston (energy), Detroit (durables), San Francisco (software),

and Atlanta (non-durables).

   What makes these dominant industry-city pairs useful is that we can use variation in


                                               18
non-local factors to impose a shock on some local ﬁrms – and crucially, only some – to alter

their probabilities of engaging in ﬁnancial misconduct. The source of this variation is the

annual average fraud rates of ﬁrms in each city’s dominant industry (e.g., energy in the case

of Houston), but measured outside the local area. Keeping with the Houston example, we

instrument for Houston-based Apache’s tendency to commit fraud using the fraud rates of

New York City’s Hess, or California-based Occidental Petroleum. The fact that (in this

example) we use no Houston-speciﬁc information to proxy for the fraud rates of ﬁrms in

Houston’s energy sector means that time-varying, local contextual eﬀects cannot explain any

spillovers to other local ﬁrms outside the dominant sector. This not only addresses contextual

eﬀects for which some information is observable, such as population growth, but also those

for which we lack data (e.g., rotation of SEC oﬃcials between oﬃces).

   In Table 7, we formalize this test in an instrumental variables regression. We estimate a

variant of Equation (2), but with two main changes. First, we estimate ﬁrm-level fraud with a

linear probability model, as logit models are not amenable to IV. Second, the sample applies

only to the four cities mentioned above, and for ﬁrms outside the dominant sector (e.g.,

non-energy ﬁrms in Houston). The endogenous covariate, F raudDom,a
                                                             p,t   , is the average fraud

rate of ﬁrms in the city’s dominant industry (e.g., Houston energy ﬁrms). We instrument

for ﬂuctuations in F raudDom,a
                         p,t   using ﬂuctuations in industry level fraud rates, measured

exclusively outside the local area.

   The ﬁrst and third columns present the ﬁrst stage IV results. Whether measured contem-

poraneously (column 1) or with a one-year lag (column 3), annual ﬂuctuations in ﬁnancial

misconduct for each dominant industry-city pair (e.g., Houston-energy) is strongly related

to year-to-year ﬂuctuations at the industry level, when measured outside the city of inter-

est (e.g., using energy ﬁrms outside Houston). This obviates weak-instrument concerns.

Note also that because we are estimating this model with OLS, the incidental parameters is

avoided, permitting both ﬁrm and year ﬁxed eﬀects to be included. (The former explains the

reduction in statistical signiﬁcance for many of the ﬁrm-level characteristics.)

   Columns two and four, respectively, present the results of the second stage. The contem-

poraneous model (column 2) indicates a large sensitivity 1.94 (t=3.43), whereas the one-year


                                              19
lagged model (column 4), indicates one roughly on par with the industry eﬀect (0.53, t=1.98).

While the magnitudes here are not directly comparable to Table 4 – much smaller sample,

logit versus OLS/IV, ﬁxed eﬀects versus no ﬁxed eﬀects – we note that the implied spillover

rates in this four-city experiment are substantially larger than those in our benchmark re-

gressions. One possible explanation for the larger magnitudes is that peer eﬀects are not

symmetric, and that the particularly visible/salient ﬁrms in an area, such as Google (SF

Bay Area), General Motors (Detroit), or Coca-Cola (Atlanta), may have a disproportionate

inﬂuence “setting an example” for neighboring ﬁrms, even those operating in diﬀerent sectors.

    Regardless, the more important goal of this exercise is to purge the inﬂuence of contextual

eﬀects. Because the estimates in Table 7 are based solely on the fraction of variation in

F raudDom,a
      p,t   attributable to non-local variation at the industry level, local environmental

inﬂuences cannot explain the results. Importantly, this test eﬀectively rules out any generic

contextual eﬀect, be it related to the local economy, local enforcement (i.e., rotation of SEC

oﬃcers), local media, and so on. In the section immediately following, we provide more

speciﬁc evidence of the one remaining mechanism: peer eﬀects involving local corporate

managers.



5    Who deﬁnes a CEO’s peers?

The analysis in the preceding section suggests that common environmental factors are unlikely

to account for the regional ebbs and ﬂows we observe in corporate misconduct. In this

section, we provide more direct evidence that such regional patterns can be attributed to

social interactions involving a city’s top management.

    In our ﬁrst set of tests (subsection 5.1), we divide a ﬁrm’s local peers into two groups

based on similarity of: (i) ﬁrm size, or (ii) CEO age, with the idea that managers are more

likely to interact with others in the same groups. As we will see, correlation in ﬁnancial

misconduct is much stronger within size groups: small ﬁrms predict the behavior of (only)

other local small ﬁrms, and large ﬁrms predict the behavior of (only) other large ﬁrms. We

also ﬁnd a somewhat stronger within CEO-age groups. Both ﬁndings are consistent with



                                              20
endogenous social interactions, but harder to reconcile with alternative explanations.

    The analysis in subsection 5.2 asks whether cities with the highest rates of ﬁnancial mis-

conduct appear more corrupt in other dimensions – speciﬁcally in the political arena. Using

city-level convictions of publicly elected oﬃcials as a measure of political corruption (Glaeser

and Saks (2006)), we ﬁnd strong positive correlations between ﬁnancial misconduct and po-

litical fraud, both across cities and within cities over time. As we will discuss below, these

results eﬀectively rule out area ﬁxed attributes (e.g., culture), local shocks to enforcement,

or other area-level contextual eﬀects, and thus represent our strongest causal evidence that

corruption-related norms are transmitted via local social interactions.


5.1    Reﬁning peer groups: ﬁrm size and CEO age

If social interactions among local managers are the mechanism by which ﬁnancial misconduct

spreads within a city, then correlations should be stronger among parties likely to be in closer

contact. In this section, we explore two proxies: ﬁrm size and CEO age. Our hypothesis is

that managers that have similar ages and manage ﬁrms with similar sizes tend to interact

more with each other. If so, provided that social interactions inﬂuence behaviors, we should

observe stronger comovement in ﬁnancial misconduct within each group.

    There are a number of reasons why ﬁrm size and CEO age may be related to social

interactions. Starting ﬁrst with ﬁrm size, studies using the BoardEx database indicates

that executives of large ﬁrms are much more likely to sit on boards of nearby companies

and/or have leadership roles in local civic organizations (e.g., Engelberg, Gao, and Parsons

(2013)).8 Consequently, when an executive of a large ﬁrm joins (say) a local board, the

social connections formed are disproportionately with other large-ﬁrm executives. Another

possibility is that local peer groups may form along income cohorts. Because ﬁrm size is such a

strong determinant of executive compensation, sorting on size is akin to a noisy sort on pay.

If the wealthiest of a city’s inhabitants concentrate in certain neighborhoods, restaurants,

country clubs, etc., it is easy to see how ﬁrm size likely provides information about the social

contact.
  8
    BoardEx creates ‘synthetic CVs’ for thousands of ﬁrm executives and directors, allowing researchers infer
common overlaps in schooling, past workplaces, or social organizations.


                                                     21
   Our second proxy is the CEO’s age, also seems intuitive given that social connections form

during school (see, e.g., Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2010)) as well as previous employment.

We expect that the probability of two CEOs interacting socially is likely to be correlated

with whether they are close in age.

   Table 8 presents the empirical estimates when a ﬁrm’s neighbors are segregated as de-

scribed above. Panel A presents the size split, and Panel B the age split. Within every year,

we rank ﬁrms from largest to smallest, taking those above the yearly median as Large, and

those below the median as Small. Then, rather than running logit regressions of ﬁnancial

misconduct on a single portfolio of a ﬁrm’s local, non-industry peers (F raud−i,a
                                                                             p,t ), we estimate

the sensitivity to two, mutually exclusive covariates, F raud−i,a              −i,a
                                                             large,t and F raudsmall,t .

   Column 1 shows the estimates only for large ﬁrms, and column 2 only for small ﬁrms. In

both cases, a clear pattern emerges: each group is sensitive to the behavior of its size-matched

counterparts, and completely insensitive to those in the other group. The third column ag-

gregates all ﬁrm-year observations together, and aggregates the diagonal elements of the prior

column (Small-Small, and Large-Large) into a single M atch variable; all other observations

are termed Diﬀ Size. Conﬁrming the patterns observed in columns 1 and 2, M atch coeﬃ-

cient is highly signiﬁcant (t=7.07), whereas the portfolio involving ﬁrms of diﬀerent sizes is

not statistically diﬀerent from zero (t=−1.40). The diﬀerence between the two estimates is

highly statistically signiﬁcant. Column 4 adds the overall time-series average fraud rate for

each city (as we did in Table 4), with minimal change to the coeﬃcients of interest.

   Moving to Panel B, we conduct the same exercise, ﬁrst for ﬁrms with young CEOs in

column 1, where Young is deﬁned as being 55-years old or younger at the observation year, and

then for Old CEOs in column 2. Before describing the results, note the dramatic reduction

(about 80%) in sample size relative to Panel A, due to the fact that we observe CEO ages

only recently (post 1992) and only for ﬁrms in the EXECUCOMP database.

   This caveat notwithstanding, the evidence is still broadly consistent with the size-matched

results. Though neither portfolio is signiﬁcant for older CEOs (with nearly identical point

estimates), Young CEOs appear nearly twice as sensitive to the behavior of other young

CEOs, though this diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. When all observations are pooled


                                               22
in column 3, a similar pictures emerges: the point estimates are much larger (and signiﬁcant)

for the M atch group, compared to the portfolio comprised of CEOs of diﬀerent age.


5.2      Firm executives and local politicians as (corrupt) peers?

In this section, we test whether cities ranking high in corporate corruption also rank high in

political corruption, and more importantly, whether these covary over time within a given

region. This test has two motivations. First, it provides strong falsiﬁcation against variation

in regional enforcement (e.g., rotation of SEC oﬃcers) driving our main results, as local

authorities play little to no role in the enforcement of political corruption.9 Second, by

broadening the set of peers to those in a completely diﬀerent arena (politics), this test helps

us better understand whether it is the transmission of information (i.e., “how to cheat?”)

or social norms (i.e., “how acceptable it is to cheat?”) that generates the correlations in

misbehavior we observe.

       Regional data on political corruption are reported by the Justice Department’s Report

to Congress on the “Activities and Operations of the Public Integrity Section.”10 The types

of activities prosecuted include electoral fraud, conﬂicts of interest, campaign violations,

and obstruction of justice. Glaeser and Saks (2006) were the ﬁrst to link this measure of

corruption to economic variables, ﬁnding not only that wealthier and more educated states

are less corrupt, but also that increases in corruption foreshadow slower growth.

       An important advantage of this corruption measure is that, as discussed in Glaeser and

Saks (2006), it is largely immune from the “usual problem that ... in corrupt places, the

judicial system is itself corrupt and fewer people will be charged with corrupt practices.” As

they argue, “This problem is mitigated when focusing on Federal convictions, because the

Federal judicial system is relatively isolated from local corruption and should treat people

similarly across space (page 1054).” There is a further reason why, in our context, variation

in local enforcement is unlikely to explain the results: the relevant enforcement bodies are

diﬀerent. The Department of Justice is solely responsible for federal prosecutions of local gov-
   9
     See Glaeser and Saks (2006) for more discussion of this point, particularly pages 1054 and 1058.
  10
     The Department of Justice’s website (http://www.justice.gov/criminal/pin/) gives more detailed de-
scription of the data.



                                                  23
ernment oﬃcials, whereas in the majority of cases, the Securities and Exchange Commission

investigates corporate misbehavior and securities fraud.

       Returning once again to Table 2, inspection reveals a positive relation between corporate

and political corruption (ρ = 0.31). To see this more clearly, Figure 2 plots time-series average

rate of federal convictions of public oﬃcials for each city on the y-axis, and the time-series

average of ﬁnancial misconduct on the x-axis. To more formally characterize the relation

between political and corporate corruption, we estimate the following logistic regression:

                                                              1
                      P r(Fraud i,a
                                j,t ) =                                                 .          (2)
                                                −(δ+α1 PolCor a +α2 Controls ij,t−1 )
                                          1+e

Here, P r(F raudi,a
                j,t ), is the probability of ﬁrm i being investigated for ﬁnancial misconduct in

year t, and as before (and throughout the paper), subscript j refers to Fama and French-12

industry classiﬁcation, and a to economic area. The coeﬃcient of interest, α1 , measures the

extent to which the propensity for ﬁnancial misconduct is related to Glaeser and Saks’ (2006)

area-level measure of political corruption, P olCor. Firm-level Control variables include one-

year lagged stock returns, total assets, market-to-book ratio, leverage, and cash ﬂows.

       The results of this estimation are presented in Panel A of Table 9. In the ﬁrst column, we

relate the probability of corporate fraud to the time series average value of political corruption
                                 a
for each area, denoted P olCor . The coeﬃcient is 0.0395 (t = 2.55), translating to an increase

in the odds ratio of e0.0395 − 1 ≈ 4.03%, conﬁrming the evidence illustrated in Figure 2 that

cities ranking high in political corruption also rank high in corporate corruption.

       To highlight the economic magnitude of the relation between political and corporate

misconduct, the next four columns present the results when the political corruption variables
                                            a
enter non parametrically. HighP olCor is an indicator for the quintile of most politically
                                     a
corrupt cities, and LowP olCor an indicator for the quintile of least corrupt cities.11 The

second column indicates a positive and signiﬁcant eﬀect for cities in the top quintile of political

corruption, whereas the third suggests that cities ranking lowest in political corruption also

have low rates of corporate corruption.
  11                         a
    Cities in the HighP olCor quintile are Washington, D.C., Chicago, Miami, and Cleveland, while those
in the least corrupt group include San Francisco, Seattle, Indianapolis, and Minneapolis.



                                                      24
                                                           a
    In column (4), the coeﬃcient on HighP olCor is 0.112 (t = 1.77), indicating that relative

to the middle three quintiles, the odds ratio for ﬁrms headquartered in the most politically

corrupt cities is elevated by e0.112 − 1 ≈ 11.8%. By contrast, the magnitude is over twice

as large (in absolute value), but of the opposite sign for the least corrupt cities (t=−2.83).

Taking the diﬀerence between these coeﬃcients, the diﬀerence in the odds ratio is e0.380 − 1 ≈

46.1%, when evaluated at the mean values for all other covariates in Equation (2). This

translates to a percentage change in P r(F raudi,a
                                               j,t ) of about sixty basis points, 41% of the

overall average corporate fraud rate of 1.46%.12 Note that this diﬀerence is virtually identical

to that implied by Figure 2 (raw fraud rates), suggesting that the persistent variation between

the least and most politically corrupt cities is mostly orthogonal to ﬁrm, industry, and market

controls.

    We conclude Panel A by allowing the relation between corporate and political fraud to

diﬀer among ﬁrms of diﬀerent sizes. Our intuition is that if peer-to-peer interaction be-

tween politicians and corporate managers is the relevant mechanism driving the link between

political and corporate fraud, the relation should strengthen with the potential for contact

between these groups. Firm size strikes us as a reasonable proxy, given that large ﬁrms signif-

icantly impact local employment, have a disproportionate eﬀect on local tax revenues, and,

for these and other reasons, are almost certainly more likely to garner attention from local

politicians. Provided that these considerations translate to more interactions, peer eﬀects

between companies and politicians should be stronger for larger companies.

    Our analysis indicates that this is indeed the case. Within each year, we rank ﬁrms based

on total assets, and place them into quintiles. Large ﬁrms are those in the top 20%, Small

ﬁrms correspond to the bottom quintile, and M edium ﬁrms to the middle three groups.13

The ﬁfth column shows the results when the LargeF irm and M ediumF irm indicators are
                                  a
interacted with HighP olCor , with SmallF irm being omitted to avoid the dummy trap. The

                                   j,t is 1.46%, implying a log odds ratio of log( 1−0.0146 ) = −4.21. Being
     The average value for F raudi,a
  12                                                                                 0.0146

headquartered in the decile of least politically corrupt cities reduces the log odds ratio by 0.11, implying a
                     j,t is 1.31%, as log( 1−0.0131 ) = −4.32. The same calculation implies a log odds of -3.94
mean value of F raudi,a                     0.0131

for the most corrupt decile, translating to a mean value of 1.90% for F raudi,a
                                                                              j,t .
  13
     The average Large ﬁrm in our sample has US$ 3.3B in assets. The corresponding ﬁgures for M edium
and Small ﬁrms are US$ 226M and US$ 12M, respectively.




                                                      25
                            a
coeﬃcient on HighP olCor *LargeF irm is positive and signiﬁcant, indicating that compared

to ﬁrms in the smallest quintile, fraud rates of the largest ﬁrms are more sensitive to prevailing

political fraud rates. The point estimate on the interaction for ﬁrms in the middle group is

also positive, though not statistically signiﬁcant (t=1.61).

   In Panel B of Table 9, we present the relation between political and corporate fraud

from a slightly diﬀerent perspective. Instead of using political fraud to predict ﬁrm-level

occurrences of ﬁnancial misconduct, we aggregate each city-year into a single observation, an

exercise useful for two reasons. First, with a single observation for each city, any concerns

about correlated residuals across ﬁrms are removed by construction. Second, the dependent

variable can now be deﬁned as a continuous rate of fraud deﬁned at the city-year level, rather

than as a discrete variable at the ﬁrm level. Consequently, we can estimate the model using

OLS with city ﬁxed eﬀects (which the incidental parameters problem makes infeasible for

logit models), providing a more robust account of cross-regional covariation in fraud rates.

   Consistent with Panel A, Panel B indicates that cities ranking high in political fraud are

associated with high rates of corporate fraud. In the ﬁrst column, we show the contempora-

neous relation, where a city’s rate of corporate fraud in year t is regressed against the rate

of convictions for political fraud that the same year. The point estimate indicates that in

response to a standard deviation increase in the rate of political fraud (about three additional

convictions per million inhabitants), corporate fraud rates increase by roughly sixteen basis

points (2.89 × 0.055% ≈ .16%). Recalling that average rate of corporate fraud is a little over

one percent, this represents a meaningful increase on a percentage basis.

   Column two tests the same idea, but takes as the independent variable the rate of political

corruption the previous year. Here, the goal is to explore whether the relation is truly

contemporaneous, or whether a spike in political corruption foreshadows (or is foreshadowed

by) a similar increase in ﬁnancial misconduct by local executives. Indeed, the point estimate

is about twenty percent larger in column 2, and when both contemporaneous and lagged

covariates are included, only the lagged value retains its signiﬁcance.

   In the next three columns (4-6), we present the results of the same speciﬁcations shown in

column 1-3, but add city ﬁxed eﬀects. This facilitates the interpretation of each coeﬃcient as


                                               26
a (roughly) diﬀ-in-diﬀ, whereby ﬂuctuations in local political corruption slightly lead similar

increases and decreases in corporate misbehavior. The estimated magnitudes are nearly

identical to the ﬁrst three columns, and suggest that a standard deviation increase in a

city’s political corruption predicts an increase in corporate corruption in the neighborhood of

twenty percent. Column seven adds lagged employment and population growth as controls,

with almost no change in the results.

    To summarize the results of this section: 1) there is a strong cross-sectional correlation,

with cities ranking highest in political corruption also having higher than average rates of

ﬁnancial misconduct, 2) misconduct in the corporate and political spheres are strongly cor-

related over time within cities, 3) this time-series relation is concentrated among the largest

companies. Whereas the ﬁrst ﬁnding is consistent with all three elements of Manski’s (1993)

taxonomy – exogenous, contextual, and endogenous peer eﬀects – the second result rules out

relatively static exogenous attributes, and any time-varying contextual eﬀect due to enforce-

ment.

    This leaves only non-enforcement environmental inﬂuences as alternatives to peer eﬀects,

but these are inconsistent with the third ﬁnding, as large ﬁrms should be the least sensitive to

shifts in local demographics, wealth shocks, etc. On the other hand, it seems reasonable that

CEOs of large companies would interact more frequently with local politicians, compared to

CEOs of smaller ﬁrms. Accordingly, we argue that the analysis of corporate and political

corruption provides strong evidence against other possibilities, and moreover, suggests that

the transmission of ethical norms extends beyond the corporate sector.



6    Stock prices

We conclude with an examination of stock return patterns around the announcement of legal

investigations into ﬁnancial misconduct. In these tests, we are not so much interested in the

stock price reactions of the violators themselves (i.e., ﬁrms targeted by the SEC), but instead,

on whether or not there is a stock price reaction of its local neighbors. As fraud appears to

have consequences beyond the immediate violators, the question is whether the stock market



                                              27
understands these eﬀects, and incorporates them into securities prices. In particular, given

that there appears to be a local component in the revelation of fraud, the market may assign

a higher probability of fraud to ﬁrms located near a known violator.14

    Table 10 presents the results. Panel A summarizes announcement returns for ﬁrms tar-

geted by the SEC for ﬁnancial misconduct. Conﬁrming prior research including Karpoﬀ,

Koester, Lee, and Martin (2013), we ﬁnd that the initial announcements of fraud investiga-

tions are associated with large, negative, and highly signiﬁcant stock returns. The median

return is −11.62%, with a mean of −18.10% (t=−18.10).

    Of greater interest to us, however, is the extent to which these announcements impact

neighboring ﬁrms who are not currently targeted for fraud investigation. Panel B presents the

results of this analysis. Although the point estimate is negative, the magnitude is very small

(−4 basis points), as is the statistical signiﬁcance (t=−1.15). Thus, at least for the typical

ﬁrm, news that a neighboring ﬁrm is being investigated for fraud has a minimal impact on

its stock price.

    A much diﬀerent picture emerges, however, when we focus on the stock price reactions of

neighboring ﬁrms that are subsequently investigated for fraud themselves. This is, of course,

a much smaller set: for every ﬁrm implicated for ﬁnancial misconduct, an additional two

neighboring ﬁrms will be targeted for SEC action over the following year. Panels C1 and

C2 show the results. In panel C1, we simply adjust announcement returns by the market,

indicating an abnormal return of negative 89 basis points (t=−2.55). In panel C2, we subtract

the returns of all non-locally headquartered ﬁrms investigated for fraud over the following year,

ﬁnding a similar magnitude (point estimate of −0.84%, t=−2.32). This second normalization

eliminates any non-local “bellweather” eﬀects for the ﬁrm originally targeted for fraud, as

the following example hopefully clariﬁes.

    Suppose that in 1995, Seattle-based Boeing is investigated for ﬁnancial misconduct, and

that Starbucks (also based in Seattle) is subsequently investigated in 1996. The results in

Panel A suggest that on average, Boeing’s stock price will drop −18% upon being targeted
  14
     Here, we do not take a stand on a causal relation. That is, stock price reactions are consistent with
both endogenous peer-to-peer eﬀects, as well as contextual eﬀects like enforcement driving local correlations
in fraud revelation.



                                                     28
in 1995, but that the typical Seattle ﬁrm (say, Nordstrom) is not impacted. Panel C1 indi-

cates that Starbucks, which is later investigated for fraud in 1996, reacts to Boeing’s fraud

investigation in 1995, on the order of negative one percent relative to the overall market. The

remaining concern, however, is that companies with linkages to Boeing – having the same

auditor for example – may suﬀer an immediate price decline, but not due to local factors.

By subtracting oﬀ the 1995 stock returns of non-Seattle ﬁrms later investigated for fraud in

1996, this alternative is eliminated.



7     Summary and Conclusion

The results in this paper can be summarized as follows:

    1. Financial misconduct rates diﬀer by up to a factor of three among large U.S. cities.

    2. Cities experience “waves” of ﬁnancial misconduct. Fluctuations in city misconduct

      rates are 50%-75% as important as industry ﬂuctuations in explaining the time-series

      pattern of ﬁrm level ﬁnancial misconduct.

    3. Common enforcement and/or other environmental eﬀects do not provide a complete

      explanation. Financial misconduct is initiated (not just exposed) simultaneously in an

      area. Moreover, a non-local instrument for misconduct in a city’s core industry explains

      misconduct in other local industries.

    4. At least part of these regional patterns is likely due to peer eﬀects. Misbehavior of a

      ﬁrm’s management is mainly inﬂuenced by local peers of similar size and/or age groups,

      and cities tend to have corresponding waves of political and corporate corruption.

    The ﬁrst pair of ﬁndings is novel, and regardless of their interpretation, should be of

interest to researchers interested in the determinants of white collar crime. The speciﬁc

interpretation – peer eﬀects among local executives – as the most plausible mechanism is

relevant for a number of additional reasons.

    First, the oﬀenders are, in a sense, unexpected. In contrast to the literature on urban

crime, where the perpetrators are often youths or street criminals, the relevant parties here are

                                               29
highly educated, wealthy businesspeople – presumably an area’s leaders rather than followers.

Moreover, the costs of getting caught (e.g., career concerns) are clearly quite high for the

executives, suggesting that cultural norms can have a powerful inﬂuence on behavior.

   Second, just as street crime aﬀects the vibrancy of an urban area – we certainly avoid

shopping and socializing in areas that we believe are unsafe – the prevalence of white-collar

crime can inﬂuence a city’s business climate. Indeed, our preliminary evidence suggests that

after controlling for the determinants of bankruptcy described in the existing literature, the

incidence of ﬁnancial misconduct in a city has a material eﬀect on the probability of failure

for its resident ﬁrms. We conjecture that struggling ﬁrms in cities with higher incidences of

ﬁnancial misconduct ﬁnd it more diﬃcult to raise capital, and may, as a result, fail to survive

what could have been a minor liquidity problem if they were located in a city with more

favorable social capital. This is an important issue that we will examine in future work.




                                              30
References
 [1] Ang, J., Nagel, G., Yang, J., “The Eﬀect of Social Pressures on CEO Compensation, ”
     working paper, 2013.

 [2] Byard, D., Shaw, K., 1003, “Corporate disclosure quality and properties of analysts’
     information environment,” Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance 18, 355-378.

 [3] Biddle, G., and G. Hilary, 2006, “Accounting quality and ﬁrm-level capital investment,”
     The Accounting Review 81, 963-982.

 [4] Burns, N., S. Kedia, 2006, “The impact of performance-based compensation on misre-
     porting,” Journal of Financial Economics, 79: 35-67.

 [5] Bushman, R., and A. Smith, 2001. “Financial accounting information and corporate
     governance,” Journal of Accounting and Economics 31, 237-333.

 [6] Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy, 2010, “Sell Side School Ties,” Journal of Finance,
     65, 1409-1437.

 [7] Dechow, P., Ge, W., Schrand, C., 2010, “Understanding earnings quality: A review
     of the proxies, their determinants and their consequences,” Journal of Accounting and
     Economics 50, 344-401.

 [8] Dougal, C., Parsons, C., Titman, S., Urban Vibrancy and Corporate Investment, forth-
     coming, Journal of Finance.

 [9] Duranton, W., Pagu, D., 2004, Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economies,
     Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. IV, J.V. Henderson and J.F.Thisse
     (eds), North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2063-2117.

[10] Dyreng, S., Mayew, W., and Williams, C., 2013, “Religious social norms and corporate
     ﬁnancial reporting,” working paper.

[11] Efendi, J., Srivastava, A., E. Swanson, 2007, “Why do corporate managers misstate
     ﬁnancial statements? The role of option compensation and other factors, ”Journal of
     Financial Economics 85: 667708.

[12] Engelberg, J., Gao, P., and Parsons, C., 2013, “The Price of a CEO?s Rolodex, Review
     of Financial Studies ”] 26 (1), 79-114.

[13] Erickson, M., Hanlon, M., E. Maydew, 2006, “Is there a link between executive equity
     incentives and accounting fraud?” Journal of Accounting Research 44: 113-143.

[14] Fisman, R., Miguel, E., 2007 “Corruption, Norms and Legal Enforcement: Evidence
     from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy,115(6), 1020-1048

[15] Francis, J., LaFond, R., Olsson, P., Schipper, K., 2005, “The market pricing of accruals
     quality,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 39, 295-327.

[16] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., Zingales, L., 2004, “The Role of Social Capital on Financial
     Development,” American Economic Review 94, (3) 526-556.


                                             31
[17] Kanatas, G., Grullon, G., Weston, J., 2013, “Religion, Ethics, and Corporate Behavior,”
     working paper.
[18] Healy, P., and K. Palepu, 2001, “Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the
     capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature,” Journal of Accounting
     and Economics 31, 405-440.
[19] Harris, J. and Bromiley, P. 2007, “Incentives to cheat: The inﬂuence of executive com-
     pensation and ﬁrm performance on ﬁnancial performance on ﬁnancial misrepresenta-
     tion,” Organization Science, 18 (3): 350-367.
[20] Kalbﬂeisch, J., Sprott, D., 1970, “Applications of Likelihood Methods to Models Involv-
     ing Large Numbers of Parameters,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B, 32:
     175-208.
[21] Karpoﬀ, J., Koester, A., Lee, D.S., Martin, G., 2013, “Database Challenges in Financial
     Misconduct,” working paper.
[22] Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobaton, P., 1999, “Governance Matters,” World Bank
     Policy Research Working Paper no. 2196 (Washington: World Bank).
[23] Kedia, S., Rajgopal, S., 2009, “Neighborhood matters: the impact of location on broad
     based stock option plans,” Journal of Financial Economics 92(1): 109-127.
[24] Kedia, S., S. Rajgopal, 2011. “Do the SEC’s enforcement preferences aﬀect corporate
     misconduct?” Journal of Accounting and Economics 51(3): 259-278.
[25] Knack, S., Keefer, P., 1995, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
     Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics, 7 (3), 207-227.
[26] Lambert, R., C. Leuz, and R. Verrecchia, 2007, “Accounting information, disclosure,
     and the cost of capital,” Journal of Accounting Research 45, 385-420.
[27] Lang, R., Lundholm, M., 1996, “Corporate disclosure policy and analyst behavior,” The
     Accounting Review 71(4), 467-492.
[28] Mauro, P., 1995, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3),
     681-712.
[29] Manski, C. 1993. “Identiﬁcation of Endogenous Social Eﬀects: The Reﬂection Problem,”
     Review of Economic Studies 60(3): 531-542.
[30] Marshall, A., 1890, Principles of Economics (MacMillan and Co., London, U.K.).
[31] O’ Connor, J., Priem, R., Coombs, J., Gilley, M., 2006, “Do CEO stock options prevent
     or promote fraudulent ﬁnancial reporting?” Academy of Management Journal 49 (3),
     483-500.
[32] Fich, M., A. Shivdasani, 2007, “Financial fraud, director reputation, and shareholder
     wealth,” Journal of Financial Economics 86(2): 306336.
[33] Zhang, X., Barton, K., Pfarrer, M., and Khanin, D., 2008, “CEOs on the edge: Earn-
     ings manipulation and stock-based incentive misalignment,” Academy of Management
     Journal, 51 (2): 241-258.

                                             32
                    Figure 1: Time Series of Corporate Fraud Rate
This ﬁgure reports the time-series pattern of city-level corporate fraud rates for three diﬀerent groups of cities
sorted by their time-series average of fraud rate over the whole sample. The top and bottom quartiles are
reported separately, and the middle two quartiles are combined. Panel A reports the raw fraud rates, while
Panel B reports the industry-adjusted fraud rates, for which the average industry fraud rates (outside of our
20-city sample) are deducted from the raw fraud rates.

                                           Panel A. Raw Fraud Rate




                                    Panel B. Industry-Adjusted Fraud Rate




                                                       33
                         Figure 2: Political and Corporate Frauds
This ﬁgure reports the scatterplot of ﬁnancial misconduct rate and political corruption measure. The numbers
used to generate this scatterplot are reported in Table 2. The straight line depicts the best-ﬁt line.




                                                      34
                                       Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table contains summary statistics related to our fraud measures. Panel A presents variables deﬁned at the
ﬁrm-year level, while Panels B and C show those deﬁned at the city-year and industry-year level, respectively.
At the ﬁrm level, F raudi,a
                        j,t , is a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j, operating in industry
i, in area a, during year t. F raudInitiations, is a dummy variable which takes a value of one during the ﬁrst
year of a ﬁnancial misconduct event, and zero otherwise. At the city (Panel B) and industry (Panel C) levels,
fraud and initial fraud are deﬁned using rates instead of dummy variables, e.g., the average fraud rate for area
a in year t is simply the sum of F raud in area a during year t, divided by the number of ﬁrms headquartered
in area a that year. The same applies to industry-level averages. In Panel B, P oliticalF raudat is the count
of prosecutions of elected and appointed public oﬃcials at all levels of government and/or of election crimes
(per million of population) in area a during year t. We report time-series averages of cross-sectional summary
statistics.

                                                 Panel A: By Firm-Year

                                                                     Std.     25th               75th
              Variable                                      Mean     Dev.     Pctl.     Median   Pctl.
              F raudInitiationsi,a
                                 j,t ; Indicator Variable   0.0034
              F raudi,a
                    j,t ; Indicator Variable                0.0146
              Stock Characteristics
                 Lagged Stock Return                        0.0783   0.5071   -0.2643   0.0271   0.3393
                 Lagged Asset (Logged)                      4.8992   2.0220    3.3376   4.7739   6.3669
                 Lagged Leverage                            0.3109   0.2879    0.0000   0.2747   0.5443
                 Lagged Q                                   1.4026   1.1042    0.6821   0.9980   1.6976
                 Lagged Cash Flow / Asset                   0.0492   0.1421    0.0113   0.0763   0.1344

                                                  Panel B: By City-Year
              F raudInitiationsat                          0.0030 0.0066      0.0000    0.0000   0.0040
              F raudat                                     0.0112 0.0140      0.0000    0.0073   0.0172
              P oliticalF raudat                           3.0317 2.8930      1.0012    2.1602   4.3345

                                               Panel C: By Industry-Year
              F raudInitiationsit                        0.0032 0.0058        0.0000    0.0000   0.0049
              F raudit                                   0.0120 0.0133        0.0000    0.0101   0.0170




                                                            35
                           Table 2: Summary Statistics, by City
This table contains summary statistics of our fraud measures for each city in our sample. F raudat , is the
average fraud rate for area a in year t, i.e., the sum of F raudi,a
                                                                j,t in area a during year t, divided by the
number of ﬁrms headquartered in area a that year. P oliticalF raudat is the count of prosecutions of elected
and appointed public oﬃcials at all levels of government and/or of election crimes (per million of population)
in area a during year t. We report time-series summary statistics. Economic areas are sorted in ascending
order by the mean fraud rate.

                                                            F raudat
                                  Number                  Std.    25th      75th        P olitical
            Economic Area         of Firms       Mean     Dev.   Pctl.      Pctl.       F raudat

            Indianapolis            28.03        0.48%    1.34%    0.00%    0.00%         1.70
            Seattle                 47.90        0.52%    1.12%    0.00%    0.00%         1.42
            Minneapolis            123.05        0.64%    0.82%    0.00%    0.98%         1.18
            Cleveland               76.65        0.69%    1.06%    0.00%    1.19%         5.03
            Atlanta                 98.08        0.80%    0.83%    0.00%    1.11%         2.53
            Boston                 219.20        0.96%    1.11%    0.00%    1.59%         2.31
            Orlando                 27.78        0.98%    2.12%    0.00%    0.00%
            Phoenix                 46.25        0.99%    1.18%    0.00%    1.84%         2.70
            Philadelphia           138.63        1.05%    0.96%    0.23%    1.61%         3.86
            Detroit                 68.90        1.07%    1.61%    0.00%    1.67%         1.83
            San Francisco Bay      234.55        1.16%    1.25%    0.00%    1.46%         1.00
            Chicago                180.10        1.19%    1.06%    0.00%    1.97%         4.92
            Denver                  96.40        1.23%    1.40%    0.00%    2.23%         1.78
            Washington, DC         133.18        1.31%    1.22%    0.00%    1.91%         7.97
            Los Angeles            270.88        1.36%    0.73%    0.85%    1.91%         2.27
            New York               599.13        1.52%    0.99%    0.75%    1.94%         4.30
            Houston                136.83        1.56%    2.05%    0.00%    1.75%         3.24
            Dallas                 154.73        1.61%    1.87%    0.00%    2.15%         1.69
            St. Louis               45.45        1.64%    1.95%    0.00%    3.06%         2.39
            Miami                  105.45        1.66%    1.44%    0.00%    2.69%         5.39




                                                     36
                       Table 3: City Eﬀects in Financial Misconduct
This table reports the statistics of regressions predicting fraud that include various ﬁxed eﬀects. The dependent
variable is F raudi,a
                  j,t . We report the ﬁt statistics and statistical tests of the signiﬁcance of each ﬁxed eﬀect.


                                     (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)           (6)
                                   Year FE                               Year FE      Year FE       Year FE
                                               Ind. FE                               + Ind. FE     + Ind. FE
                                                              Area FE   + Area FE                  + Area FE

  Observations                     113,245     113,245        113,245    113,245       113,245       113,245
  Adjusted R2                       0.0054      0.0014        0.0007     0.0062        0.0065         0.0075
  R2                                0.0057      0.0015        0.0009     0.0067        0.0069         0.0081

  Statistical tests:

  Year FE
  F-stat                           16.776
    Critical value for p<0.01       1.603
    Critical value for p<0.001      1.851

  Ind. FE                                                                              vs (1)
  F-stat                                       15.468                                  12.357
    Critical value for p<0.01                   2.249                                   2.249
    Critical value for p<0.001                  2.845                                   2.845

  Area FE                                                                vs (1)                       vs (5)
  F-stat                                                       5.333     5.757                        7.111
    Critical value for p<0.01                                  1.907      1.907                        1.907
    Critical value for p<0.001                                 2.309      2.309                        2.309




                                                         37
                 Table 4: Logistic Regressions of Financial Misconduct
This table contains parameter estimates from panel logit regression predicting our fraud measure. The de-
pendent variable in all regressions in Panel A is F raudi,a
                                                        j,t , is a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct
by ﬁrm j, operating in industry i, in area a, during year t. The main dependent variables of interest are
F raud−i,a        i,−a            i,a
      p,t , F raudp,t , and F raudp,−j,t . They are the fraud rates of ﬁrms located in the same area but oper-
ating in a diﬀerent industry, operating in the same industry but located in a diﬀerent area, and other ﬁrms
operating in the same industry and located in the same area, respectively. The set of control variables also
                                                                                                                −i,a
include the market fraud rate excluding ﬁrms in the same area and/or industry (in all models) and F raudp              ,
the time-series average of   F raud−i,a
                                   p,t    (in the last two models). In the last column, the rates are replaced with
high fraud rate indicator variables, which take the value of 1 if the respective fraud rate is higher than 1.2%.
In Panel B, the fraud indicators and rates are replaced with fraud initiation indicators and rates, respectively.
The t-stats reported in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the industry-year level. The signiﬁcance
levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.

                                                    Panel A: Fraud
                                 (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)

  Peer Fraud Variables:                                   Raw Fraud Rate                             High Fraud
                                                                                                      Indicator

   Dependent Variable:          Fraud          Fraud            Fraud      Fraud         Fraud          Fraud

  F raud−i,a
        p,t                   8.1118***                                  7.9641***      9.3299***     0.3708***
                                (4.79)                                     (4.69)          (4.76)       (4.38)
  F raudi,−a
        p,t                                  13.1937***                  12.6083***    12.1558***     0.3702***
                                               (4.29)                      (4.18)          (4.06)       (5.39)
  F raudi,a
        p,−j,t                                              2.1368***    1.7517***      1.7069***     0.3856***
                                                              (3.84)       (3.02)          (2.94)       (4.37)
         −i,a
  F raudp                                                                                -11.2545    -14.2637**
                                                                                          (-1.42)       (-2.17)
  Lagged stock return        0.0686***       0.0653***      0.0669***     0.0651***    0.0655***      0.0655***
                                (3.97)          (3.90)         (3.80)       (3.95)         (4.00)       (4.01)
  Lagged asset               0.2588***       0.2608***       0.2600***    0.2607***    0.2609***      0.2748***
                               (12.68)         (12.82)        (12.74)      (12.83)        (12.85)      (13.96)
  Lagged leverage              -0.1417         -0.1458        -0.1454      -0.1515        -0.1470      -0.0875
                                (-1.32)         (-1.45)        (-1.38)      (-1.50)       (-1.46)       (-0.85)
  Lagged Q                   0.2239***       0.2059***       0.2194***    0.2086***    0.2059***      0.1987***
                                (7.40)          (8.06)         (7.52)       (8.15)         (8.14)       (7.63)
  Lagged cash ﬂow               0.2257          0.2119         0.2185       0.2077         0.2059       0.1054
                                (0.83)          (0.84)         (0.82)       (0.82)         (0.81)       (0.42)
  Constant                   -6.6508***      -6.6568***     -6.6439***   -6.6717***    -6.5317***    -6.6284***
                               (-44.37)        (-47.34)       (-45.22)     (-47.34)      (-38.17)      (-39.64)

  Market Fraud Rates            Yes             Yes              Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes
  Observations                 90,208          90,208           90,208     90,208        90,208        90,208
  Pseudo R2                    0.0551          0.0566           0.0549     0.0580        0.0582        0.0574




                                                           38
               Table 4: Logistic Regressions of Financial Misconduct
                                    (Continued)


                                       Panel B: Fraud Initiations
                           (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)

Peer Fraud Variables:                          Raw FraudInit Rate                         High FraudInit
                                                                                             Indicator

 Dependent Variable:      Fraud        Fraud         Fraud          Fraud      Fraud          Fraud
                           Init         Init          Init           Init       Init           Init

F raudInit−i,a
          p,t           23.5383***                              22.6751***   23.5471***      0.5350***
                          (3.75)                                  (3.66)        (3.74)         (4.14)
F raudIniti,−a
          p,t                         17.8104                    15.6833       15.3639         0.1772
                                       (1.42)                     (1.23)        (1.19)         (0.92)
F raudIniti,a
          p,−j,t                                    3.6153*       3.2525        3.2030         0.1497
                                                     (1.82)       (1.45)        (1.42)         (0.81)
           −i,a
F raudInitp                                                                    -55.1867       -85.4018
                                                                                (-0.66)        (-0.98)
Lagged stock return     0.0786***    0.0752***     0.0762***     0.0770***   0.0769***       0.0894***
                           (3.42)       (3.00)        (3.12)       (3.25)       (3.24)         (4.84)
Lagged asset            0.1843***    0.1850***      0.1851***    0.1839***   0.1845***       0.2074***
                           (4.79)       (4.90)        (4.85)       (4.87)       (4.90)         (5.48)
Lagged leverage          -0.5358**    -0.5263**     -0.5282**    -0.5385**    -0.5368**       -0.4355*
                           (-2.29)      (-2.26)       (-2.26)      (-2.30)      (-2.30)        (-1.84)
Lagged Q                0.1975***    0.1919***      0.1964***    0.1921***   0.1911***       0.2023***
                           (3.79)       (3.74)        (3.77)       (3.74)       (3.71)         (3.86)
Lagged cash ﬂow            0.1640       0.1482        0.1469       0.1477       0.1409         0.0562
                           (0.36)       (0.34)        (0.33)       (0.33)       (0.32)         (0.13)
Constant                -7.4918***   -7.4817***    -7.4766***   -7.4927***   -7.3242***     -7.4958***
                          (-26.09)     (-26.73)      (-26.16)     (-26.83)     (-17.77)       (-16.81)

Market Fraud Rates         Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes            Yes
Observations              90,208      90,208        90,208          90,208     90,208         90,208
Pseudo R2                 0.0392      0.0379        0.0381          0.0407     0.0409         0.0362




                                                  39
                     Table 5: Controlling for Environmental Variables
This table contains parameter estimates from panel logit regression predicting our fraud measure. The depen-
dent variable in all regressions in Panel A is F raudi,a
                                                     j,t , a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm
j, operating in industry i, in area a, during year t. The main dependent variables of interest are F raud−i,a
                                                                                                         p,t ,
F raudi,−a            i,a
      p,t , and F raudp,−j,t . They are the fraud rates of ﬁrms located in the same area but operating in a
diﬀerent industry, operating in the same industry but located in a diﬀerent area, and other ﬁrms operating
in the same industry and located in the same area, respectively. The set of control variables also includes
      −i,a
F raudp      , the time-series average of F raud−i,a
                                                p,t , and the market fraud rate excluding ﬁrms in the same area
and/or industry. In columns (2)-(5), we add lagged, contemporaneous, and lead variables reﬂecting city-level
economic conditions: population, employment, and wage growth rates. Columns (6) and (7) replicate column
(5) for ﬁrms above and below the annual median asset size, respectively. In Panel B, the fraud indicators and
rates are replaced with fraud initiation indicators and rates, respectively. The t-stats reported in parentheses
are adjusted for clustering at the industry-year level. The signiﬁcance levels are abbreviated with asterisks:
***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                       40
                   Table 5: Controlling for Environmental Variables
                                      (Continued)


                                                Panel A: Fraud
                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
       Subsample:     All Firms    All Firms    All Firms    All Firms    All Firms    Large Firms   Small Firms
Dependent Variable:    Fraud        Fraud        Fraud        Fraud        Fraud          Fraud        Fraud

F raud−i,a
      p,t              9.3299***    8.6371***   9.3692***    9.3829***     7.8859***   8.3418***        6.1108
                          (4.76)       (4.51)       (4.82)      (4.85)        (3.98)      (3.49)         (1.50)
F raudi,−a
      p,t             12.1558***   11.7638***   11.9379***   11.9205***   11.4825***   10.1285***    14.4278***
                          (4.06)       (4.00)       (4.13)      (4.17)        (4.10)      (3.04)         (3.09)
F raudi,a
      p,−j,t           1.7069***    1.6120***   1.7167***    1.7193***     1.5759***   2.5013***        -3.3145
                          (2.94)       (2.79)       (3.01)      (2.97)        (2.68)      (4.34)        (-1.40)
      −i,a
F raudp                 -11.2545     -12.5274     -11.7366    -11.4604      -12.0758    -10.8044       -14.2618
                         (-1.42)      (-1.55)      (-1.49)     (-1.49)       (-1.54)      (-1.07)       (-0.99)
Lagged stock return   0.0655***     0.0617***    0.0650***   0.0660***    0.0666***       0.0069     0.0805***
                          (4.00)       (3.62)       (4.02)      (4.18)        (4.33)      (0.15)         (4.63)
Lagged asset           0.2609***    0.2674***   0.2659***    0.2627***     0.2641***   0.3492***      0.1378***
                         (12.85)      (13.37)      (13.22)     (12.89)       (13.11)     (11.97)         (3.09)
Lagged leverage          -0.1470     -0.1715*      -0.1350     -0.1297       -0.1263     -0.0538     -0.5723***
                         (-1.46)      (-1.70)      (-1.38)     (-1.34)       (-1.31)      (-0.44)       (-3.05)
Lagged Q               0.2059***    0.2073***   0.2141***    0.2074***     0.2042***   0.2795***      0.1254***
                          (8.14)       (8.23)       (8.40)      (8.24)        (8.07)      (7.33)         (3.46)
Lagged cash flow         0.2059       0.1430       0.1746      0.1970        0.2130      -0.4592         0.5580
                          (0.81)       (0.56)       (0.69)      (0.78)        (0.85)      (-1.47)        (1.63)
P op.Growtha
           t−2                        8.7657                                  6.7466      3.9875       14.0916
                                       (1.00)                                 (0.77)      (0.36)         (1.02)
P op.Growtha
           t−1                        5.5573                                  6.8935      4.3668       11.9982
                                       (0.42)                                 (0.52)      (0.27)         (0.58)
P op.Growtha
           t                          -1.7846                                 7.5661      2.7428       13.8319
                                      (-0.15)                                 (0.59)      (0.16)         (0.66)
P op.Growtha
           t+1                        -1.2623                                 3.8763     -5.6224       19.5596
                                      (-0.12)                                 (0.31)      (-0.32)        (0.96)
P op.Growtha
           t+2                        -3.8172                               -10.6556     -7.5782       -16.2803
                                      (-0.52)                                (-1.21)      (-0.62)       (-1.06)
Emp.Growtha
          t−2                                     1.2719                     -2.5827      0.0234      -7.4236**
                                                  (0.68)                     (-1.14)      (0.01)        (-2.28)
Emp.Growtha
          t−1                                     0.1128                     -0.9006      0.0905        -2.1693
                                                  (0.05)                     (-0.32)      (0.02)        (-0.50)
Emp.Growtha
          t                                      -4.4667*                   -5.6068*     -2.3816      -9.6500**
                                                  (-1.86)                    (-1.95)      (-0.64)       (-2.21)
Emp.Growtha
          t+1                                     2.6391                      1.2464      2.5780        -1.8399
                                                  (1.02)                      (0.45)      (0.76)        (-0.45)
Emp.Growtha
          t+2                                     1.7638                      0.4189      1.5470        -1.3512
                                                  (0.90)                      (0.18)      (0.56)        (-0.36)
W ageGrowtha
           t−2                                                  0.0657        0.8793      0.2833         1.9628
                                                                (0.04)        (0.55)      (0.15)         (0.76)
W ageGrowtha
           t−1                                                 -0.8811        0.0142     -0.8250         0.8853
                                                                (-0.56)       (0.01)      (-0.40)        (0.31)
W ageGrowtha
           t                                                    0.0229        1.2528      0.1835         4.6998
                                                                (0.02)        (0.73)      (0.09)         (1.56)
W ageGrowtha
           t+1                                                 2.9141*        2.6404      1.3645       5.0246*
                                                                (1.96)        (1.61)      (0.59)         (1.90)
W ageGrowtha
           t+2                                                  0.3703        0.8507      1.2277         1.2209
                                                                (0.26)        (0.55)      (0.56)         (0.48)
Constant              -6.5317***   -6.5456***   -6.5221***   -6.5332***   -6.5521***   -7.3573***    -5.5881***
                        (-38.17)     (-39.81)     (-39.28)     (-38.77)     (-39.67)     (-29.92)      (-23.76)

Market Fraud Rates       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations            90,208       86,962       86,962       86,962       86,962       44,876        42,068
Pseudo R2               0.0582       0.0572       0.0571       0.0570       0.0585       0.0715        0.0304



                                                   41
                   Table 5: Controlling for Environmental Variables
                                      (Continued)


                                            Panel B: Fraud Initiations
                         (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)
       Subsample:     All Firms    All Firms    All Firms     All Firms   All Firms    Large Firms   Small Firms
Dependent Variable:   FraudInit    FraudInit    FraudInit     FraudInit   FraudInit     FraudInit     FraudInit

F raudInit−i,a
          p,t         23.5471***   22.4102***   23.2866***   24.0756***   22.0948***   23.0499***       17.9364
                          (3.74)       (3.49)       (3.72)      (3.71)        (3.31)      (2.97)         (1.22)
F raudIniti,−a
          p,t            15.3639     14.4595       15.8037     15.1815       14.7487     17.9005        -5.6631
                          (1.19)       (1.12)       (1.22)      (1.19)        (1.12)      (1.37)        (-0.24)
F raudIniti,a
          p,−j,t         3.2030       3.0565       3.2096       3.2288       3.0175       3.4462        -3.9116
                          (1.42)       (1.36)       (1.52)      (1.46)        (1.37)      (1.48)        (-0.51)
           −i,a
F raudInitp             -55.1867     -82.2545     -55.9700     -53.9174     -92.8906    -83.0663      -104.6879
                         (-0.66)      (-0.99)      (-0.68)      (-0.65)      (-1.09)      (-0.97)       (-0.64)
Lagged stock return   0.0769***     0.0736***    0.0813***   0.0833***    0.0824***     0.1076**     0.0738***
                          (3.24)       (3.20)       (3.61)      (3.73)        (3.81)      (2.11)         (3.48)
Lagged asset           0.1845***    0.1875***   0.1873***    0.1817***     0.1830***   0.2784***        -0.0402
                          (4.90)       (5.00)       (4.92)      (4.78)        (4.85)      (4.46)        (-0.44)
Lagged leverage        -0.5368**    -0.5571**    -0.5591**    -0.5225**    -0.5530**     -0.3397     -1.1555***
                         (-2.30)      (-2.36)      (-2.35)      (-2.18)      (-2.30)      (-1.04)       (-2.82)
Lagged Q               0.1911***    0.1901***   0.1987***    0.1882***     0.1826***   0.2153***       0.1178*
                          (3.71)       (3.65)       (3.75)      (3.51)        (3.35)      (2.81)         (1.72)
Lagged cash flow         0.1409       0.0718       0.0979       0.1542       0.1665       0.2119         0.2608
                          (0.32)       (0.16)       (0.22)      (0.35)        (0.38)      (0.28)         (0.46)
P op.Growtha
           t−2                        -6.6124                               -11.6767    -15.1224        -5.2660
                                      (-0.41)                                (-0.67)      (-0.66)       (-0.20)
P op.Growtha
           t−1                       13.2661                                 11.6494     -2.3295       25.2257
                                       (0.60)                                 (0.45)      (-0.07)        (0.61)
P op.Growtha
           t                         16.9399                                 24.5933     29.6983       20.1217
                                       (0.79)                                 (1.08)      (1.01)         (0.57)
P op.Growtha
           t+1                        -0.0467                                13.0450     15.8145       10.0751
                                      (-0.00)                                 (0.57)      (0.50)         (0.31)
P op.Growtha
           t+2                       -12.1127                               -15.5342    -13.1131       -20.1500
                                      (-0.92)                                (-0.94)      (-0.55)       (-0.82)
Emp.Growtha
          t−2                                    3.0294                      -1.8653      0.9685        -5.7571
                                                  (0.76)                     (-0.37)      (0.14)        (-0.88)
Emp.Growtha
          t−1                                    4.0028                      0.3095       0.7884         1.0889
                                                  (0.80)                      (0.05)      (0.10)         (0.13)
Emp.Growtha
          t                                      -7.3842                     -8.7593     -8.3155        -9.4742
                                                 (-1.61)                     (-1.47)      (-1.00)       (-1.28)
Emp.Growtha
          t+1                                    -0.6661                     -3.1593     -4.0234        -3.6961
                                                 (-0.16)                     (-0.66)      (-0.61)       (-0.54)
Emp.Growtha
          t+2                                    4.4818                      2.0416       0.7733         3.5596
                                                  (1.20)                      (0.46)      (0.14)         (0.58)
W ageGrowtha
           t−2                                                  2.8022       3.4528       7.3323        -1.5611
                                                                (0.89)        (1.03)      (1.59)        (-0.27)
W ageGrowtha
           t−1                                                 -1.7508       -1.4814     -2.4471         0.9820
                                                                (-0.61)      (-0.47)      (-0.56)        (0.21)
W ageGrowtha
           t                                                   -0.4838       2.1233       3.3683         1.6789
                                                                (-0.18)       (0.64)      (0.85)         (0.28)
W ageGrowtha
           t+1                                                 4.0720*       4.4020*    6.2977**         2.1046
                                                                (1.78)        (1.67)      (2.15)         (0.45)
W ageGrowtha
           t+2                                                  1.1097       1.3835       2.3158         1.2159
                                                                (0.51)        (0.55)      (0.65)         (0.27)
Constant              -7.3242***   -7.3133***   -7.3835***   -7.3447***   -7.3385***   -8.2919***    -6.0507***
                        (-17.77)     (-17.58)     (-17.19)     (-16.88)     (-16.66)     (-14.24)       (-9.36)

Market Fraud Rates       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Observations            90,208       86,962       86,962       86,962       86,962       44,876        42,068
Pseudo R2               0.0409       0.0410       0.0411       0.0406       0.0438       0.0628        0.0269



                                                   42
                  Table 6: The Revelation of Corporate Misconduct
This table contains parameter estimates from panel logit regression predicting the revelation of fraud. The
dependent variable in the ﬁrst column is F raudExposedi,a
                                                      j,t , is a dummy variable denoting the exposure of
ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j, operating in industry i, in area a, during year t. This includes ﬁnancial
misconduct initiated in any year up to year t. The dependent variable in the second and third columns
                 j,t |F raudInitj,t−1 and F raudExposedj,t |F raudInitj,t−2 , respectively. They are dummy
are F raudExposedi,a            i,a                    i,a            i,a

variables denoting the exposure during year t of ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j but only if the misconduct is
initiated in year t − 1 or t − 2, respectively. The main dependent variables of interest are F raudExposed−i,a
                                                                                                          p,t ,
F raudExposedi,−a                   i,a
             p,t , and F raudExposedp,−j,t . They are the fraud exposure rates of ﬁrms located in the same
area but operating in a diﬀerent industry, operating in the same industry but located in a diﬀerent area, and
other ﬁrms operating in the same industry and located in the same area, respectively. The ﬁrst variable is
broken down into F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a                   −i,a           −i,a
                              p,t |F raudInitp,t−1 and F raudExposedp,t |F raudInitp,t−2 in models (2)
and (3) to capture the exposure rates of misconduct initiated in years t − 1 and t − 2, respectively. The
set of control variables also include the market fraud exposure rate excluding ﬁrms in the same area and/or
industry. The t-stats reported in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the industry-year level. The
signiﬁcance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.


                                                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)
                     Dependent Variable:    F raudExposedi,a
                                                         j,t     F raudExposedi,aj,t   F raudExposedi,aj,t
                                                                  |F raudIniti,a
                                                                             j,t−1      |F raudIniti,a
                                                                                                   j,t−2


      F raudExposed−i,a
                   p,t                          21.7316***
                                                  (2.61)
      F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                   p,t |F raudInitp,t−1                                38.2183              37.8208
                                                                        (1.57)               (1.53)
      F raudExposed−i,a           −i,a
                   p,t |F raudInitp,t−2                                 6.5062            68.1700***
                                                                        (0.18)               (6.69)
      F raudExposedi,−a
                   p,t                          27.5809***           33.4214***           26.1272***
                                                   (4.99)               (7.52)               (4.76)
      F raudExposedi,a
                   p,−j,t                          1.0992               1.6409              -1.3370
                                                   (0.81)               (0.63)               (-0.31)
      Lagged stock return                          0.0432              -0.0222               0.0708
                                                   (0.91)               (-0.30)              (1.18)
      Lagged asset                               0.2268***           0.1742***               0.0482
                                                   (6.54)               (3.27)               (0.76)
      Lagged leverage                            1.0539***           1.2494***            1.8238***
                                                   (5.18)               (2.91)               (3.62)
      Lagged Q                                   0.2918***           0.4970***            0.2472***
                                                   (5.58)               (6.00)               (2.99)
      Lagged cash ﬂow                             -0.7573*             -1.1257               0.7109
                                                   (-1.85)              (-1.46)              (0.70)
      Constant                                  -8.2731***           -9.6090***           -8.9433***
                                                  (-35.30)             (-22.67)             (-20.97)

      Market Fraud Exposure Rates                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes
      Observations                                90,208               90,208                90,208
      Pseudo R2                                   0.0585               0.0553                0.0459




                                                      43
                      Table 7: Instrumenting for Local Corruption
This table contains parameter estimates from linear probability model regressions predicting our fraud mea-
sure. The dependent variable in all regressions is F raudi,a
                                                         j,t , a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct
by ﬁrm j, operating in industry i, in area a, during year t. The main dependent variable of interest is
F raudDom,a
      p,t   , which is the fraud propensities of ﬁrms in the dominant industry in area a, instrumented us-
ing F raudDom,−a
          p,t    , the dominant industry’s fraud rate calculated using only ﬁrms headquartered outside the
relevant area (−a). Models (3) and (4) employ the lagged value of the instrument variable rather than the
contemporaneous value. The t-stats reported in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the industry-year
level. The signiﬁcance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

                                                (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)
                         2SLS Stage:         1st stage       2nd stage      1st stage    2nd stage
                  Dependent Variable:      F raudDom,a
                                                  p,t        F raudi,a
                                                                    j,t   F raudDom,a
                                                                                 p,t     F raudi,a
                                                                                                j,t


            Instrumented F raudDom,a
                               p,t                           1.94***                       0.53**
                                                              (3.43)                       (1.98)
            F raudDom,−a
                  p,t                        0.46***
                                              (7.78)
            F raudDom,−a
                  p,t−1                                                      0.53***
                                                                              (8.87)
            Lag 1 returni,a
                        p,−j,t                  -0.00            0.01          -0.00         0.00
                                              (-0.14)          (0.72)        (-0.52)       (0.19)
            Lag 1 returnj,t                      0.00           0.00*          0.00         0.00*
                                               (1.64)          (1.80)         (1.45)       (1.66)
            Lagged asset                      0.00***          0.01**        0.00***         0.00
                                              (10.34)          (2.22)        (10.28)       (0.91)
            Lagged leverage                     -0.00         -0.01**          0.00        -0.01*
                                              (-0.08)         (-2.12)         (0.16)       (-1.66)
            Lagged Q                          0.00**           0.00**         0.00*          0.00
                                               (2.24)          (2.13)         (1.78)       (1.42)
            Lagged cash ﬂow                  -0.02***           -0.01       -0.02***        -0.01
                                              (-6.26)         (-1.24)        (-5.76)       (-0.89)

            Year Fixed Eﬀects                  Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes
            Firm Fixed Eﬀects                  Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes
            Observations                      9,775            9,775         9,722         9,722
            R2                                0.111            0.322         0.125         0.397




                                                        44
           Table 8: Peer Eﬀects of Similar Local Firms and/or Managers
This table contains parameter estimates from panel logit regression predicting our fraud measure. The de-
pendent variable in all regressions is F raudi,a
                                             j,t , a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j,
operating in industry i, in area a, during year t. The main dependent variables of interest in Panel A are the
fraud rates of subsample of ﬁrms located in the same area but operating in a diﬀerent industry: F raud−i,a
                                                                                                      large,t ,
F raud−i,a            −i,a
      small,t , F raudsame      size,t ,   and F raud−i,a
                                                     dif f.   size,t .   These are local large ﬁrms (above the annual median
asset size), local small ﬁrms (below the annual median asset size), local ﬁrms in the same size group as ﬁrm j,
and local ﬁrms in the opposite size group, respectively. The set of control variables also includes fraud rates of
ﬁrms operating in the same industry but located in a diﬀerent area, other ﬁrms operating in the same industry
and located in the same area, and the market fraud rate excluding ﬁrms in the same area and/or industry.
The ﬁrst two columns are restricted to large ﬁrms and small ﬁrms as deﬁned above, respectively. The last two
columns include all ﬁrms, with the column (4) also includes lagged/contemporaneous/lead city-level growth
rates. In Panel B, the main dependent variables of interest are the fraud rates of subsample of ﬁrms located
in the same area but operating in a diﬀerent industry: F raud−i,a
                                                             young                   CEO,t ,   F raud−i,a              −i,a
                                                                                                     old CEO,t , F raudsame   age,t ,
and   F raud−i,a
            dif f. age,t .   These are local ﬁrms with CEO younger than 55 years old, with CEO older than 55,
with CEO in the same age group as ﬁrm j’s CEO, and whose CEO is in the opposite age group, respectively.
The sample in Panel B is restricted to ﬁrms in Execucomp. The t-stats reported in parentheses are adjusted
for clustering at the industry-year level. The signiﬁcance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ***, **, and *
indicate statistical signiﬁcance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                     45
Table 8: Peer Eﬀects of Similar Local Firms and/or Managers
                         (Continued)

                              Panel A: Size-Matching
                                (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)
             Subsample:     Large Firms Small Firms        All Firms    All Firms
      Dependent Variable:      Fraud         Fraud          Fraud        Fraud

  F raud−i,a
        large,t              3.9326***          0.1819
                               (3.65)           (0.06)
  F raud−i,a
        small,t                0.6743         13.2194***
                               (0.30)           (6.40)
  F raud−i,a
        same     size,t                                     7.1821***    6.6658***
                                                              (7.07)       (5.49)
  F raud−i,a
        dif f.   size,t                                      -2.1865     -3.5713**
                                                              (-1.40)      (-2.09)
  F raudi,−a
        p,t                 30.6662***           5.8859    21.3121***   17.5833***
                               (5.59)            (0.81)       (4.68)       (4.15)
  F raudi,a
        p,−j,t              10.7599***        20.3592***   13.2251***   12.5792***
                               (3.16)            (4.01)       (4.28)       (5.65)
  Lagged stock return          0.0221          0.0788***   0.0677***     0.0691***
                               (0.51)            (4.29)       (4.10)       (3.33)
  Lagged asset               0.2815***           0.0484     0.2328***    0.2339***
                               (9.78)            (1.05)      (11.76)      (13.92)
  Lagged leverage             -0.0766         -0.5016***     -0.1458      -0.1225
                               (-0.64)           (-2.69)      (-1.43)      (-1.19)
  Lagged Q                   0.2524***        0.1646***    0.2119***     0.2078***
                               (6.73)            (4.57)       (8.24)       (8.59)
  Lagged cash ﬂow             -0.3190           0.5804*       0.1610       0.1798
                               (-1.00)           (1.65)       (0.65)       (0.82)
  Constant                  -6.9425***        -5.6268***   -6.4939***   -6.5057***
                              (-33.09)          (-32.75)     (-47.91)     (-51.83)

  Market Fraud Rates           Yes               Yes          Yes          Yes
  City-level Growth Rates       No                No           No          Yes
  Observations                46,597            43,611       90,208       86,962
  Pseudo R2                   0.0640            0.0268       0.0601       0.0607




                                         46
Table 8: Peer Eﬀects of Similar Local Firms and/or Managers
                         (Continued)

                           Panel B: CEO Age-Matching
                                (1)         (2)         (3)                 (4)
              Subsample: Young CEO       Old CEO     All Firms           All Firms
       Dependent Variable:    Fraud        Fraud      Fraud               Fraud

   F raud−i,a
         young     CEO,t      2.5486**           1.6900
                               (2.20)            (1.21)
   F raud−i,a
         old CEO,t             1.4176            1.2996
                               (1.12)            (0.87)
   F raud−i,a
         same     age,t                                       2.1107**     1.9145*
                                                               (2.22)       (1.92)
   F raud−i,a
         dif f.   age,t                                        1.3469       1.2474
                                                               (1.30)       (1.18)
   F raudi,−a
         p,t                 29.3283***        34.1916***   32.1589***   28.2395***
                                (3.66)            (4.15)       (4.81)       (3.27)
   F raudi,a
         p,−j,t              17.5348***         11.4095**   13.5796***   13.2689***
                                (3.62)            (2.31)       (3.11)       (3.15)
   Lagged stock return          0.0634            0.1415       0.0910       0.0570
                                (1.07)            (1.27)       (1.43)       (0.80)
   Lagged asset              0.3005***         0.3771***     0.3311***   0.3358***
                                (3.81)            (5.48)       (6.60)       (6.64)
   Lagged leverage              0.3148            0.0118       0.1672       0.2136
                                (1.10)            (0.04)       (0.83)       (1.02)
   Lagged Q                    0.0979*          0.2088***    0.1484***    0.1380***
                                (1.76)            (3.40)       (3.42)       (3.11)
   Lagged cash ﬂow             -0.0234         -2.3608***    -1.0437**    -1.0871**
                                (-0.04)           (-3.83)      (-2.30)      (-2.28)
   Constant                  -7.0389***        -7.6079***   -7.2684***   -7.4207***
                               (-10.67)          (-13.82)     (-16.42)     (-16.27)

   Market Fraud Rates            Yes               Yes         Yes          Yes
   City-level Growth Rates       No                No           No          Yes
   Observations                 6,138             7,428       13,566       12,550
   Pseudo R2                   0.0653            0.0626       0.0616       0.0613




                                          47
     Table 9: The Relation Between Political and Corporate Corruption
This table contains estimates from regressing corporate fraud on political fraud. Panel A contains parameter
estimates from panel logit regression predicting ﬁrm-level fraud measure. The dependent variable in all
regressions is F raudi,a
                     j,t , is a dummy variable denoting ﬁnancial misconduct by ﬁrm j, operating in industry
i, in area a, during year t. The main dependent variables of interest are derived from P olCorta , which is the
count of prosecutions of elected and appointed public oﬃcials at all levels of government and/or of election
                                                                                                 a
crimes (per million of population) in area a during year t. In Model (1) we employ P olCor , the time-series
                                                            a                   a
mean of P olCorta . In Models (2)-(5), we use High P olCor and Low P olCor , indicator variables for cities in
                                         a
the top and bottom quintiles of P olCor , respectively. In Model (5) we use LargeF irm and M ediumF irm,
indicator variables for ﬁrms in the top quintile and middle three quintiles of total asset, respectively. The t-
stats reported in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the industry-year level. Panel B contains parameter
estimates from panel regression predicting city-level fraud rate. The dependent variable in all regressions is
F raudat , the city-level average of F raudi,a
                                           j,t for all ﬁrms operating in any industry in area a during year t. The
main dependent variables of interest are P olCorta , which is the count of prosecutions of elected and appointed
public oﬃcials at all levels of government and/or of election crimes (per million of population) in area a during
                                     a
year t, and its lagged value, P olCort−1 . The control variables in Model (7) include lagged employment and
population growth rates in the city. The t-stats reported in parentheses are adjusted for clustering at the year
level. The signiﬁcance levels are abbreviated with asterisks: ***, **, and * indicate statistical signiﬁcance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.


                                         Panel A: Firm-Level Analysis
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)              (4)              (5)
    Dependent Variable:                    Fraud       Fraud         Fraud            Fraud            Fraud
              a
    P olCor                                0.0395**
                                            (2.55)
                   a
    High P olCor                                        0.1768***                     0.1119*           -0.1718
                                                          (2.98)                       (1.77)           (-1.08)
                  a
    Low P olCor                                                      -0.3201***     -0.2670***       -0.2693***
                                                                       (-3.61)        (-2.83)           (-2.85)
                   a
    High P olCor * LargeF irm                                                                          0.3785**
                                                                                                         (2.01)
                   a
    High P olCor * M ediumF irm                                                                          0.2598
                                                                                                         (1.61)
    Lagged stock return                   0.0853***    0.0860***     0.0843***      0.0851***         0.2830***
                                            (4.97)        (5.02)        (4.80)         (4.84)           (11.84)
    Lagged asset                          0.2984***    0.2980***     0.3014***      0.3003***         0.0842***
                                           (14.25)       (14.27)       (14.40)        (14.33)            (4.78)
    Lagged leverage                        -0.1135       -0.1148       -0.1248        -0.1258           -0.1249
                                            (-0.97)       (-0.98)       (-1.07)        (-1.07)          (-1.07)
    Lagged Q                              0.2658***    0.2645***     0.2758***      0.2758***         0.2788***
                                            (8.70)        (8.63)        (9.13)         (9.12)            (9.20)
    Lagged cash ﬂow                        -0.2192       -0.2174       -0.2522        -0.2422           -0.2719
                                            (-0.81)       (-0.80)       (-0.93)        (-0.89)          (-1.02)
    Constant                             -6.3337***    -6.2707***    -6.1841***     -6.2314***       -6.1326***
                                           (-45.41)      (-46.75)      (-45.10)       (-45.15)         (-41.66)

    Observations                             90,274      90,274        90,274         90,274          90,274
    Pseudo R2                                0.0371      0.0374        0.0378         0.0381          0.0384




                                                       48
Table 9: The Relation Between Political and Corporate Corruption
(Continued)

                                   Panel B: City-Level Analysis
                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
 Dependent Variable:   F raudat    F raudat   F raudat   F raudat   F raudat   F raudat   F raudat

 P olCorta             0.0547***                0.0151    0.0425*               0.0160      0.0186
                         (2.80)                 (0.67)     (1.74)               (0.68)      (0.84)
        a
 P olCort−1                        0.0713***   0.0615**             0.0674**   0.0605**   0.0610**
                                     (3.45)     (2.39)               (2.55)     (2.22)      (2.29)
 EmpGrowthat−1                                                                            -10.1760*
                                                                                            (-1.81)
 P opGrowthat−1                                                                            20.2409
                                                                                            (1.36)

 City Fixed Eﬀects                                          Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
 Observations             613         613        613        613       613        613         613
 R2                      0.013       0.022      0.023      0.090     0.097      0.098       0.119




                                                49
                  Table 10: Stock Returns around Fraud Revelation
This table contains the stock returns around revelations of ﬁnancial misconduct. We examine the abnormal
stock returns of the ﬁrm investigated by the SEC and/or DOJ for ﬁnancial misconduct (Panel A) and other
ﬁrms in the same area but operating in a diﬀerent industry (Panels B and C). Panel B examines the market-
adjusted stock returns of all surrounding ﬁrms, i.e., those located proximate to a ﬁrm targeted for SEC/DOJ
action, but not targeted themselves. In Panel C, we characterize the market-adjusted return patterns of a
much smaller set of local ﬁrms: those that are subsequently targeted for ﬁnancial misconduct themselves.
Panel C1 adjust the returns by market returns, while Panel C2 adjusts the returns by a control group of
non-area ﬁrms that are subsequently targeted for ﬁnancial misconduct. For the last three panels, we ﬁrst
aggregate within each event, and then report the summary statistics of the event mean across events. The
t-statistics are reported in parentheses.

                                                                   Mean

                Panel A: Event ﬁrms (N=426 events)
                  CAR(0:1) of revelation                          -18.10%    (-18.10)

                Panel B: Non-event ﬁrms in the same area but diﬀerent industry
                  Number of ﬁrms / event                     259
                  Fraction of CAR(0:1)>0 / event          46.51%
                  Mean CAR(0:1) / event                    -0.04%  (-1.15)

                Panel C1: Non-event ﬁrms in the same area but diﬀerent industry;
                              caught in the next year (N=270 events)
                  Number of ﬁrms / event                      2.06
                  Fraction of CAR(0:1)>0 / event            41.37%
                  Mean CAR(0:1) / event                      -0.89%  (-2.55)

                Panel C2: Adjusting for control group of non-area ﬁrms
                              caught in the next year
                  Fraction of CAR(0:1)>0 / event            44.65%
                  Mean CAR(0:1) / event                     -0.84%   (-2.32)




                                                    50
