                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             EQUILIBRIUM CORPORATE FINANCE AND INTERMEDIATION

                                            Alberto Bisin
                                            Piero Gottardi
                                             Guido Ruta

                                        Working Paper 20345
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20345


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




Thanks to Viral Acharya, Michele Boldrin, Marcus Brunnermeier, Douglas Gale, John Geanakoplos,
Arvind Krishnamurty, David Levine, Larry Samuelson, Luigi Guiso, Enrico Perotti, Tom Sargent,
Martin Schneider, Dimitri Vayanos, Bill Zame and many seminar audiences for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Alberto Bisin, Piero Gottardi, and Guido Ruta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Equilibrium Corporate Finance and Intermediation
Alberto Bisin, Piero Gottardi, and Guido Ruta
NBER Working Paper No. 20345
July 2014
JEL No. G10,G32,G33

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes a class of competitive economies with production, incomplete financial markets,
and agency frictions. Firms take their production, financing, and contractual decisions so as to maximize
their value under rational conjectures. We show that competitive equilibria exist and that shareholders
always unanimously support firms' choices. In addition, equilibrium allocations have well-defined
welfare properties: they are constrained efficient when information is symmetric, or when agency
frictions satisfy certain specific conditions.

Furthermore, equilibria may display specialization on the part of identical firms and, when equilibria
are constrained inefficient, may exhibit excessive aggregate risk. Financial decisions of the corporate
sector are determined at equilibrium and depend not only on the nature of financial frictions but also
on the consumers' demand for risk. Financial intermediation and short sales are naturally accounted
for at equilibrium.


Alberto Bisin                                       Guido Ruta
Department of Economics                             S. Giovanni Laterano
New York University                                 Roma (Italy)
19 West 4th Street, 5th Floor                       guido.ruta@gmail.com
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
alberto.bisin@nyu.edu

Piero Gottardi
European University Institute
gottardi@unive.it
1         Introduction
The notion of competitive equilibrium in incomplete market economies with production is
considered problematic in economics. This is because, when financial markets are incom-
plete and equity is traded in asset markets, firms’ production decisions may affect the set of
insurance possibilities available to consumers, the asset span of the economy.1 As a conse-
quence, macro models with production and incomplete markets typically assume that firms’
equity is not traded, or that firms operate with a backyard technology and are managed by
households.2
        Similarly, while agency frictions are at the core of corporate finance, they have been hardly
studied in the context of equilibrium models. This is also arguably due to the conceptual
difficulties involved in the definition of competitive equilibria with asymmetric information.3
        In this paper we study a class of economies with production, incomplete financial mar-
kets, and agency frictions (for instance between the firm’s manager and its shareholders, or
between shareholders and bondholders). To highlight the foundational aspect of our analy-
sis, we restrict attention to simple two period economies along the lines of classical general
equilibrium theory4 embedding the key features of macroeconomic models with production.
At a competitive equilibrium - we postulate - price-taking firms take their production, financ-
ing, and contractual decisions so as to maximize their value defined on the basis of rational
conjectures, as in Makowski (1983a,b). These conjectures guide firms’ decisions when the
value of production plans lies outside the asset span of the economy and the rationality
condition can be interpreted as a consistency condition on firms’ out-of-equilibrium beliefs.
The analysis is first carried out in a set-up where short sales of assets are not allowed5 , but
    1
        It is only in rather special environments, as pointed out by Diamond (1967), that the spanning condition
holds and such issue does not arise; see also the more recent contribution by Carceles-Poveda and Coen-Pirani
(2009).
   2
     This is the case, for instance, in Bewley economies, the workhorse of macroeconomic model with incom-
plete markets; see e.g., Ljungqvist and Sargent (2004) and Heathcoate, Storesletten, and Violante (2010) for
recent surveys.
   3
     See, e.g., Bolton and Dewatripont (2005) and Tirole (2006). A few notable exceptions include Dow,
Gorton, and Krishnamurthy (2005), Acharya and Bisin (2009), and Parlour and Walde (2011).
  4
    In a complementary paper, Bisin and Gottardi (2012), we consider Bewley economies, that is, infinite
horizon economies with incomplete markets but no agency frictions.
   5
     This condition ensures the perfectly competitive nature of forms’ decisions even when markets are in-
complete.



                                                         2
it is then extended to incorporate financial intermediation and short sales.
       We show that competitive equilibria, according to this definition, exist and have theo-
retically appealing properties. First of all, in the absence of agency frictions, or when such
frictions satisfy appropriate conditions (satisfied, for instance, when the frictions concern
the firm’s manager and its shareholders) equilibrium allocations are constrained efficient.
Equilibria may otherwise fail to be constrained efficient, with the source of the inefficiency
lying in an externality generated by the agency friction, and we show that when this hap-
pens equilibria may display excessive aggregate risk. In addition, shareholders unanimously
support value maximization and hence firms’ choices, even when allocations are not efficient
at equilibrium. We also identify conditions under which ex-ante identical firms might choose
to specialize in equilibrium, that is to adopt different production, financial, and contractual
decisions so as to optimally accommodate the demand of different consumers. Finally, in the
class of economies considered the Modigliani-Miller result does not hold in general and the
financial decisions of the corporate sector are determinate at equilibrium and depend not
only on the nature of the financial frictions but also on the consumers’ demand for risk.
       We take these findings to imply that the analysis of production economies with incomplete
markets and agency frictions rests on solid theoretical foundations in general equilibrium,
thereby providing some foundations to the integrated study of macroeconomics and corporate
finance.


1.1        Related literature
Starting with the contributions of Dreze (1974), Grossman and Hart (1979) and Duffie and
Shafer (1986), a large literature has dealt with the question of what is the appropriate objec-
tive function of the firm in economies with incomplete markets (under symmetric information,
that is, with no agency frictions). Different objective functions have been proposed and re-
sults generally display unappealing theoretical properties, in particular the lack of unanimity
of shareholders on the firms’ decisions. This literature however seems to have somewhat over-
looked an important contributions by Louis Makowski (1983a).6 Indeed, Makowski showed
   6
       For instance, Makowski is not cited in Dreze (1985) nor in the main later contributions to this literature,
like DeMarzo (1993), Kelsey and Milne (1996), Dierker, Dierker and Grodal (2002), Bonnisseau and Lachiri
(2004), Dreze, Lachiri and Minelli (2007), Carceles-Poveda and Coen-Pirani (2009). When it is cited, as in
Duffie and Shafer (1986), it is to a large extent disregarded. Makowski is not even cited in the main surveys
of the GEI literature, as Geanakoplos (1990) and Magill and Shafer (1991).


                                                         3
that if firms operate on the basis of rational conjectures, under the condition that agents can-
not short-sell equity and under symmetric information, value maximization is unanimously
supported by shareholders as the firm’s objective.7
       In this paper we re-formulate and extend Makowski’s notion of rational conjectures to
economies with various forms of agency frictions under asymmetric information and we
provide a systematic study of the properties of competitive equilibria for this general class of
economies.Furthermore, we extend the analysis to financial intermediation under frictions,
permitting short-sales on equity and general financial intermediation.
       With regards to agency frictions and asymmetric information, most of the competitive
equilibrium concepts which have been proposed build on the concept proposed by Prescott
and Townsend (1984) for exchange economies, therefore exhibiting no traded equity.8 While
Prescott and Townsend’s approach, rooted in mechanism design, is quite different from ours,
which instead relies on the extension of rational conjectures to economies with asymmetric
information, we show that our equilibrium concept is indeed equivalent to the one of Prescott
and Townsend once this is extended to economies with incomplete markets where firms rather
than consumers face agency frictions.9 Nonetheless, interesting and important conceptual
differences emerge when the analysis is extended from exchange to production economies,
since we show there are natural environments where informational asymmetries in firms’
decisions give rise to externalities while in consumers’ problems they do not.

       The class of economies considered is described in Section 2, where the equilibrium notion
is also presented. Existence, the welfare properties of equilibria and unanimity are then
established in Section 3, while additional properties of equilibria are derived in Section 4.
Section 5 studies the determinants of firms’ financial decisions. Section 6 extends the analysis
to allow for financial intermediation and short sales. Section 7 concludes. Proofs are collected
in the Appendix.
   7
       Under the same conditions, Makowski (1983b) shows that competitive equilibria are constrained Pareto
optimal.
   8
     See, e.g., Magill and Quinzii (2002), Prescott and Townsend (2006), and Zame (2007).
   9
     We do not discuss economies with adverse selection in this paper. We conjecture that the equilibrium
concepts studied by Bisin and Gottardi (2006) have an equivalent reformulation in terms of equilibria with
rational conjectures in economies with production along similar lines to those considered in the present paper.




                                                      4
2        Production economies with incomplete markets and
         agency frictions
In this section we introduce an abstract economy with production, incomplete financial mar-
kets and agency frictions. Various applications, examples, and extensions will be considered
in later sections.
       The economy lasts two periods, t = 0, 1, and at each date a single commodity is available.
Uncertainty is described by a random variable s on the finite support S = {1, ..., S}, which
realizes at t = 1.10 We assume the economy is populated by i) a continuum of consumers, of
I different types, each of them of unit mass; and ii) a continuum of firms, of unit mass, for
simplicity all identical. The economy is perfectly competitive and both firms and consumers
take then prices as given.
       Each consumer i = 1, .., I has an endowment of w0i units of the single commodity at date
0 and w1i (s) units at date 1, thus the agent’s endowment is also subject to the shock affecting
the economy at t = 1. He is also endowed with θ0i ≥ 0 units of equity of the representa-
tive firm. Consumer i has preferences over consumption in the two dates, represented by
Eui (ci0 , ci1 (s)), where ui (·) is also continuously differentiable, increasing and concave.
       Firms in the economy produce at date 1 using as physical input the single commodity
invested as capital at time 0. Each firm’s output depends on the investment k but is also
in principle affected by agency frictions. At an abstract level, we model these frictions by
assuming that the firm’s output also depends on two other choices: φ, not observable to
outside investors, and m, which is instead observable. For instance, φ could represent a
technological or administrative choice and m could represent a - possibly costly - action
undertaken to limit the effects of agency frictions.11 The cost of this action might be born
both at time 0 and at time 1. Let f (k, φ, m; s) denote the time 1 output, net of costs, for
k ∈ K, φ ∈ Φ, m ∈ M . We assume that Φ, K, M are closed, compact subsets of non-negative
Euclidean spaces, with K ⊆ R+ , convex and 0 ∈ K. Also, unless stated otherwise, Φ is a
finite set.12 Moreover, f (k, φ, m; s) is continuous in k, φ, m and continuously differentiable,
  10
       Any function of s, say g(s) is then a random variable and we denote its mean by E[g(s)]. Abusing
notation we shall let s also denote the realization of the random variable when clear from the context.
  11
     Some examples are presented in Section 2.2 to illustrate possible interpretations of these variables and
applications to standard frictions considered in corporate finance concerning managers, shareholders, and
outside investors.
  12
     The condition that the set of admissible values of k is bounded above is restrictive but by no means


                                                     5
increasing and concave in k, with f (k, φ, m; s) ≥ 0 for all k and some φ, m. The cost of the
firm’s actions at date t = 1 is captured by the effect of m on the firm’s net output f (.), while
the cost paid at time 0 is denoted by W (k, φ, m, B) and we allow them to depend also on
the firms’ financial decisions, described below.
    Each firm takes both production and financial decisions. The outstanding amount of
equity is normalized to 1: the initial distribution of equity among consumers satisfies then
P i
  i θ0 = 1. We assume this amount of equity is kept constant and a firm can issue (non
contingent) bonds. Hence the capital structure of a firm is only determined by its decision
concerning the amount B of bonds issued. The total payment due to bondholders at t = 1
equals B, but the actual payment may be smaller if the resources available for such payment
- at most equal to the firm’s net output f (k, φ, m; s) - are insufficient, in which case the firm
defaults and these resources are divided pro-rata among all bondholders. As a consequence
the unit return on bonds depends on the firm’s production and financing choices, k, φ, m, B,
as well as the date 1 shock, and is so denoted by Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) . The rest of the firm’s
net output is then entirely distributed to shareholders, so that the unit return on equity
Re (k, φ, m, B; s) satisfies:

                       f (k, φ, m; s) = Re (k, φ, m, B; s) + Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) B                          (1)

It is natural to assume that Re (k, φ, m, B; s) and Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) are non negative, contin-
uous and that the set of admissible debt levels B is also a closed and compact subset of R+
with 0 ∈ B.
    The firms’ equity and debt are the only assets in the economy. If all firms make the
same production and financial decisions there are then effectively two assets each consumer
can trade and we write below his choice problem for that case. At t = 0 each consumer i
chooses his consumption plan ci (s) = (ci0 , ci1 (s)), his portfolio of equity and bonds, θi and bi
respectively, so as to maximize his utility, taking as given bond and equity prices p, q, their
returns Rb (s), Re (s), as well as the firms’ initial market value, V . We assume that agents
cannot short-sell the firm’s equity nor its debt.13 The problem of agent i is then:

                                             max Eui (ci0 , ci1 (s))                                       (2)
                                           θi ,bi ,ci (s)

essential and is only introduced for simplicity. The concavity assumption can also be relaxed with no essential
loss of generality.
  13
     This is in line with Makowski (1983a, 1983b). In Section 6 we show how to introduce the possibility of
short sales and financial intermediation more generally in our analysis.

                                                            6
subject to

                        ci0 = w0i + V θ0i − q θi − p bi                                                (3)
                        ci1 (s) = w1i (s) + Re (s)θi + Rb (s)bi                                        (4)
                        bi ≥ 0, θi ≥ 0                                                                 (5)


2.1        Equilibrium in a special case: no agency frictions
It is useful to introduce the competitive equilibrium notion we propose by considering first
the special case where there are no agency frictions, that is, all the firm’s decisions, including
φ, are commonly observed by market participants. In this case the resources available to
pay bondholders are always equal to all the firm’s output f (k, φ, m; s), so that we have:

                           Re (k, φ, m, B; s) = max {f (k, φ, m; s) − B, 0}                            (6)
                                                       f (k, φ, m; s)
                           Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) = min{1,                },                               (7)
                                                             B
       In evaluating alternative production and financing plans k, φ, m, B, firms operate on the
basis of price conjectures q(k, φ, m, B) and p(k, φ, m, B), which specify the market valuation
of the future yields of equity and debt for any possible choice of the firm that is observable
by traders in the market.14 Formally, the firm’s optimization problem consists in the choice
of k, φ, m, B that maximizes its initial market value, at time t = 0:

                      max V (k, φ, m, B) = −k + q(k, φ, m, B) + p(k, φ, m, B)B                         (8)
                     k,φ,m,B

       At equilibrium we shall require conjectures to be rational, that is:

                     q(k, φ, m, B) = max E M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ, m, B; s) ,
                                                                           
            M)
                                      i
                     p(k, φ, m, B) = max E M RS i (ci (s))Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) , ∀k, φ, m, B;
                                                                           
                                          i

where M RS i (ci (s)) denotes the marginal rate of substitution between consumption at date
0 and at date 1 for consumer i, evaluated at his equilibrium consumption level ci (s).15
  14
       These conjectures are also referred to as price perceptions; see Grossman and Hart (1979), Kihlstrom
and Matthews (1990) and Magill and Quinzii (1998).
  15
     The marginal rates of substitution M RS i are taken as given, independent of the firm’s decision. To
simplify the notation we avoid to make explicit the dependence of equity and bond price conjectures on
agents’ consumption levels ci (s), i = 1, ..I.


                                                      7
       Condition M ) is the Makowski criterion for rational conjectures (after Makowski (1983a),
(1983b)). It requires that for any k, φ, m, B the value of the equity and bond price con-
jectures q(k, φ, m, B) and p(k, φ, m, B) equals the highest marginal valuation - across all
consumers in the economy - of the return on equity and bonds associated to k, φ, m, B. Con-
sider for instance equity: the consumers with the highest marginal valuation for its yield
Re (k, φ, m, B; s) when the firm chooses k, φ, m, B are in fact those willing to pay the most
for the firm’s equity in that case and the only ones willing to buy equity - at the margin - at
the price given by M ). When financial markets are complete marginal rates of substitutions
are equalized across all consumers at equilibrium and hence property M ) holds whatever is
the type i whose M RS i (ci (s)) is considered.16 More generally, with incomplete markets it
is easy to verify from the first order conditions of the consumers’ choice problem (2) that
property M ) is satisfied by the prices q, p and returns Re (s), Rb (s) faced by consumers. The
rationality of conjectures requires that the same is true for any possible choice of the firm
k, φ, m, B: the value attributed to equity equals the maximum any consumer is willing to
pay for it, similarly for bonds.
       Furthermore, we impose the following consistency condition between the values of prices
and returns appearing in the consumers’ choice problem and those conjectured by firms:

                  C)      q = q(k, φ, m, B), p = p(k, φ, m, B), V = V (k, φ, m, B),
                          Re (s) = Re (k, φ, m, B; s), Rb (s) = Rb (k, φ, m, B; s)
                           for k, φ, m, B indicating the firms’ equilibrium choice.

       This condition requires that the prices of equity and bonds conjectured by firms in cor-
respondence of the choice they make in equilibrium coincide with the prices at which these
assets trade in the market. The same must then also be true for the returns on these assets
and the firms’ market value V.
       Therefore at a competitive equilibrium k, φ, m, B solves the firms’ problem (8), with
conjectures satisfying the rationality criterion M ); θi , bi , ci (s) solves the consumer’s problem
(2), subject to (3)-(5), for each i; prices, returns and conjectures satisfy the consistency
condition C), and markets clear:
                                                         bi ≤ B
                                                 P
                                                    i
                                                                                                        (9)
                                                         θi ≤ 1
                                                 P
                                                     i

  16
       As the property is readily implied by no-arbitrage in the case of complete markets, it is not usually
explicitly imposed at equilibrium.

                                                          8
2.2        Agency frictions
In the general case the choice of φ by the firm is not observable by outside investors and
hence the firm faces some agency frictions. More specifically, outside investors can decide
their portfolio on the basis of the firm’s choice of k, B, m, which are observable, but will
only have expectations, which in equilibrium will be assumed to be rational, about the level
of φ that is chosen for any given k, B, m. Hence while k, m, B are freely chosen by the
firm so as to maximize its market value (and we will show this is in the interest of all the
firm’s shareholders), the same is generally no longer the case for φ, whose choice is subject
to implementability constraints. Such constraints reflect the fact that the choice of φ is the
solution of an independent problem, which depends on the specific agency frictions present in
the economy: for instance, the choice of φ might be delegated to a manager, or shareholders
might choose φ to maximize the value of equity. Here we adopt an abstract specification,
whereby the firm’s choice of φ ∈ Φ is subject to an abstract constraint described by the
following map:
                                            φ ∈ φ(k, m, B; c(s)),                                        (10)
                          I
where c(s) = {ci (s)}i=1 . Thus the level of φ depends on the other decisions of the firm k, m, B
and, possibly, also on other variables external to the firm, as the consumption allocation
c(s).17
       In the analysis of competitive equilibria the map φ(.) is taken as exogenously given. All
agents in the economy (outside investors as bondholders as well as shareholders) expect then
the choice of φ to satisfy (10). The specific form of the map φ(.) depends on the nature of
the agency frictions faced by firms and hence of the choice problem determining φ. In the
next section we shall present some leading examples of agency frictions on which we shall
build on in the rest of the paper, distinguishing between environments in which shareholders
choose φ directly from others where such choice is instead delegated to a manager. In these
cases we shall derive explicitly the form of the map φ(.).

2.2.1       Shareholders vs. bondholders

Suppose the firm’s shareholders choose directly φ to maximize their benefit from holding
equity (more precisely, the consumers’ marginal valuation of the payoff of equity). In this
  17
       This is without loss of generality in our environment: other variables, as equilibrium prices, could be
added with no change in the results.


                                                       9
case we have:
                                       n                                   o
                                                  i i      e
                                             
             φ(k, m, B; c(s)) ∈ arg max max E M RS (c (s))R (k, φ, m, B; s)                 (11)
                                             i

As a consequence, even though φ affects both the returns on equity and debt, φ is chosen to
maximize only the shareholders’ valuation of the return on equity. This induces an agency
problem between the firms’ shareholders and bondholders: shareholders have in fact an
incentive to choose values of φ for which the yield of equity is the highest, but at such values
the yield of debt may be lower than what it could otherwise be. This is in turn anticipated
by bondholders and hence reduces the value of debt. It is the asset substitution problem,
as in Jensen and Meckling (1976). As a consequence, the firm’s valuation is lower than if
shareholders could commit to a different choice of φ, hence the agency problem.
   Notice that in the situation considered here the map φ(.) depends not only on the firm’s
choices but also on the equilibrium consumption allocation c(s).

2.2.2   Delegated management

Consider next the situation in which the choice of φ is delegated to a manager whose type
and compensation are chosen by the firm. In this case m includes the choice of the type i of
agent serving as the firm’s manager as well as that of its compensation package, consisting
of a net payment z0 , in units of the consumption good at date 0, and a net portfolio of ζ m
units of equity and bm units of bonds.
   An agent, if chosen as manager of a firm, will choose φ so as to maximize his utility, since
the choice of φ is not observable. The choice of φ affects this agent’s utility both because
the agent may hold a portfolio whose return is affected by φ but also because the agent
may incur some disutility costs (or benefits) associated to different choices of φ. Let these
disutility costs be v i (φ) for a type i consumer. Thus the map φ(.) describes the manager’s
optimal choice of φ, given his compensation package:
                
                
                
                  arg maxφ E [ui (ci0 , ci1 (s))] − v i (φ)
                
                 s.t.
                
                
                
   φ(k, m, B) ∈    E [ui (ci0 , ci1 (s))] − v i (φ) ≥ Ū i                                  (12)
                
                   ci0 = w0i + z0m
                
                
                
                
                
                 ci (s) = wi (s) + Re (k, φ, m, B; s) (θi + ζ m ) + Rb (k, φ, m, B; s)bm
                
                     1           1                           0

The constraints in (12) say that, to be able to hire a type i agent as manager, an appropriate
participation constraint must be satisfied: the compensation offered must be such that its

                                                 10
utility is not lower than i’s reservation utility Ū i (endogenously determined in equilibrium as
the utility that a type i agent, not hired as a manager, can attain by trading in the market).
This is the delegation problem, as e.g. in Jensen (1986).
       Note that in this case the choice of φ only depends on m, k, B (hence c(s) does not appear
among the arguments of the map φ(.)), and both shareholders and bondholders expect φ
to be chosen according to (12). Also, the cost of action m incurred at time 0 is given by
the cost of the compensation package offered to a type i agent chosen as manager when the
other firm’s choices are k, B:18
                           1  m
                                z0 + q(k, m, B)ζ m + p(k, m, B)bm − θ0i (−k + p(k, m, B)B) .
                                                                                          
        W (k, m, B) =         i
                         1 − θ0

2.2.3       Two examples

We present here two specifications of the firms’ technology that differ for the interpretation
of φ and m and the characterization of their effects on the firm’s net output and asset returns
and correspond to cases often considered in the literature.

i) Suppose φ represents the loading on different aggregate factors affecting the firm’s output,
(a1 (s), a2 (s)) , as in the following specification:

                                  f (k, φ; s) = [(1 − φ)a1 (s) + φa2 (s)] k α                              (13)

Shareholders or managers, depending on the agency friction, choose then the loading φ ∈
{0, 1} on the various risk components unbeknownst to outside investors.19 The yields of
equity and bonds are given by analogous expressions to (6) and (7) in Section 2.1.


ii) Consider an environment where funds can be distracted from the firm’s cashflow available
to pay bondholders at some cost, while (some component of) m represents a costly monitoring
mechanism, e.g. some form of collateral. For instance, suppose φ−m are the funds distracted,
not available to bondholders, so that default occurs whenever f (k, φ, m; s) − (φ − m) < B.
  18
       This expression is obtained by summing to the net payment z0m the value of the net portfolio of equity
and bonds ς m , bm and subtracting the dividends due to this agent on account of his initial endowment θ0i of
equity.
  19
     In this specification there is no action m to affect the value of the firm’s output at date 1 and hence also
no cost, W = 0. Also, all the firm’s output at t = 1 is available to pay bondholders.



                                                       11
The distraction might have a cost in terms of output and exerting monitoring m may also
be costly, so that f (k, φ, m; s) is weakly decreasing both in φ and m.
       In this case the returns on equity and bonds are:

                Re (k, φ, m, B; s) = φ − m + max {f (k, φ, m; s) − (φ − m) − B, 0}                      (14)
                                            f (k, φ; s) − (φ − m)
                Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) = min{1,                       }.                                    (15)
                                                       B
This specification allows to describe a costly monitoring problem, as in Townsend (1979).


2.3        Equilibrium in the general case: agency frictions
The agency frictions faced by firms have no direct impact on the agents’ choice problem,
still described by (2) subject to (3)-(5), given q, p, V and Re (s), Rb (s).
       Where the presence of agency frictions displays its main effects is in the formulation
of the firms’ choice problem and the role played by price conjectures. Firms solve a value
maximization problem analogous to (8), but subject now to an implementability constraint:20

   maxk,φ,m,B        V (k, φ, m, B) = −k − W (k, φ, m, B) + q(k, φ, m, B) + p(k, φ, m, B)B
                                                                                                        (16)
                     s.t. φ ∈ φ(k, m, B; c(s))

       The Makowski criterion requires that the firm rationally anticipates its value, that is
the market value of its equity and bonds, for any of its possible choices. With symmetric
information, as we saw, these conjectures equal the highest marginal valuation across all
consumers for the yield of equity and bonds, for any possible value of k, φ, m, B. With
asymmetric information regarding φ the admissible choices of φ are restricted by constraint
(10). Hence the price conjectures reflect, for any given k, m, B, the correct anticipation of
the level of φ ’induced’ by k, m, B, that is, chosen according to the map φ(k, m, B; c(s)).
This is seen more clearly when φ is univocally determined by the constraint, that is the map
φ(k, m, B; c(s)) is single valued. In this case we could equivalently write the rational price
conjectures in problem (16) as follows:

              q(k, m, B) = max E M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ(k, m, B; c(s)), m, B; s)
                                                                                
                            i
              p(k, m, B) = max E M RS i (ci (s))Rb (k, φ(k, m, B; c(s)), m, B; s) , ∀k, m, B
                                                                                
                               i

  20
       The date 0 cost W (k, φ, m, B) of the actions undertaken to mitigate the agency frictions now appear
explicitly in the expression of the firms’ market value. This term was instead omitted for simplicity in (8).


                                                     12
The presence of the map φ(.) in the specification of the price conjectures and the fact that B
appears among its arguments generate an additional link between production and financing
decisions, due to the agency frictions.
   Summarizing, we have:

Competitive equilibrium: At a competitive equilibrium of the economy

i) For all i, (ci (s), θi , bi ) solve consumer i’s problem, (2) s.t. (3)-(5), for given p, q, V and
      Re (s), Rb (s);

ii) k, φ, m, B solve the firm’s problem, (16), given q(k, φ, m, B), p(k, φ, m, B);

iv) Price conjectures q(k, φ, B, m) and p(k, φ, B, m) satisfy the rationality condition M);

v) Prices p, q, V and returns Re (s), Rb (s) satisfy the consistency condition C)

vi) Markets clear: (9) holds.

   To simplify notation, the above definition and most of the presentation refers to the
case of symmetric equilibria, where all firms choose the same production and financial plan.
When price conjectures satisfy conditions C) and M), the firms’ choice problem is however
not convex. Asymmetric equilibria might therefore exist, where firms optimally choose to
specialize and make different choices in equilibrium (in which case more than just two differ-
ent assets would be available for trade to consumers). We shall discuss firms’ specialization
in Section 4.1.


2.4    A few remarks on the equilibrium concept
The key feature of the competitive equilibrium notion we propose consists in the formula-
tion of the restriction imposed on firms’ price conjectures, the Makowski rationality criterion
M). As already noticed in Section 2.1 the consistency condition C) together with the con-
sumers’ first order conditions imply that this restriction is satisfied by the equilibrium choice
k, φ, m, B. Hence the main bite of the rationality criterion is to require that the same prop-
erty holds for any other admissible choice k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 . It should then be interpreted as a
consistency condition for out of equilibrium conjectures.
   Note that the notion of rational price conjectures as specified in M) is consistent with com-
petitive (indeed Walrasian) markets: the consumers’ marginal rate of substitution M RS i (ci (s))

                                                13
used to determine the conjectures over the market valuation of debt and equity are taken as
given, evaluated at the equilibrium consumption values and unaffected by the firm’s choice
of k, φ, m, B. In this sense each firm is price taker, is ”small” relative to the market, and we
can think of each consumer as holding a negligible amount of shares of any given firm.
    We claim this equilibrium notion is natural in competitive production economies. Before
discussing the properties of equilibria, we argue here that this notion is equivalent to two
others adopted in the literature (in different environments).

All markets open at market clearing prices. Consider a specification where markets for
all possible ‘types’ of equity and bonds are open: that is, equity and bonds correspond-
ing to any possible value of k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 are available for trade to consumers at the prices
q(k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 ), p(k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 ). It is immediate to see that all such markets - except the
one corresponding to the firms’ equilibrium choice k, φ, B, m - clear at zero trades. As a
consequence, q(k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 ) and p(k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 ) correspond to the equilibrium prices of eq-
uity and bonds of a firm who were to “deviate” from the equilibrium choice and choose
k 0 , φ0 , B 0 , m0 instead. In this sense, we can say that rational conjectures impose a consistency
condition on the out of equilibrium values of the equity and bonds price conjectures, that
corresponds to a “refinement” somewhat analogous to subgame perfection.
Prescott and Townsend equilibria. Consider the equilibrium concept adopted by Prescott
and Townsend (1984) for exchange economies with asymmetric information. In this con-
cept prices depend both on unobservable as well as observable choices and this is sustained,
drawing a parallel with mechanism design formulations of related problems relying on the
Revelation Principle, by restricting admissible choices to those which are incentive compat-
ible. In contrast, the equilibrium concept we propose relies on price conjectures that reflect
the correct anticipation of unobservable choices. It is however straightforward to show that
these two approaches are equivalent. The equilibrium notion proposed by Prescott and
Townsend (1984), once extended to the environment under consideration, and hence to pro-
duction economies and incomplete markets, features markets and prices for any possible value
of k, φ, B, m and the presence of condition (10) as a constraint in the firm’s problem (16).
In light also of the equivalence result established in the previous paragraph, it is then easy
to verify that these Prescott Townsend competitive equilibria are equivalent to competitive
equilibria as defined in the previous section.




                                                    14
3        Equilibrium properties
The equilibrium notion we propose has several desirable properties: i) existence of an equi-
librium is ensured, ii) equilibrium allocations have well-defined welfare properties, and iii)
shareholders unanimously support firms’ decisions. We present and discuss these properties
in turn.

Proposition 1 (Existence) A competitive equilibrium always exist.

       As noticed in Section 2.3, the firms’ choice problem is not convex and to ensure the
existence of an equilibrium we have to allow for asymmetric equilibria. The existence proof
(in the Appendix) exploits the presence of a continuum of firms of the same type to convexify
the firms’ choice problem.21
       The appropriate efficiency notion for our economy is constrained: attainable allocations
are restricted not only by the limited set of financial assets that are available but also by the
presence of agency frictions. More formally, a consumption allocation c(s) is admissible if:

    1. it is feasible: there exists a production plan22 k, m, φ of firms such that
                                 X              X
                                     ci0 + k ≤      w0i                                                       (17)
                                       i                       i
                                       X                      X
                                               ci1 (s)    ≤        w1i (s) + f (k, φ, m; s);
                                           i                   i

    2. it is attainable with the existing asset structure: that is, there exists B and, for each
         consumer’s type i, a pair θi , bi such that

                            ci1 (s) = w1i (s) + Re (k, φ, m, B; s)θi + Rb (k, φ, m, B; s)bi ;                 (18)

    3. it is incentive compatible: given the observable component of the production plan k, m,
         the financing plan B and the consumption allocation c(s), the unobservable component
         satisfies
                                                         φ ∈ φ(k, m, B; c(s))                                 (19)
  21
       Also, the existence proof requires for simplicity that Φ is a discrete set and a natural regularity condition
for the implementability constraints φ ∈ φ(k, m, B; c(s)) (spelled out in the Appendix). But existence is also
guaranteed when Φ is more generally a compact set if the first order approach is satisfied, that is, if the
problem whose solution yields the map φ(k, m, B; c(s)) has a unique solution, described by a continuous
function.
  22
     Again production and financing plans could differ across firms but we state for simplicity the notion of
admissible allocations for the case in which they don’t.

                                                              15
       We then say that a competitive equilibrium allocation is constrained Pareto efficient if
we cannot find another admissible allocation which is Pareto improving.

Proposition 2 (First Welfare Theorem) Competitive equilibria are constrained Pareto
efficient when no agency frictions are present or whenever the incentive compatibility map
φ(.) only depends on the firm’s choice variables k, m, B.

       Thus in the economy with no agency frictions described in Section 2.1, where φ is ob-
servable and its choice is unrestricted in Φ, constrained efficiency always holds. With agency
frictions, considering the characterization introduced in Section 2.2, we find that constrained
efficiency obtains when the friction is of the delegated management type, that is, when firms
delegate the choice of the unobservable variable φ to a manager and m contains the man-
ager’s type as well as his compensation contract. In this case, as we noted, φ is determined
by (12) and is independent of c(s).23 Note that a key feature for the specification of the in-
centive constraint in (12), and thus also for the efficiency result, is that the manager’s trades
are observable, so that the manager cannot trade his way out of his compensation package.
In other words, it is crucial that the manager’s compensation contract is exclusive.24
       On the other hand constrained efficiency may fail when the incentive constraint depends
also on variables not directly chosen by the firm, like the consumption allocation c(s), as we
showed it happens in the shareholders/bondholders problem considered in Section 2.2.1. In
this case in fact an externality arises, generated by the agency friction.
       At the same time, we should point out that this is the only source of inefficiency in
our economy. In all other respects, firms’ decisions are efficient and, as we show next,
unanimously supported by shareholders. In both the economies described in Sections 2.1
and 2.2 in fact all shareholders unanimously agree on the firm’s production and financing
decisions, that is on the choice of k, φ, m, B which maximizes the firm’s market value, defined
by rational conjectures (subject, when φ is unobservable, to the implementability constraint
(10)):
  23
       Under the stated conditions the First Welfare Theorem is established by an argument (see the Appendix)
essentially analogous to the one used to establish the Pareto efficiency of competitive equilibria in Arrow-
Debreu economies.
 24
    The inefficiency of economies where this assumption is not satisfied have been studied in the literature;
see, Arnott and Stiglitz (1993) and, more recently, e.g., Acharya and Bisin (2009) and Bisin, Gottardi, and
Rampini (2008).



                                                      16
Proposition 3 (Unanimity) Let k, φ, m, B be the firms’ choice at a competitive equilib-
rium and c(s) be the consumption allocation. Then every agent i holding a positive initial
amount θ0i of equity of a firm will be made - weakly - worse off by any other possible choice
of the firm (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ) (with φ0 satisfying (10) when there are agency frictions).

   The result follows from the fact that, as noticed in Section 2.4, the equilibrium allocation
is the same as the one which would obtain if markets for all possible types of equity and
bonds were open. Consequently, the unanimity result holds by the same argument as the
one used to establish this property for Arrow-Debreu economies.


3.1     A few remarks on the relationship with the literature
The problems found in the literature and recalled in Section 1.1, concerning the specification
of the firms’ objective function, do not arise for the equilibrium notion we propose. As
shown in the previous section, in the set-up typically considered in this literature (that is,
with no agency frictions), both unanimity and constrained efficiency hold. The key difference
between this paper and this literature lies in the specification of the firms’ price conjectures.
It is useful then to compare the Makoswki criterion for rational conjectures to the two main
alternative specifications in the literature, the Dreze and the Grossman-Hart criterions, in
the context of an economy without agency friction, as in Section 2.1.
   Dreze (1974) proposes the following criterion for equity price conjectures (a similar con-
dition holds for bond prices):
                                  X
              q(k, φ, m, B) = E         θi M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ, m, B; s), ∀k, φ, m, B       (20)
                                    i

It requires the conjectured price of equity for any plan k, φ, m, B to equal - pro rata - the
marginal valuation of the agents who in equilibrium are shareholders of the firm (that is, the
agents who value the most the plan chosen by the firm in equilibrium and hence choose to
buy equity). It does not however require that the firm’s shareholders are those who value
the most any possible plan of the firm. Intuitively, the choice of a plan which maximizes
the firm’s value with q(k, φ, m, B) as in (20) corresponds to a situation in which the firm’s
shareholders choose the plan which is optimal for them without contemplating the possibility
of selling the firm in the market, to allow the buyers of equity to operate the plan they instead
prefer. Equivalently, the value of equity for out of equilibrium production and financial plans


                                                  17
is determined using the - possibly incorrect - conjecture that the agents who in equilibrium
own the equity of a firm remain the firm’s shareholders also for any alternative production
and financial plan.25
       Grossman and Hart (1979) propose an alternative criterion for price conjectures which,
when applied to the price of equity, requires:
                                       X
                  q(k, φ, m, B) = E          θ0i M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ, m, B; s), ∀k, φ, m, B
                                         i

We can interpret this specification as describing a situation where the firm’s plan is chosen by
the initial shareholders (i.e., those with some predetermined equity holdings at the beginning
of date 0) so as to maximize their welfare, again without contemplating the possibility of
selling the equity to other consumers who value it more. Equivalently, the value of equity
for out of equilibrium production and financial plans is derived using the conjecture that the
firm’s initial shareholders stay in control of the firm whatever is the plan that is chosen.
       In summary, according to the Makowski criterion for rational conjectures each firm eval-
uates different production and financial plans using possibly different marginal valuations
(that is, possibly different pricing kernels, but all still consistent with the consumers’ marginal
rate of substitution at the equilibrium allocation). This is essential to ensure the unanimity
of shareholders’ decisions and is a key difference with respect to Dreze (1974) and Grossman
and Hart (1979), both of whom rely on the use of a single pricing kernel.26


       On a different note, our analysis also highlights an interesting and important difference
between the properties of equilibria when agency frictions are faced by consumers, as e.g.,
in Prescott and Townsend’s analysis of exchange economies with asymmetric information,
and when instead such frictions are faced by firms. While competitive equilibria are always
  25
       It is then easy to see that any allocation constituting an equilibrium with rational conjectures according
to the criterion is also an equilibrium under the Dreze criterion: all shareholders of a firm have in fact the
same valuation for the firm’s production and financial plan and their marginal utility for any other possible
plan is lower, hence a fortiori the chosen plan maximizes the weighted average of the shareholders’ valuations.
But the reverse implication is not true, i.e., an equilibrium under the Dreze criterion is not in general an
equilibrium under rational conjectures.
  26
     This feature distinguishes also the equilibrium notion based on the Makowski rationality criterion from
the several others proposed in the literature, including those applying elements from the theory of social
choice and voting to model the control of shareholders over the firm’s decisions; see for instance DeMarzo
(1993), Boyarchenko (2004), Cres and Tvede (2005).


                                                        18
constrained efficient in the exchange economies considered by Prescott and Townsend, this
is not necessarily the case in production economies, as we have shown in Proposition 2. The
nature of the equilibrium concept adopted plays no role in this: as we discussed in Section
2.4, our equilibrium concept is equivalent to the one of Prescott and Townsend once this is
extended to production economies. Rather, agency frictions and production may naturally
interact to generate an externality.27
       An important implication of the welfare properties of production economies with agency
frictions is that in economies where equilibrium allocations are constrained inefficient, e.g.
when the agency friction is between shareholders and bondholders, a Pareto improvement
may be achieved with different types of agents owning equity than the ones who do in equi-
librium. Since the unanimity result in Proposition 3 always holds, even when equilibrium
allocations are not constrained efficient, this misallocation of equity ownership is not a conse-
quence of lack of unanimity, as it might instead be the case in equilibrium concepts adopting
the Dreze or the Grossman-Hart criterion. It is rather a consequence of the externality af-
fecting firms’ incentive constraints, which may turn out to be more severe when some types
of agents are shareholders than when others are.


4        Specialization and amplification
In this section we present two results concerning properties of equilibria with the aim of
better illustrating some important aspects of equilibrium allocations. While we present these
results in the context of specific examples, it should be clear that the underlying economic
phenomena we characterize represent robust equilibrium properties.


4.1        Efficient firms’ specialization
In Section 2.3 we defined for simplicity competitive equilibria for the case where firms’
choices are symmetric, that is all firms choose the same production and financial plan, but
we also acknowledged that asymmetric equilibria may exist. This is not just a technical issue,
arising from the non concavity of the firms’ objective problem, but reflects a fundamental
  27
       Prescott and Townsend also assume that markets are complete, while we do not. But whether markets
are complete or not, and hence whether M RS i (ci (s)) are equalized or not across i, is not crucial for the
welfare result. What is crucial is that the agents’ marginal rates of substitution enter the incentive constraint,
so that a change in the consumption allocation may relax this constraint.


                                                       19
implication of the rationality of firms’ conjectures: firms may have an incentive to specialize
their production and financial plans so as to cater to the different demands of different
consumers. In this section we analyze an example where we illustrate the incentives of firms
to specialize, so as to offer consumers different risk profiles for the yields of their equity and
bonds, but also the possible costs which may hinder specialization.
       Consider an environment with no agency frictions, two types of consumers, and a single
type of firms. Both consumers have the same initial equity holdings and first period endow-
ments, as well as identical preferences. They only differ in their second period endowment
w11 (s) and w12 (s). The production technology of each firm is as in (13), with φ representing
the loading on the two risk factors a1 (s), a2 (s): f (k, φ; s) = [(1 − φ)a1 (s) + φa2 (s)] k α . Also,
Ea1 (s) = Ea2 (s). Let us also ignore here, for simplicity, the firms’ financial choice, by setting
B = 0, so that Re (k, φ, m, B; s) = f (k, φ; s).
       Under some symmetry conditions (spelled out in the Appendix), we obtain the following
result:

Proposition 4 (Specialization) Suppose the factors a1 (s) and a2 (s) vary anti-comonotonically.28
Then if w11 (s) varies comonotonically with one factor and w12 (s) with the other factor, the
equilibrium displays production specialization: a fraction of firms choose φ = 0 and the re-
mainder φ = 1. If instead both w11 (s) and w12 (s) vary comonotonically with the same factor,
the equilibrium is symmetric: all firms choose the same value of φ.

       The incentives of firms to specialize their production plans are larger when the different
factors in the firms’ production function are good hedges of the endowment risk of different
types of agents. In this case specialization more easily allows to satisfy the consumers’
demand for risk. At the same time, specialization also involves some cost since it reduces
the demand for each firm’s equity as this comes from only one type of consumer. There is
so a trade-off and when the differences in hedging properties of different factors for different
agents are less clearly marked specialization does not arise in equilibrium.
       To illustrate and provide some intuition for the result in the above proposition it is useful
to present the first steps of the proof.

Proof of Proposition 4. Consider the following case: w11 (s) is comonotonic with a1 (s) and
w12 (s) with a2 (s), hence Cov(w11 (s), a2 (s)) < 0 and Cov(w12 (s), a1 (s)) < 0. In this situation
  28
       That is, for any pair s1 , s2 ∈ S, a1 (s1 ) ≥ a1 (s2 ) if and only if a2 (s1 ) ≤ a2 (s2 ).


                                                              20
factor 2 is a clearly a good hedge for type 1 agents while factor 1 is a good hedge for type 2
agents and the claim is that specialization obtains.
   Suppose, by contradiction, that we have an equilibrium where all firms choose the same
factor, say a1 (s), that is, choose φ = 0. Then from the first order conditions for the con-
sumers’ optimal choice we have, for each i = 1, 2:

                                   E M RS(ci (s))a1 (s)k α ≤ q,
                                                         
                                                                                                  (21)

where M RS(ci (s)) is evaluated at the equilibrium consumption level ci0 = w0 + V 0.5 −
qθi , ci1 (s) = w1i (s) + a1 (s)k α θi . Note that (21) must hold as equality for at least one i.
Furthermore, for the choice φ = 0 to be optimal for all firms the following relationship must
hold:
                 max E M RS(ci (s))a1 (s)k α ≥ max E M RS(ci (s))a2 (s)k α ,
                                                                       
                                                                                                  (22)
                   i                                   i

where we used the rationality of price conjectures to determine the value of a firm corre-
sponding to the alternative choice φ = 1. For any type i for whom (21) holds as equality, the
firm’s optimality condition (22) reduces to

                   Cov M RS(ci (s)), a1 (s)k α ≥ Cov M RS(ci (s)), a2 (s)k α
                                                                          


But this is clearly impossible for i = 1: given that Ea1 (s) = Ea2 (s), the comonotonicity
conditions imply that Cov [M RS(c1 (s)), a1 (s)k α ] < 0 while Cov [M RS(c1 (s)), a2 (s)k α ] > 0,
since a2 (s) is clearly a better risk hedge than a1 (s) when c11 (s) = w11 (s) + a1 (s)k α θ1 . In this
situation a firm could increase its value by switching to factor a2 (s), hence the contradiction.
It remains then to establish the claim when (21) holds as equality only for type i = 2. The
proof of this and the second part of the claim in the proposition are in the Appendix. 2

   As shown above, production specialization may arise in equilibrium to satisfy the agents’
demand for hedging their endowment risk. Given the constrained efficiency of competi-
tive equilibria with no agency frictions, established in Proposition 2, when the equilibrium
exhibits specialization this is also efficient. Efficiency requires to evaluate the alternative
production and financing plans by firms on the basis of the different preferences of con-
sumers for such plans. When the profitability of all possible plans is assessed on the basis of
rational price conjectures as in condition M), firms do indeed this, taking into account which
type of agent will hold the firms’ assets for each possible plan. This implies, as we noticed,
a non convexity of the firm’s choice problem so that indeed specialization may emerge. In

                                                  21
contrast, with the Dreze or the Grossman-Hart criteria firms evaluate any (equilibrium and
out of equilibrium) production and financial plan according to the preferences of a given
subset of agents. As a consequence the firm’s objective function is linear and its choice
problem convex, equilibria will generally be symmetric and may turn out to be constrained
inefficient.
       To illustrate this point further we take up the well-known example studied by Dierker,
Dierker, and Grodal (2002). In this example, uncertainty is represented by S = {s1 , s2 }.
There are two types of consumers. The technology of the representative firm is described
by f (k, φ; s) = φk for s = s1 and (1 − φ)k for s = s2 , with φ ∈ Φ = [2/3, 0.99].
Again abstracting from the firms’ financial decisions and setting B = 0, the problem faced
by firms in this environment is to choose (k, φ) so as to maximize −k + q(k, φ), where
q(k, φ) = max {EM RS 1 (c1 (s))f (k, φ; s); EM RS 2 (c2 (s))f (k, φ; s)} .
       For specific functional forms of the agents’ preferences and parameter values, in this
economy Dierker, Dierker and Grodal (2002) find a unique symmetric equilibrium, according
to the Dreze criterion, where all firms choose the same value of k and φ and such equilibrium
is constrained inefficient.29 In contrast, a symmetric competitive equilibrium according to
the Makowski rational conjecture criterion does not exist: at a symmetric allocation the
firms’ optimality condition with respect to φ in fact can never hold. This is because, for the
specification of agents’ preferences and endowments considered, type 1 consumers strongly
prefer assets paying when s = s1 (and hence φ = 0.99) while type 2 consumers strongly
prefer assets paying when s = s2 (φ = 2/3). On the other hand, allowing for production
specialization, a unique equilibrium exists, which is constrained Pareto optimal.


4.2        Aggregate risk amplification
Proposition 2 identifies conditions on the financial frictions faced by firms under which equi-
librium allocations might be constrained inefficient. In this section we characterize the form
the inefficiency takes in an economy where the agency frictions are of the asset substitu-
tion type, as in Section 2.2.1. Interestingly, in this case the constrained inefficiency might
manifest itself in terms of excessive aggregate risk at equilibrium.
  29
       The remaining description of the environment considered in this example, together with the derivation
of the competitive equilibria according to the Dreze and the Makowski rational conjecture criteria can be
found in the Appendix.



                                                      22
       Consider the following small variant of the firms’ technology in (13):

                            f (k, φ, m; s) = [a1 (s) + C(φ) (a2 (s) − a1 (s))]k α

with30 φ ∈ Φ = [0, 1] and the loading on a2 (s) described by the function C(φ), increasing
and concave and such that C(0) = 0, C(1) = 1. Suppose that S = {s1 , s2 } and that a1 (s) is
a mean preserving spread of a2 (s) with

                                   a1 (s1 ) > a2 (s1 ) > a2 (s2 ) > a1 (s2 ).                         (23)

       Postulate that parameters are such that at a competitive equilibrium of the economy with
no agency frictions (with observable φ, as in Section 2.1) the firm’s choice of φ is interior
and B is such that the firm defaults in state s2 but not in state s1 . This is clearly a robust
property in the class of economies we are considering. As a consequence, the yields of equity
and bonds are:
                                   (
                                       [a1 (s) + C(φ) (a2 (s) − a1 (s))] k α − B       for s = s1
               Re (k, φ, B; s) =
                                       0                                               for s = s2
                                   (
                                       1                                  for s = s1
               Rb (k, φ, B; s) =       [a1 (s)+C(φ)(a2 (s)−a1   (s))]kα
                                                    B
                                                                          for s = s2

Since the value of φ only affects the return on equity in state s1 and the return on bonds
only in state s2 , it follows from (23) that

                       ∂Re (k, φ, B; s1 )/∂φ = C 0 (φ) (a2 (s1 ) − a1 (s1 )) k α < 0,
                       ∂Rb (k, φ, B; s2 )/∂φ = C 0 (φ) (a2 (s2 ) − a1 (s2 )) k α > 0.

Letting ie denote any of the (agents who in equilibrium are) shareholders and ib any of the
bondholders, the firms’ first order condition with respect to the choice of φ at this equilibrium
requires:
                                                                       
                  ie i e   ∂ e                  ib ib    ∂ b
            E M RS (c (s)) R (k, φ, B; s) + M RS (c (s)) R (k, φ, B; s)B = 0.                         (24)
                          ∂φ                            ∂φ

As shown above, the first term in the above expression is negative and the second one
positive.
  30
       Here (and at the end of the previous section) we leave our standard environment where Φ is discrete.
Hence the implementability constraints are characterized in terms of derivatives.


                                                          23
       Now consider the case with agency frictions in which φ is not observable and chosen by
shareholders, as in Section 2.2.1. Suppose at a competitive equilibrium the debt level is still
such that the firm defaults in state s2 . The first order condition with respect to φ of problem
(11), stating the incentive constraint in the environment under consideration, is then in this
case:
                                  
                  ∂ e
   E M RS (c (s)) R (k, φ, m, B; s) = M RS ie (cie (s1 ))C 0 (φ) (a2 (s1 ) − a1 (s1 )) k α ≤ 0,
         ie ie
                 ∂φ
                                                                                             (25)
which is satisfied as a strict inequality at a corner solution31 φ = 0. This is because, as argued
above, Re (k, φ, m, B; s1 ) is decreasing in φ, the loading factor on a2 (s). At a competitive
equilibrium with agency frictions, therefore, shareholders will choose to load on the riskier
factor a1 (s) more than at the equilibrium without agency frictions.
       We show next that a marginal increase in φ by all firms, with respect to its level at a
competitive equilibrium with agency frictions, may be feasible, that is satisfy the incentive
constraint (11).32 This is because the marginal effect of a change in φ on the objective
function of problem (11), when φ is modified by all firms so that also the consumers’ MRS
is modified, is given by:
                                                                           
                   ie ie   ∂ e               ∂     ie ie    e
         E M RS (c (s)) R (k, φ, m, B; s) +    M RS (c (s))R (k, φ, m, B; s)                               (26)
                          ∂φ                ∂φ

The first term is the same as in the equilibrium condition (25), and has a negative sign, but
                                     ∂
there is now a second term,         ∂φ
                                       M RS ie (cie (s1 ))Re (k, φ, m, B; s1 ),   which has a strictly positive
sign: an increase in φ in fact reduces the consumption of shareholders in state s1 , cie (s1 ),
and this in turn increases these agents’ marginal utility, as this is decreasing in consumption,
and also M RS ie (cie (s1 ))33 . The overall expression in (26) may then have a strictly positive
sign, in which case an increase in φ (by all firms) is feasible, in the sense that it satisfies the
incentive constraint (11). In other words, by internalizing the effect of φ on the shareholders’
consumption, a higher level of φ can be supported, that is a value closer to the one obtained
  31
       It is straightforward to see that at the equilibrium allocation with no agency frictions the term on the
left hand side of (25) is always negative. Hence the incentive constraint (11) is violated, since shareholders
would like to decrease φ, that is, to increase the loading on (the riskier) factor a1 (s). Thus we cannot have
an interior solution for φ.
  32
     We limit our analysis here to a local argument, following on this the literature on economies with financial
frictions, e.g., Gromb and Vayanos (2002), Krishnamurty (2000, 2010) and Lorenzoni (2005).
   33 ie
     c0 is in fact not affected by the change in φ.


                                                        24
at the equilibrium without agency frictions.34
       In the environment considered we can thus say that a competitive equilibrium with agency
frictions displays excessive aggregate risk, as φ is set at the level 0, with full loading on the
riskier factor, while a higher level of φ, with less loading on this factor, could be feasible and
allow to reduce the aggregate risk in the economy. By not taking into account the effects
of their choice of φ on the agents’ marginal rates of substitution, shareholders will tend to
choose a too low level of φ, increasing the amount of risk in the economy at equilibrium.


5        Equilibrium capital structure
In this section we illustrate how equilibrium analysis may produce interesting implications
for important issues in corporate finance. In the corporate finance literature it is typically
the case that the capital structure of firms is fully determined by its role in providing incen-
tives to shareholders or managers, often in partial equilibrium. But in a general equilibrium
framework, when financial markets are incomplete, the capital structure is generally deter-
mined not only by its role in mitigating the agency frictions, but also by the consumers’
willingness to pay for the different forms of the borrowing instruments issued by firms and
the different amounts issued of them. We refer to these, respectively, as the supply and de-
mand forces in the determination of the capital structure. This is important because demand
forces link the capital structure to fundamental macroeconomic factors as the allocation of
risk in the economy, asset prices and business cycle fluctuations.
       The economy presented in Section 2, displaying production, incomplete financial markets,
as well as agency frictions, is a natural environment where to study such demand and supply
effects in the determination of the firms’ capital structure. Since the amount of equity is
constant, as already noticed the capital structure is simply described by the level B of bonds
issued.
  34
       The marginal increase in φ generates an increase in the surplus from the firms’ production activity,
which can then be distributed among agents with appropriate transfers at date 0 so as to generate a welfare
improvement.




                                                     25
5.1        Capital structure and managerial compensation
For the sake of the exposition it is convenient to first isolate the demand component, consid-
ering an economy with no agency frictions, as in Section 2.1. Even without such frictions,
in the presence of incomplete markets and borrowing constraints the Modigliani-Miller ir-
relevance result does not fully hold in equilibrium. In this respect the following partial
characterization is of interest.35

Proposition 5 (Capital structure with incomplete markets) In the economy with no
agency frictions, at a competitive equilibrium the firms’ capital structure is, at least partially,
determinate. If, in particular, the equilibrium level of B is such that bonds are risk free, that
is, f (k, φ, m; s) ≥ B with probability 1,, all equityholders are also bondholders.36

       This result is easy to illustrate within a simple parametric example with two types of
agents and a representative firm with a two-factor productivity shock technology as in (13).37
In Figure 1 we report the consumers’ holdings of equity and debt and their marginal valuation
for these assets at an allocation where all the conditions for a competitive equilibrium are
satisfied except the one for the firm’s optimal debt level. Debt is in fact taken as parametric,
by setting B = B ex , and we report the values of asset holdings and marginal valuations for
different levels of B ex . We see that when B ex = 0 both consumers’ types hold equity while
only type 1 consumers are bondholders since they have a higher marginal valuation for this
asset than type 2 consumers. The consumers’ marginal rates of substitution at this allocation
determine then, as in condition M), the equity and bond price conjectures associated to any
other value of B.         We see that a firm could increase its value by issuing debt and thus
B = 0 is not an equilibrium value. As B ex is progressively increased it remains true that
type 1 consumers have a higher marginal valuation for the bond until a specific level of B ex
is reached (.1828), at which all consumers have the same marginal valuation for the bond
(see the bottom right panel) and both types hold equity. At this level the condition stated
  35
       See Appendix A, available at http://apps.eui.eu/Personal/Gottardi/ for a formal statement of the firms’
optimality condition with respect to B when bonds are riskless and when instead they are risky.
  36
     With some notational abuse, we call equityholders (resp. bondholders) all agents i such that q =
                                                                               
E M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ, m, B; s) (resp. p = E M RS i (ci (s))Rb (k, φ, m, B; s) ), that is, the collection of
agents that in equilibrium either hold equity (resp. bonds) or are indifferent between holding and not
holding equity (resp. bonds).
  37
     The specification of the consumers’ preferences and endowments, together with that of the firms’ tech-
nology, can be found in the Appendix.

                                                       26
                    1                                                            1
                                                           1‘s stock holdings: θ                                             1‘s bond holdings: b1
                                                                                         0.6
                                                           2‘s stock holdings: θ2                                            2‘s bond holdings: b2
                   0.8                                                                   0.5


                   0.6                                                                   0.4

                                                                                         0.3
                   0.4
                                                                                         0.2
                   0.2
                                                                                         0.1

                    0                                                                     0
                           0.1   0.2    0.3         0.4          0.5           0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4         0.5         0.6
                                          Bex                                                                Bex




                                                                                   1    0.79                                                     1
                                        1‘s marginal valuation of the stock: MVθ                           1‘s marginal valuation of the bond: MVb
                   0.6




27
                                                                                       0.785               2‘s marginal valuation of the bond: MV2
                                        2‘s marginal valuation of the stock:   MV2
                                                                                 θ                                                               b
                                                                                        0.78
                   0.5
                                                                                       0.775
                   0.4                                                                  0.77

                                                                                       0.765
                   0.3
                                                                                        0.76
                   0.2                                                                 0.755

                           0.1   0.2    0.3         0.4          0.5           0.6             0.1   0.2   0.3        0.4         0.5         0.6
                                          Bex                                                                Bex




     Figure 1: Parametric exercise: market clearing values, for given B ex i) First row: consumers’ asset holdings. ii) Second
     row: consumers’ willingness to pay for equity EM RS i (s) [a1 (s)k α − B ex ] and bonds EM RS i (s), i = 1, 2.
in the above proposition is satisfied and we have so a competitive equilibrium where the
firms’ choice (of B as well as k, φ) maximizes their market value. In equilibrium the value
of B is partially indeterminate in the sense that any value greater than .1828, provided debt
remains risk-free, is an equilibrium value.
       We now show how the demand and supply components contribute to determine the firms’
financing decisions, by introducing an agency friction, of the delegated management type,
in the above example. As in Section 2.2.2, suppose that φ is not observable and is chosen
by an agent selected as the firm’s manager, who incurs then a utility cost v i (φ), which may
vary with the agent’s type i. We assume that v i (0) > v i (1) for all i; that is, for all types of
agents choosing φ = 0 entails a costlier effort. It is then easy to verify that the equilibrium
allocation obtained in the case without agency frictions is no longer feasible, as the incentive
constraint (12) is violated, whatever the type i of agent selected as manager. We find that
in equilibrium the firm hires a type 2 agent as manager, increases its debt level B, thereby
making equity riskier, in line with the implications of the delegation agency problem, and
loads all the incentive compensation of the manager on equity (no debt), to induce him to
choose φ = 0.38 The equilibrium level of debt B is now uniquely determined at the level
.216, greater than .1828 but nonetheless such that debt remains risk-free. In this example,
therefore, the firm’s capital structure is essentially determined by the supply, that is, is high
enough to provide a manager compensated with equity with the right incentives to choose
the loading on the productivity factor which maximizes firm’s value, φ = 0. On the demand
side, as we saw at the equilibrium with no agency frictions, consumers are willing to buy
any amount of risk-free debt B greater than .1828.


5.2        Capital structure, asset substitution and demand for risk
It is useful to illustrate the role of the demand and supply components determining the
firms’ capital structure also in another environment, where the agency friction is of the
asset substitution type, as in Section 2.2.1. In this economy, in fact, the interaction between
demand and supply in the determination of the capital structure appears even more evidently.
       Consider again an economy populated by two types of consumers, I = 2, where the firms’
production technology is again as in (13), f (k, φ; s) = [(1 − φ)a1 (s) + φa2 (s)] k α , with a1 (s) a
  38
       The equilibrium values of prices and the allocation for this example, with and without the agency friction,
are also reported in the Appendix.



                                                        28
mean preserving spread of a2 (s).39 Consumers have the same initial equity holdings θ0 = 0.5,
first period endowments w0 and preferences described by Eu(c0 , c(s)) = u(c0 ) + βEu(c(s)),
                 c1−γ
with u(c) =      1−γ
                      .   The endowments of type i = 1, 2 consumers in the second period are:

                                             w1i (s) = ξ − δi ηi (s)

with δ1 , δ2 , ξ positive constants and

                 η1 (s) = max {Ea2 (s) − a2 (s); 0} , η2 (s) = max {a2 (s) − Ea2 (s); 0} .

Thus the endowment of type 2 consumers is perfectly (negatively) correlated with the upper
tail of the shock affecting the second factor of the firms’ technology, while that of type 1’s
consumers is perfectly (negatively) correlated with the lower tail of this shock.
       When the choice of φ is observable, for an open set of values of the parameters δ1 , δ2 , ξ
and of the consumers’ first period endowments w0 , an equilibrium exists where all firms
choose a full loading on factor a2 (s), that is, φ = 0. Furthermore, at equilibrium, firms
issue an amount of risky debt - approximately - equal to B = k α Ea2 (s).40 Type 2 consumers
choose to hold equity while type 1 consumers only hold debt. The return on equity is
k α max {a2 (s) − Ea2 (s); 0}, while the return on debt is min {1; a2 (s)} /Ea2 (s). This shows
that in this environment there is demand for risky debt as well as for equity of the firms
choosing the less risky factor φ = 0. At the equilibrium the capital structure is determinate
and the agents’ portfolio allocation is such that, indeed, both type of agents - approximately
- fully hedge their endowment risk.
       Consider instead the same economy with an agency friction: φ is not observable and is
chosen by the firm’s shareholders to maximize the value of equity, as in Section 2.2.1. The
firm’s capital structure is determined now not only by the consumers’ willingness to pay for
the different levels of risk of debt and equity, but also by the need to enhance incentives in the
presence of asset substitution (the supply side). It is easy to verify that at the equilibrium
allocation without agency frictions described above type 2 consumers, who are the firm’s
shareholders, prefer to choose factor loading φ = 1 rather than φ = 0, so as to profit from
  39
       Moreover, E max {a2 (s) − Ea2 (s); 0} < 0 < E max {a1 (s) − Ea1 (s); 0} .
  40
       In turn, the investment level k is - also approximately - determined by the condition
                                              1                   α−1         1
                                                           γ = αk     Ea2 (s) γ .
                                (w0 + θ0 (−k + pB + q) − q)                  ξ




                                                       29
the larger upper tail payoffs associated with this factor.41 Thus incentive compatibility (11)
is violated.42
       To be able to still implement the factor loading choice φ = 0 a lower level of leverage is
needed (in line with the asset substitution problem). This is clearly possible with43 B = ak α ,
with a such that a2 (s), a1 (s) ≥ a for all s, so that firms’ debt is risk-free. In this case the
agents holding equity would not be even approximately fully hedged as they would bear
both the upper and lower tail risk of their factor choice, and this would in turn induce
them to choose φ = 0. At the equilibrium with agency frictions we expect therefore the
debt level to be in the intermediate range between ak α and k α Ea2 (s), and hence a more
volatile consumption level for all agents than with no agency frictions.                In the environment
considered we then see that the firms’ leverage ratio and the riskiness of the debt issued are
determined jointly by the preference of consumers in favor of risky debt and by the need to
provide incentives.
       A final comment is important, to better appreciate the role of market incompleteness in
the determination of the capital structure. Observe in fact that if (we extended the model
so that) a complete set of financial instruments were available to trade, consumers would
be indifferent between firms issuing risk-free or risky debt. The Modigliani Miller theorem
holds and the capital structure would then only be determined by the supply component, the
need to provide incentives. In particular, in the economy considered above, when markets
are complete setting B = 0 ensures that the incentive constraint (11) is always satisfied.
Hence incentives can be provided to shareholders without any need to affect firms’ choices
and the risk allocation among agents, the equilibrium is so fully Pareto efficient. It is easy
to see that this property holds in general for economies where the agency friction is of the
asset substitution type, as in Section 2.2.1, since this friction has no bite when B = 0.44
  41
       We have in fact
                                      γ
          (w0 + θ0 (−k + pB + q) − q) α
                                      k [E max {a2 (s) − Ea2 (s); 0} − E max {a1 (s) − Ea2 (s); 0}] < 0.
                       ξγ

  42
       Note that shareholders in this economy have an incentive to load the productivity shock on the riskier
factor, as in the case of the economy studied in Section 4.2.
  43
     Note that the level of k may be different in this case, typically higher because of a precautionary motive.
  44
     In contrast, when the agency friction is of the delegated management type, as in Section 2.2.2 (and
the example of Section 5.1), Pareto efficiency is not ensured when markets are complete, as the incentive
constraint (12) may still constrain not only the firms’ capital structure but also the equilibrium allocation.



                                                       30
6        Intermediation and short sales
In this section we introduce markets for derivatives on the firms’ financial assets. This
is important obviously because derivatives markets exist and we claim their modeling fits
naturally into our set-up with interesting implications for financial economics. They are also
a natural way to model short sales of the existing assets. Indeed in this section we focus
our attention on the case where derivatives are simply given by short and long positions on
the firms’ equity.45 A short position on a firm’s equity is in fact, both conceptually and in
the practice of financial markets, different from a simple negative holding of equity: it is a
loan contract with a promise to repay an amount equal to the future value of equity. To
model short sales it is then natural to introduce financial intermediaries who can issue claims
corresponding to short positions on the firm’s equity.
       We assume that intermediation is subject to frictions, e.g. default or transaction costs.
This ensures that the notion of competitive equilibrium is well-defined, even if such frictions
are arbitrarily small (and hence short sales are ”essentially unlimited”).46
       Consider an environment where intermediaries bear no cost to issue derivative claims, but
face the possibility of default by consumers on the short positions they issue (e.g., on the loans
induced by the sale of such positions to consumers), this is the friction on intermediation.
Assume for simplicity that i) the default rate on the short positions issued is exogenously
given and constant in every state, for all consumers;47 ii) a solvency constraint is imposed
on intermediaries’ portfolio, to ensure they are never insolvent.
       More specifically, an intermediary who is intermediating H units of the derivative on
the firm’s equity (that is, issuing H long and short positions) is repaid only a fraction
  45
       It should be clear that the analysis could be extended to short sales of the bond as well as other forms
of derivatives, at only a notational cost.
  46
     The analysis of equilibria with intermediated short sales is also important from a theoretical standpoint.
It is evident from our analysis in the previous sections that the unlimited short sales paradigm adopted by
the GEI literature cited in the Introduction, while elegant and convenient, is incompatible with competitive
equilibrium modeling in economies with production and incomplete markets. With infinite short sales, e.g.,
of equity, a small firm can in fact have a large effect on the economy by choosing a production plan with cash
flows which, when traded as equity, change the asset span and hence the admissible trades of all consumers,
allocations and equilibrium prices. In this section we show how not only limited but also ”essentially
unlimited” short sales can be consistently introduced in our competitive economy with production.
  47
     In Appendix A we show how the analysis and results extend to the general case where default rates are
endogenously chosen by consumers.



                                                       31
(1−δ) ∈ (0, 1) of the amount due on each short position issued.48 To ensure its own solvency,
the intermediary must hold an appropriate portfolio of claims, as a form of collateral, whose
yield can cover the shortfalls in its revenue from the intermediation activity due to consumers’
defaults. The best hedge against the risk of consumers’ default on short positions on equity
is clearly equity itself. The intermediary’s solvency constraint then requires that it holds an
amount γ of equity of the firm to ensure its ability to meet all its future obligations:

                                             H ≤ H(1 − δ) + γ,                                          (27)

       To cover the cost of this collateral, intermediaries may charge a different price for long
and short positions in the derivative issued. Let q + (resp. q − ) be the price at which long
(resp. short) positions in the derivative issued by the intermediary are traded, while q is still
the price at which equity trades in the market. The intermediary chooses then the amount
H issued of long and short positions in the derivative and the amount γ of equity held as a
hedge, so as to maximize its total revenue at date 0:

                                          max2 (q + − q − )H − qγ
                                                                 
                                                                                                        (28)
                                         H,γ∈R+


subject to the solvency constraint (27).
       A solution to the intermediary’s choice problem exists provided

                                                       q+ − q−
                                                  q≥           ;                                        (29)
                                                          δ
                                                                   q + −q −
and is characterized by γ = δH and H > 0 only if q =                   δ
                                                                            .
       Let hi+ ∈ R+ denote consumer i’s holdings of long positions in the derivative issued by
intermediaries, and hi− ∈ R+ his holdings of short positions. The consumer’s choice problem
consists in maximizing his expected utility subject to the budget constraints

                             ci0 = w0i + V θ0i − q θi − p bi − q + hi+ + q − hi−                        (30)
                             ci1 (s) = w1i (s) + Re (s)(θi + hi+ − hi− ) + Rb (s)bi                     (31)
                       
and θi , bi , hi+ , hi− ≥ 0.
       The asset market clearing conditions are now, for equity
  48
       The analysis in this section holds for all δ > 0, even arbitrarily small (hence even when the friction
introduced is of negligible amount).



                                                        32
                                                      X
                                                 γ+         θi = 1,
                                                      i∈I

and for the derivative security
                                           X             X
                                                 hi+ =         hi− = H.
                                           i∈I           i∈I

       Furthermore, the firm’s choice problem is unchanged, still given - if we consider for
simplicity the case where there is no agency friction, as in Section 2.1 - by (8). However, the
condition specifying the criterion for rational conjectures for equity, q(k, φ, m, B), has to be
properly adjusted to reflect the fact that now intermediaries may also demand equity in the
market:
                                                                                          
                               maxi E [M RS i (ci (s))Re (k, φ, m, B; s)] ,               
 q(k, φ, m, B) = max                                                                                      (32)
                      maxi E[M RS (c (s))R (k,φ,m,B;s)]−mini E[M RS (c (s))R (k,φ,m,B;s)] 
                                  i i      e                        i i      e

                                                                 δ


for all k, φ, m, B.
       The above expression states that the conjecture of a firm over the price of its equity when
the firm chooses the plan k, φ, m, B equals the maximal valuation, at the margin, among
intermediaries as well as consumers, of the equity’s cash flow corresponding to k, φ, m, B.
The second term on the right hand side of the above expression is in fact the intermediaries’
marginal valuation for equity and can be interpreted as the value of intermediation. Since
an appropriate amount of equity is needed, to be retained as collateral, in order to issue the
corresponding derivative claims, the intermediary’s willingness to pay for equity with yield
Re (k, φ, m, B; s) is determined by the consumers’ marginal valuation for the corresponding
derivative claims which can be issued49 . Hence the above specification of the firms’ equity
price conjectures allows firms to take into account the effects of their decisions on the value
of intermediation.
       In all other respects, a competitive equilibrium of the economy with intermediation and
short sales is defined along similar lines to Section 2.1. By a similar argument as in Propo-
sitions 1, 2 and 3 we can show that a competitive equilibrium of an economy with interme-
diated short sales exists; moreover, any equilibrium allocation is constrained Pareto efficient
and shareholders unanimously support the production and financial decisions of the firms.
  49
       More precisely, the first term on the numerator of the second expression in (32) equals the consumers’
valuation for long positions in the derivative, the second one their valuation for short positions; dividing by
δ yields the profits of intermediation, per unit of equity purchased.


                                                         33
       The model of intermediation proposed in this section is admittedly quite stylized. We
believe however it allows to capture in a simple way the relationship between the financial
claims issued by firms and the intermediation process. The key feature is that the derivatives
issues by intermediaries are backed by the claims issued by firms in two ways. First, the
yields of these derivatives are pegged to the yield of the claims issued by firms; second, the
intermediaries must hold some amount of these claims to back the derivatives issued. Hence
part of the demand fior the firms’ claims now also comes from intermediaries (as such claims
enter as some sort of input in the intermediation technology).
       It is interesting to compare this optimality result with Theorem 5 in Allen and Gale
(1991), where it is shown that the competitive equilibria of an economy where consumers
face a finite, exogenous bound K̄ on short sales are constrained inefficient. In their set-
up, long and short positions trade at the same price, i.e., the bid ask spread is zero. The
inefficiency result in Allen and Gale (1991) then follows from the fact that firms maximize a
conjecture over their market value which ignores the effect of their decisions on the value of
intermediation. In other words, a firm does not take into account the possible gains arising
from the demand for short positions in the firm’s equity. In contrast in our economy, when
a firm makes its production and financial decisions the firm considers the value of its equity
not only for the consumers but also for the intermediaries who use equity as an input in
the intermediation process. The gains from trade due to intermediation are so taken into
account by firms.
       It is also useful to contrast our findings with the inefficiency result in Pesendorfer (1995).
Example 2 in Pesendorfer (1995) shows that a competitive economy where financial in-
termediaries can introduce complementary innovations in the market may get stuck at an
equilibrium in which no intermediary innovates, even though welfare would be higher if
all innovations were traded in the market.50 The source of the inefficiency arising in the
environment considered by Pesendorfer (1995) is analogous to the one of the result of Allen
and Gale (1991) just discussed: each intermediary is implicitly restricted not to trade with
other intermediaries. Equivalently, equilibrium prices for non-traded innovations do not in-
clude their effect on the value of intermediation. If instead prices for non-traded innovations
were specified so as to equal the maximum between the consumers’ and the intermediaries’
marginal valuation, as in (32) above, constrained efficiency would obtain at equilibrium.
  50
       This finding is related to similar ones obtained in competitive equilibrium models with differentiated
goods; notably Hart (1980) and Makowski (1980).


                                                      34
       Finally, we can provide the following simple characterization of the intermediation levels
at equilibrium, which follows from (29):

Proposition 6 (Intermediation) In the economy with financial intermediation and short
sales, at an equilibrium, either (i) q = (q + − q − )/δ > q + and intermediation is full (the whole
amount of outstanding equity is purchased by intermediaries) or (ii) q = q + and intermedi-
ation is partial (some if not all the amount of outstanding equity is held by consumers).

       At an equilibrium where intermediation is full, equity sells at a premium over the long
positions on the derivative claim issued by the intermediary, due to its additional value
as input in the intermediation technology. Intermediaries in turn recoup the higher cost of
equity through a sufficiently high spread q + −q − between the price of long and short positions
on the derivative. When on the contrary intermediation is partial, equity and long positions
in the derivative trade at the same price, intermediaries may not be active in equilibrium
and the bid ask spread q + − q − is low (in particular, less or equal than δq).51


7        Conclusions
In this paper we have provided an equilibrium foundation to the study of corporate finance by
showing how a consistent definition of competitive equilibria can be provided in environments
with production, incomplete financial markets, and agency frictions. We have shown that,
once firms are postulated to operate under rational conjectures, along the lines of Makowski
(1983a,b), equilibria exist and have natural and appealing properties (in terms, e.g. of
welfare and unanimity).
       We have considered various classes of economies and examples to illustrate how the
equilibrium concept we introduced allows to study simple finance and macroeconomic issues,
from the firms’ capital structure, to firms’ specialization, corporate default, and financial
intermediation.52
       The next step, which we leave for future work, consists in adapting the equilibrium
concept and extending the analysis to dynamic economies, e.g., Bewley economies, as the
ones typically considered in macroeconomics and finance.
  51
       Interestingly, we see from (32) that the same two situations arise for equity price conjectures.
  52
       Acharya and Bisin (2013) extend the analysis of this equilibrium concept to a class of financial interme-
diation economies with strategic default to capture counterparty risk.

                                                        35
References
Acharya, V. V. and A. Bisin (2009): ”Managerial hedging, equity ownership, and firm
    value,” RAND Journal of Economics, 40 (1), 47-77.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1988): ”Optimal security design,” Review of Financial Studies, 1
    (3), 229-263.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1991): ”Arbitrage, short sales, and financial innovation,” Econo-
    metrica, 59 (4), 1041-68.

Bisin, A. and P. Gottardi (1999): ”Competitive equilibria with asymmetric information,”
    Journal of Economic Theory, 87 (1), 1-48.

Bisin, A. and P. Gottardi (2006): ”Efficient competitive equilibria with adverse selection,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 114 (3), 485-516.

Bisin, A., P. Gottardi, and A. A. Rampini (2008): ”Managerial hedging and portfolio moni-
    toring,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6 (1), 158-209.

Bisin, A. and P. Gottardi (2014): ”Production in Bewley models,” NYU, mimeo.

Bonnisseau, J. M. and O. Lachiri (2004): ”Dreze’s criterion in a multi-period economy with
    stock markets,” Royal Economic Society Annual Conference 2004, 88, Royal Economic
    Society.

Boyarchenko, S. (2004): ”Arrow’s equivalency theorem in a model with neoclassical firms,”
    Economic Theory, 23 (4), 739-775.

Carceles-Poveda, E. and D. Coen-Pirani (2009): ”Shareholders’ unanimity with incomplete
    markets,” International Economic Review, 50 (2), 577-606.

Cres, H. and M. Tvede (2005): ”Voting in assemblies of shareholders and incomplete mar-
    kets,” Economic Theory, 26 (4), 887-906.

DeMarzo, P. M. (1993): ”Majority voting and corporate control: The rule of the dominant
    shareholder,” Review of Economic Studies 60 (3), 713-34.

Diamond, P. A. (1967): ”The role of a stock market in a general equilibrium model with
    technological uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 57 (4), 759-776.

                                            36
Dierker, E., H. Dierker, and B. Grodal (2002): ”Nonexistence of constrained efficient equi-
    libria when markets are incomplete,” Econometrica 70 (3), 1245-1251.

Dow, J., G. Gorton, and A. Krishnamurthy (2005): ”Equilibrium investment and asset
    prices under imperfect corporate control,” American Economic Review, 95 (3), 659-
    681.

Dreze, J., E. Minelli, and M. Tirelli (2008): ”Production and financial policies under asym-
    metric information,” Economic Theory 35 (2), 217-231.

Dreze, J. H. (1974): ”Investment under private ownership: Optimality, equilibrium and sta-
    bility,” in J. H. Dreze (ed.), Allocation Under Uncertainty: Equilibrium and Optimality,
    New York, Macmillan.

Dreze, J. H. (1985): ”(Uncertainty and) the firm in general equilibrium theory,” Economic
    Journal, 95 (380a), 1-20.

Dreze, J. H., O. Lachiri, and E. Minelli (2007): ”Shareholder-efficient production plans in
    multi-period economy,” Discussion Papers 2007-042, Catholic University of Louvain.

Dubey, P., J. Geanakoplos, and M. Shubik (2005): ”Default and punishment in general
    equilibrium, Econometrica, 73 (1), 1-37.

Duffie, D. and W. Shafer (1986): ”Equilibrium and the role of the firm in incomplete
    markets,” Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, mimeo.

Geanakoplos, J. (1990): ”An introduction to general equilibrium with incomplete asset
    mar- kets,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 19 (1-2), 1-38.

Geanakoplos, J. (2004): ”Liquidity, default and crashes: Endogenous contracts in general
    equilibrium,” Econometric Society 2004 North American Summer Meetings, Econo-
    metric Society.

Grossman, S. J. and O. D. Hart (1979): ”A theory of competitive equilibrium in stock
    market economies,” Econometrica, 47 (2), 293-329.

Hart, O. D. (1979): ”On shareholder unanimity in large stock market economies,” Econo-
    metrica 47 (5), 1057-83.


                                            37
Hart, O. D. (1980): ”Perfect competition and optimal product differentiation,” Journal of
    Economic Theory, 22 (2), 279-312.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2009): ”Quantitative macroeconomics
    with heterogeneous households,” Annual Review of Economics, 1 (1), 319-354.

Jensen, M.C. (1986): ”Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers”,
    American Economic Review, 76 (2), 323-329.

Jensen, M. C. and W. H. Meckling (1976): ”Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
    agency costs and ownership structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (4), 305-
    360.

Jerez, B. (2005): ”Incentive compatibility and pricing under moral hazard,” Review of
    Economic Dynamics, 8 (1), 28-47.

Kelsey, D. and F. Milne (1996): ”The existence of equilibrium in incomplete markets and
    the objective function of the firm,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 25 (2), 229-
    245.

Kihlstrom, R. E. and S. A. Matthews (1990): ”Managerial incentives in an entrepreneurial
    stock market model,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 1 (1), 57-79.

Magill, M. and M. Quinzii (1998): ”Incentives and risk sharing in a stock market equilib-
    rium,” in A. Alkan and N. Yannelis (eds.), Studies in Economic Theory, Volume 8,
    Current Trends in Economics: Theory and Applications, Berlin, Springer Verlag.

Magill, M. and M. Quinzii (2002): ”Capital market equilibrium with moral hazard,” Journal
    of Mathematical Economics, 38 (1-2), 149-190.

Magill, M. and W. Shafer (1991): ”Incomplete markets,” in W. Hildenbrand and H. Sonnen-
    schein (eds.), Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Volume 4, Chapter 30, pp. 1523-
    1614, Amsterdam, Elsevier.

Makowski, L. (1980): ”A characterization of perfectly competitive economies with produc-
    tion,” Journal of Economic Theory, 22 (2), 208-221.

Makowski, L. (1983a): ”Competition and unanimity revisited,” American Economic Re-
    view, 73 (3), 329-39.

                                          38
Makowski, L. (1983b): ”Competitive stock markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 50 (2),
    305-30.

Ostroy, J. M. (1980): ”The no-surplus condition as a characterization of perfectly compet-
    itive equilibrium,” Journal of Economic Theory, 22 (2), 183-207.

Ostroy, J. M. (1984): ”A reformulation of the marginal productivity theory of distribution,”
    Econometrica, 52 (3), 599-630.

Parlour, C. A. and J. Walden (2011): ”General equilibrium returns to human and invest-
    ment capital under moral hazard,” Review of Economic Studies, 78 (1), 394-428.

Pesendorfer, W. (1995): ”Financial innovation in a general equilibrium model,” Journal of
    Economic Theory, 65 (1), 79-116.

Prescott, E. C. and R. M. Townsend (1984): ”Pareto optima and competitive equilibria
    with adverse selection and moral hazard,” Econometrica, 52 (1), 21-45.

Prescott, E. S. and R. M. Townsend (2006): ”Firms as clubs in Walrasian markets with
    private information,” Journal of Political Economy, 114 (4), 644-671.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1969): ”A re-examination of the Modigliani-Miller theorem,” American
    Economic Review, 59 (5), 784-93.

Tirole, J. (2006): The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton, Princeton University Press.

Zame, W. R. (2007): ”Incentives, contracts, and markets: A general equilibrium theory of
    firms,” Econometrica, 75 (5), 1453-1500.




                                            39
Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1
We only provide here an outline of the main steps. Since the firms’ choice problem is non
convex, we allow for the possibility that firms undertake different production and financial
plans in equilibrium. By Caratheodory’s Theorem, given the finite dimensionality of the sets
where these variables lie, it is enough to consider the case where firms make at most a finite
number N of different choices k n , φn , mn , B n . As a consequence, we extend the consumers’
budget constraints (3)-(5) to allow for the possibility that they trade N different types of
equity and bonds, with prices q n , pn and returns Re,n (s), Rb,n (s). Since short sales are not
allowed, the consumers’ budget set is non empty, compact and convex for all pn , q n  0,
all Re,n (s),Rb,n (s) ≥ 0 and all V n ≥ 0, for n = 1, .., N. Under the assumptions made on
individual preferences, consumers’ net demand (for the consumption good and the different
types of bonds and equity) are then well behaved, continuous functions.
   Let us turn then our attention to the firms’ problem (16). Whenever the first order
approach is not satisfied and the map φ(k, m, B; c(s)) is not single-valued and continuous, it
is convenient to write the implementability constraint (10) in terms of the inverse map:

                                      k, m, B ∈ φ−1 (φ; c(s)).

We also impose here the following regularity condition, requiring that the above inverse map
can be described by a set of functions

                        k, m, B ∈ φ−1 (φ; c(s)) ⇔ G(k, m, B; c(s), φ) ≤ 0,                       (33)

with G(.) assumed to be continuous in k, m, B, c(s) for all φ ∈ Φ. Note that this condition
is satisfied in natural environments, as for instance in the case of (11) and (12).
   Let us partition the set N ≡ {1, .., N } into equal-sized subsets N (φ) for each φ ∈ Φ. The
firms’ choice problem can then be rewritten as
                                    " P                                                                     #
                                                            n     n                 i i       e n n    n
                                              P
                                         φ∈Φ      n∈N (φ) γ (−k + E [maxi M RS (c (s))R (k , φ, m , B ; s)]
  max(kn ,mn ,B n ,γ n )n∈N (φ),φ∈Φ                                                    
                                      +E maxi M RS i (ci (s))Rb (k n , φ, mn , B n ; s) B n
                                 (
                                                               γ ∈ ∆N −1
                          s.t.
                                    G(k n , mn , B n ; c(s), φ) ≤ 0 for all n ∈ N (φ) and all φ
                                                                                                    (34)

                                                 40
where γ ∈ ∆N −1 can be equivalently interpreted as the fraction of firms choosing each of
the N plans, or the probability weights of the lottery over production and financial plans
describing the choice of each firm53 . In the above expression of the firms’ problem we have
also used condition M) to substitute for the equity and bond price conjectures and used (33)
to rewrite the incentive constraint (10).
       The objective function and the constraints of the firms’ problem (34) are continuous
w.r.t. (k n , mn , B n , γ n )n∈N (φ),φ∈Φ and c(s). Since the sets K, M, B are compact, the corre-
spondence describing the solution of the firm’s problem (34) above is then non empty and
upper hemicontinuous, for all ci0 ∈ (0, max { i w0i }], ci1 (s) ∈ (0, max i wi (s)].
                                             P                           P

       By a standard fixed point argument there exists so a value φ̄n , k̄ n , m̄n , B̄ n , p̄n , q̄ n , γ̄ n , R̄e,n (s),
R̄b,n (s) for n = 1, .., N and c̄(s) such that: (a) k̄ n , m̄n , B̄ n , γ̄ n for n = 1, .., N solve the firms’
optimal choice problem (34) when the terms M RS i appearing in the equity and bond price
conjecture maps above are evaluated at c̄(s), and n ∈ N (φ) implies φ̄n = φ, (b) for each
i = 1, .., I, c̄i (s) is a solution of the choice problem of type i consumers at prices and re-
turns p̄n , q̄ n , V̄ n , R̄e,n (s), R̄b,n (s), n = 1, .., N , satisfying the consistency condition C), (c) the
market clearing conditions hold (for each type n of equity and bonds, the supply γ̄ n equals
consumers’ demand).


Proof of Proposition 2
Suppose ĉ(s) is admissible and Pareto dominates the competitive equilibrium allocation c̄(s).
                                                                            I
By the definition of admissibility a collection k̂, m̂, φ̂, B̂ and θ̂i , b̂i    exists such that ĉ(s)
                                                                                           i=1
satisfies (17), (18) and (19). The equilibrium consumption level c̄i (s) is the optimal choice of a
type i consumer at the equilibrium prices q̄, p̄ and returns R̄e (s) = Re (k̄, φ̄, m̄, B̄; s), R̄b (s) =
Rb (k̄, φ̄, m̄, B̄; s). As argued in Section 2.4, the consumer’s choice problem is analogous
to one where any possible type of equity and bonds are available for trade, at the prices
q(k, φ, B, m), p(k, φ, B, m) satisfying the Makowski criterion M) with φ ∈ φ(k, m, B; c̄(s)).
When the map φ(.) only depends on k, m, B, we have φ̂ ∈ φ(k̂, m̂, B̂) and so we get:


                                       ĉi0 + q̂ θ̂i + p̂ b̂i ≥ c̄i0 + q̄ θ̄i + p̄ b̄i ,
where q̂ = q(k̂, φ̂, m̂, B̂), p̂ = p(k̂, φ̂, m̂, B̂). Or, equivalently,
                         h                     i
                           −k̂ + q̂ + p̂ B̂ θ0i + τ i ≥ −k̄ + q̄ + p̄ B̄ θ0i ,
                                                                       
                                                                                                                   (35)
  53
       With the realizations of the lottery observed by consumers when choosing their portfolios.

                                                             41
                                  h                i
for τ i ≡ ĉi0 + q̂ θ̂i + p̂ b̂i − −k̂ + q̂ + p̂ B̂ θ0i . Since (35) holds for all i, strictly for some
i, summing over i yields:
                      h                i X
                                           τ i > −k̄ + q̄ + p̄ B̄
                                                                 
                       −k̂ + q̂ + p̂ B̂ +                                                                         (36)
                                                          i


The fact that k̄, m̄, B̄ solves the firms’ optimization problem (8) in turn implies that:

                                     −k̄ + q̄ + p̄ B̄ ≥ −k̂ + q̂ + p̄ B̂,

which, together with (36), yields:
                                                     X
                                                          τ i > 0,
                                                      i

or equivalently:
                                              X                   X
                                                    ĉi0 + k̂ >       w0i ,
                                                i                 i

a contradiction to (17) at date 0. 


Proof of Proposition 3
Note that we can always consider a situation where, in equilibrium, each consumer holds
at most a negligible amount of equity of any individual firm and so the effects on a con-
sumer’s utility of alternative choices by a firm can then be evaluated using the consumer’s
marginal utility. Let c(s) be the equilibrium consumption allocation. For any possible choice
k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 by a firm, with φ0 ∈ φ(k 0 , m0 , B 0 ; c(s)), the (marginal) utility of a type j consumer
if he holds the firm’s equity and debt is

−k 0 −W (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 )+E M RS j (cj (s))Re (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ; s) +E M RS j (cj (s))Rb (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ; s) B 0 ,
                                                                                                                        


But this is always lower or equal than the agent’s utility if instead he sells the firm’s equity
and bonds at the market price, evaluated on the basis of price conjectures satisfying M),

                   −k 0 − W (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ) + max E M RS i (ci (s))Re (k 0 , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ; s)
                                                                                                      
                                                      i
                   + max E M RS (c (s))R (k , φ0 , m0 , B 0 ; s) B 0 ,
                                        i i         b 0
                                                                  
                        i

and the latter is in turn lower than the corresponding expression if the firm adopts the
equilibrium choice k, φ, m, B, since this choice solves problem (16). 


                                                          42
Further details of the proof of Proposition 4
When (21) holds as equality only for consumer i = 2 we have c21 (s) = w12 (s) + a1 (s)k α >
c11 (s) = w11 (s), c20 = w0 +V 0.5−q < c10 = w0 +V 0.5. For simplicity we assume here that the
following symmetry condition also holds: E [M RS(c2 (s))a1 (s)k α ] = E [M RS(ĉ1 (s))a2 (s)k α ] ,
    c10 = w0 + V 0.5 − q, b
for b                     c11 (s) = w11 (s) + a2 (s)k α for all k, q, V > 0.
       For φ = 0 to be an optimal choice for the firms, we must have in this case:

                           q = E M RS(c2 (s))a1 (s)k α ≥ E M RS(c1 (s))a2 (s)k α
                                                                              


which contradicts the assumed symmetry condition, since

                             E M RS(c1 (s))a2 (s)k α > E M RS(ĉ1 (s))a2 (s)k α .
                                                                            


       Consider next the case where w11 (s) + a2 (s)k α and w12 (s) + a2 (s)k α varies comonotonically
with a1 (s) for all k ∈ K (a slightly stronger condition than the comononicity of w11 (s), w12 (s)
and a1 (s)). In this case we have

                                E [M RS(c(s))a2 (s)k α ] > E [M RS(c(s))a1 (s)k α ]

for all k ∈ K, c0 and c1 (s) = w1i (s)+θa2 (s)k α , i = 1, 2, θ ∈ [0, 1], since Cov(M RS(c(s)), a2 (s)) >
0 > Cov(M RS(c(s)), a1 (s)). Hence in equilibrium both consumers’ types are only willing to
buy equity of firms with full loading on factor a2 (s).


Details on the Dierker, Dierker, and Grodal (2002) example
There are two types of consumers, with type 2 having twice the mass of type 1, and (non
                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                         109
expected utility) preferences, respectively, u1 (c10 , c11 (s1 ), c11 (s2 )) = c11 (s1 )/ 1 − (c10 ) 10       and
                                                      1/2
u2 (c20 , c21 (s1 ), c21 (s2 )) = c20 + (c21 (s2 ))         , endowments w01 = .95, w02 = 1 and w11 (s) = w12 (s) = 0
for all s ∈ S.
       In this economy Dierker, Dierker and Grodal (2002) find a unique, symmetric Dreze
equilibrium where all firms choose the same value of k and φ ≈ 0.754 and this equilibrium is
constrained inefficient. We show next that a symmetric competitive equilibrium, according to
  54
       The notion of Dreze criterion used by Dierker, Dierker, and Grodal to specify price conjectures differs
from the Makowski criterion M) in two main respects: i) only the MRS of the consumers who in equilibrium
are shareholders of the firms are considered to evaluate alternative production plans, and ii) these MRS are
not constant but vary to take into account the effect of each plan on the agents’ consumption.

                                                                   43
our definition in Section 2.3, does not exist. Given the agents’ endowments and preferences,
both types of consumers buy equity in equilibrium. It is then easy to see that the firms’
optimality condition with respect to φ can never hold for an interior value of φ nor for a
corner solution.55 On the other hand, an asymmetric equilibrium exists, where a fraction 1/3
of the firms choose φ1 = 0.99 and k 1 = 0.3513 and the remaining fraction chooses φ2 = 2/3
and k 2 = 0.1667, type 1 consumers hold only equity of the firms choosing φ1 , k 1 and type
                                                                                     ∂u1 /∂c11 (s1 )
2 consumers only equity of the other firms. At this allocation, we have               ∂u1 /∂c10
                                                                                                       = 1.0101,
∂u2 /∂c21 (s2 )
 ∂u2 /∂c20
                  = 3. Also, the marginal valuation of type 1 agents for the equity of firms choosing
 2    2
φ , k is 0.1122, thus smaller than the market value of these firms’ equity, equal to 0.1667,
while the marginal valuation of type 2 agents for the equity of the firms choosing φ1 , k 1 is
0.0105, smaller than the market value of these firms’ equity, equal to 0.3513. Therefore,
at these values the firms’ optimality conditions are satisfied. It can then be easily verified
that this constitutes a competitive equilibrium according to our definition and that the
equilibrium allocation is constrained optimal.


A Parametric Example
Consumers have identifı̀cal preferences described by Eu(c0 , c1 (s)) = u(c0 ) + Eu(c1 (s)), with
            c1−γ
u(c) =      1−γ
                 ,   for γ = 2. The state space is S = {1, 2, 3} with π(1) = π(2) = π(3) = 13 . The
production technology is as in (13), with α = .75 and productivity shocks a1 (s) and a2 (s)
taking values, respectively, {1, 2, 3} and {1.1, 2, 2.9}. The second period endowments of type
1 and type 2 agents take values, respectively, {1, 2, 3} and {1.1, 2, 2.9}, while in the first
period they are endowed with w0i = w1i (2), i = 1, 2, units of the good and the same amount
θ0 = .5 units of equity. Also, the utility cost of different choices of φ is v i (1) = −.006 and
v i (0) = 0, for all i.
       The equilibrium values with and without the agency friction are reported in the following
table.
       In order to implement the same choice φ = 0 the firm modifies its production and financial
decisions together with the portfolio of the agent selected as manager (in particular, the
manager’s compensation exhibits a higher amount of equity, (.6456), a lower one of debt (0)
  55
       Consider for instance φ = 0.99. To have an equilibrium at this value the marginal valuation of equity
for both consumers must be the same at φ = 0.99, and higher than at any other values of φ, but this second
property clearly cannot hold for type 2 consumers.



                                                      44
                               Without agency friction   With agency frictions
                   φ                        0                     0
                   k                       .4888                .4896
                   B                [.1828,.6431]               .2160
                  θ1                       .3877                .3544
                   b1               [.1828,.3613]               .2160
                   q                [.5108,.1559]               .4870
                   p                       .7712                .7689
           −k + q + pB − W                 .1629                .1633
                  U1                   -1.0372                  -1.0371
                      2
                  U                    -1.0217                  -1.0219


              Table 1: Equilibrium values with and without moral hazard.

and also a lower consumption at date 0).




                                                45
