NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DOES FAMILY HEALTH CARE USE RESPOND TO ECONOMIC SHOCKS?
REALIZED AND ANTICIPATED EFFECTS
Alan C. Monheit
Irina Grafova
Rizie Kumar
Working Paper 20348
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20348
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We thank Pinar Karaca-Mandic and participants at the 5th Biennial Conference of the American Society
of Health Economists, session on The Great Recession and Health, for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alan C. Monheit, Irina Grafova, and Rizie Kumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Does Family Health Care Use Respond to Economic Shocks? Realized and Anticipated
Effects
Alan C. Monheit, Irina Grafova, and Rizie Kumar
NBER Working Paper No. 20348
July 2014
JEL No. I12,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Families in constrained economic circumstances resulting from economic shocks face difficult choices
regarding how best to spend their diminished resources. As families strive to preserve their living standards,
decisions regarding health care use and its allocation among family members may become more discretionary
and complex. Using two-year panel data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey for 2004 to 2011,
we examine how the intra-family allocation of health care spending responds to realized and anticipated
changes in family economic status. We focus on the share of total family health care spending allocated
to children, and measure realized economic shocks based on changes in the family’s income, employment,
and health insurance status. We account for anticipated economic shocks by differentiating families
by whether they are observed prior to, at the onset of, or during the Great Recession, or in the post-recession
period. Our findings suggest that both types of economic shocks affect the share of family health care
spending allocated to children, with findings more pronounced for single-mother families. We also
find that realized economic shocks have a greater impact on children’s spending share than the anticipated
change in economic status associated with the Great Recession and its recovery.
Alan C. Monheit
School of Public Health
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
683 Hoes Lane West
Piscataway, NJ 08854-5635
and NBER
monheiac@sph.rutgers.edu
Irina Grafova
School of Public Health
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
683 Hoes Lane West
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854
grafovib@sph.rutgers.edu

Rizie Kumar
School of Public Health
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
683 Hoes Lane West
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854
kumarr2@sph.rutgers.edu

How Does Family Health Care Use Respond to Economic Shocks?
Realized and Anticipated Effects
Alan C. Monheit, Irina Grafova, and Rizie Kumar

I. Introduction
Families in constrained economic circumstances resulting from economic shocks – losses
or reductions in employment, income, wealth, and health insurance – face difficult choices
regarding how best to spend their diminished economic resources on critical necessities. As
families strive to preserve their living standards by maintaining housing and adequate
nourishment, decisions regarding health care use may become far more discretionary and
complex. In particular, families experiencing an economic shock may, by necessity, be required
to prioritize their health care spending among family members and specific health care services.
In such economic circumstances, the family’s health care decision making confronts a
number of compelling resource allocation decisions. For example, do families decide to share the
burden of diminished economic resources by reducing health service use by all family members?
Or do they prioritize health care spending on behalf of children and/or family members with
specific health care needs or chronic health conditions? Do families forego certain types of
services, such as preventive health care, prescription drugs, mental health care, and dental care,
and are they more likely to obtain care at emergency rooms or hospital outpatient clinics? Such
family decision making has implications not only for the private welfare of its members but for
society more generally. For example, the inability of families to meet their health care needs can
translate into delays in seeking health care, worsening of health conditions, and the use of health
care in less appropriate setting, thereby contributing to greater health care spending over time.
1

In this paper, we consider how economic shocks affect family health security by
examining the family’s response to both realized and anticipated changes in their economic
circumstances, focusing on the implication for family health care resource allocation between
parents and children in single-mother and in two-parent families. We consider responses to a
realized economic shock by examining how families respond to observed changes in their
economic circumstances, focusing on losses in income, employment, and health insurance.
Holding constant the changes in these observed attributes of family economic status, we also
examine the impact of an anticipated economic shock on family health care use. We do so by
using the period of the Great Recession (December 2007 to June 2009) as an exogenous change
in macroeconomic circumstances which may have affected the family’s expectations regarding
its future economic prospects. 1 As we discuss below, survey data suggest that the Great
Recession and its aftermath may have altered such expectations, and in response, families may
have changed their spending patterns to accommodate precautionary savings motives. Moreover
changes in unobserved factors such as family stress and anxiety during the Great Recession and
its aftermath compared to pre-recessionary periods also may have changed expectations
regarding longer term economic prospects, and such expectations may have altered resource
allocation decisions by families (Hurd and Rohwedder, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2010)
We implement this analysis by exploiting a series of two-year panel data sets from the
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household Component (MEPS-HC). Use of these data to
characterize family health care decision making represents a key contribution of our analysis as
it enables us to examine within-family health care adjustments to realized economic shocks over
a two-year period, and to the expectation of changes in economic status resulting from the Great
We also make this distinction since actual economic shocks experienced by a family can occur
in any time period and thus are not unique to the circumstances of the Great Recession.
1

2

Recession and its weak economic recovery. Our findings suggest that both types of economic
shocks had an impact on the allocation of health care spending to children in single-parent
households, with smaller and less consistent effects observed among two-parent families.
Our paper has particular policy salience. First, it speaks directly to the issue of the
family’s health care decision-making and welfare during a period when many American families
have experienced meager economic progress, and in which economic conditions remain
uncertain and unstable. Next, while the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA)
promises health care coverage that is “always there,” and subsidies to defray the costs of
coverage, the health care needs of some families experiencing economic shocks still will remain
vulnerable. For example, since the ACA’s cost-sharing subsidies phase out after 250% of
poverty, families who exceed this income threshold but experience income losses during periods
of economic distress may also be subject to high out-of-pocket (OOP) costs and make
adjustments to their internal allocation of health care spending. In this regard, recent experience
with state health reform in Massachusetts has revealed that national health reform may not be
sufficient to alleviate substantial out-of-pocket costs for families with incomes below 400% of
poverty, for those with increased health care needs, and for families with more children
(Galbraith et al. 2013).
Other circumstances may put families at risk for high out-of-pocket costs and thus may
affect the intra-family allocation of total health care spending. Families in states that fail to
implement the ACA’s Medicaid expansion and experience income losses that place them
between their state’s Medicaid thresholds and below 138% of poverty may face potentially high
out-of-pocket expenses and may adjust their health care use accordingly. Additionally, should
insured families suffer income losses in the post-ACA period, they may gravitate to less

3

generous essential health benefit plans and thereby face higher out-of-pocket costs that may
necessitate changes in their decisions regarding family members’ health care use and spending.
The plan of our paper is as follows. We begin with a brief description of the current
economic environment and the impact Great Recession and discuss their implications for family
economic and health security. Next, we describe prior research that is particularly relevant for
our study followed by a description of the conceptual framework that motivates our analysis. We
discuss the data used in our analysis and our conceptual and empirical frameworks, and then
discuss our findings and conclusions. Our findings suggest that both realized and anticipated
economic shocks may impact the intra-family health care spending allocation for children, with
effects most pronounced for single-mother families.

II. Background:
Family Economic Security and the Economic Environment
Since the late 1990s, the US economy has been characterized by instability and sluggish
economic growth, threatening the economic progress and security of many American families.
This insecurity is reflected in stagnant or declining real incomes; increases in accumulated debt;
difficulty in meeting rising health care and insurance costs; the threat of housing foreclosures;
the tenuous nature of employment; and threats to the private safety net of pensions and retiree
health benefits and to the traditional public safety net. As regards family incomes among workage families, over the last decade, real median family income declined from $63,535 in 2000 to
$55,640 in 2011 (Economic Policy Institute tabulations of real median family income, 2014b),
and during the same period, the unemployment rate increased from 3.8% in April 2000 to 9.1%
in April 2011 (Bureau of Labor Statistics). Consistent with this characterization, a report from

4

the Pew Research Center (2012) has labeled the decade beginning in 2000 as the “lost decade of
the middle class” in which its size diminished, inflation-adjusted average family incomes
declined for families in all income tiers, wealth declined for all families except those in the
highest income tier, and in which respondents expressed significant pessimism over the future
and with regard to the performance of major financial and government institutions. In addition,
Leonhardt and Quealy (2014) report that compared to other developed countries, the economic
stature of the U.S. middle class has fallen well behind.
Apart from this general lack of economic progress, the period encompassed by the Great
Recession (December 2007 to June 2009) as well as its immediate aftermath has had a profound
effect on family economic status and expectations for future wellbeing through its impact on
labor, financial, and housing markets. The recession affected the economic status of many
American families through income losses associated with lengthy or persistent unemployment,
underemployment, losses of health insurance, as well as reductions in accumulated savings,
wealth, and housing values. For example, during this period, the U.S. labor market lost 8.8
million jobs (Goodman and Mance 2011), the unemployment rate increased from 4.7% to 9.4%,
and the long-term unemployed (more than six months unemployed) as a percent of the
unemployed increased from 18.9% in November 2007 to 27% in May 2009 (Economic Policy
Institute, 2014a). Finally, the economic recovery from the Great Recession has been exceedingly
weak, with long-term unemployment long-term as a percent of the unemployment has increasing
to 37.7% in December 2013 and, as noted above, real median family income for working-age
families declining precipitously.
As Hurd and Rohwedder (2010) note in their analysis of the American Life Panel survey
data, by April 2010, nearly 39% of households were in financial distress with either the

5

respondent or spouse having been unemployed, or the household had negative equity in their
home, or had been in arrears in home payments. The authors also found that survey respondents’
long-term expectations about stock market prices and housing prices were very pessimistic, and
that workers’ expectations of poor success in obtaining employment remained high. They
conclude by noting that the data indicate that households are not optimistic about their economic
future, suggesting that in this regard, the recession’s impact may have significantly altered
expectations.
What is especially relevant for our study is the authors’ finding of efforts by households
to economize on health care spending, specifically, a sharp decline in two components of health
care spending (prescription drugs and health care services) which substantially exceeded the
spending decline on the 25 other spending categories (health and non-health) surveyed. Finally,
the authors also note that because of the protection health spending provides against future health
declines, households economizing in this way are subject to potentially long-term negative
consequences.
In sum, this review suggests that apart from realized economic shocks prior to and during
the Great Recession, diminished family expectations about the state of the economy and future
economic prospects were also prevalent. We consider both of these potential influences on the
intra-family allocation of health spending in our analysis.
Prior research: Economic shocks and health security
Next, we highlight some very recent research that on health care responses to economic
shocks. While there is a large literature that has examined the impact of economic swings on

6

health outcomes, we restrict our discussion to a few papers that are particularly salient for our
analysis of family health care spending. 2
Perhaps most relevant to our focus on intra-family health care decision making in
response to an economic shock is the paper by Karaca-Mandic, Yoo, and Strong (2013). Noting
that the Great Recession and its accompanying decreases in household income, savings, and
increased risk both employment and health insurance loss were prominent factors in the decline
in health care spending over this period, the authors consider OOP spending trends for children
and adults. They use a sample of privately insured families with children (ages 0 to 17) and
adults obtained from annual cross-sections of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to obtain
annual spending estimates by each group between 2001 and 2009. The authors focus specifically
on the issue of whose OOP health care spending – those of children or adults – was most affected
by the recession.
Using generalized linear expenditure models (with a log-link) to estimate whether the
period of the Great Recession had a differential effect on spending for these groups compared to
other periods, they find little evidence that the recession affected such spending for most

The impact of economic fluctuations on the health of individual family members is a
complex process, and despite the large literature that has developed on this issue, remains
unresolved. The complexity reflects the fact that on the one hand, the stress, uncertainty, and
social dislocation associated with difficult economic times can result in reductions in the
physical and mental health status of particular family members through harmful health
behaviors, including smoking, drinking, drug abuse, and poor dietary practices, and that
emotional distress and anxiety can lead to harmful physical health problems such as high blood
pressure. Alternatively, the health status of some individuals will benefit from the decline in
economic activity associated with the recession, as when individuals have more time to invest in
their own health through recreation and physical activity, prepare meals at home rather than
purchase prepared foods, when air pollution diminishes due to reduced industrial production, and
when automobile mishaps are reduced as a consequence of declining economic activity, among
other factors.
2

7

children. However, children with special health care needs had significantly lower spending
levels, while adults, regardless of whether they were in families with or without special needs
children, experienced a decline in their OOP spending. They note that the reduction in adult
health care spending in families without special needs children also is suggestive of adults
sacrificing their own health care use to maintain spending levels of children. Based on this
divergence, the authors suggest that parents may reduce their own spending in difficult economic
times to accommodate the health care needs of their children.
In a related paper Karaca-Mandic et al. (2014) take a family perspective on health care
access and utilization by considering the relationship between the family’s OOP health care
burden and the health care needs of children. They use data from the MEPS-HC for the period of
2002 – 2009 which encompasses the period of the Great Recession and focus on measures of
unmet health care needs for children, obtaining observations for each child for two years from
the MEPS panel. The analysis includes OOP spending for children and for adults as explanatory
variables and considers whether outcome measures were sensitive to the period of the recession.
They fit linear probability models of the likelihood of unmet need/delayed care, and to address
the potential endogeneity of OOP spending, the authors employ an instrumental variables
technique. The authors found that children were more likely to have unmet needs or delayed care
if other family members had high OOP spending, a finding that was consistent for children with
our without special health care needs. Finally, the authors found that the period of the Great
Recession was associated with reduced unmet needs of children, suggesting, as in their earlier
study, that parents may have sacrificed their own use of medical care in response to difficult
economic circumstances.

8

While these findings suggest an internal family resource allocation process that favors
family members with specific health care needs (such as children), the analyses does not directly
consider how a specific types of economic shocks affect may affect such decision making. The
latter is particularly important since while the economic shocks of the Great Recession may have
been especially profound for many families, families also experienced economic shocks in other
periods and these also could have affected intra-family decision making. In our analysis, we
directly consider this issue and by using the MEPS-HC two-year panels, consider how families
adjust to actual and anticipated changes in their economic circumstances.
In an analysis that takes advantage of the two-year MEPS-HC panel, Schaller and
Stevens (2014) consider the impact of involuntary employment loss on health, health care access,
and health care utilization. They pool separate MEPS panels for the period 1996 to 2011 for
individual between 21 and 65 that are employed in the first round of the survey, obtaining a
sample of over 9800 individual job losses observed over this period. The authors find evidence
that a job loss results in worse self-reported physical and mental health but is not associated with
significant increases in chronic health conditions. Among all workers, they find that a job loss
leads to reductions in insurance loss but little evidence reductions in health care use. However, if
the lost job was the primary source of insurance, reductions in physician visits and prescription
drug use are observed. While the authors’ findings suggest that the health insurance loss
associated with lost employment can be an important implications for health status of some
workers, the analysis does not consider the implications for the health and health status for other
family member, or how such insurance loss may lead to changes in family-level spending
patterns. This can be an important shortcoming since the observed change in utilization for

9

individual workers is likely to be affected by the health care use and health status of other family
members.
III. Conceptual Framework
To motivate our study of how the intra-family allocation of health care responds to
economic shocks and to draw implications, we apply a simple model of family decision-making
based on Becker’s (1981) discussion of altruism in the family. In Becker’s model, families
allocate resources among members based upon the preferences of an altruistic family decision
maker. Although Becker’s model focuses on family resource allocation among spouses who pool
income, his analysis has implications for the decision-maker’s response to an economic shock.
Applying this model to our context, a parent/family-decision maker’s welfare or utility
depends on the decision-maker’s own resource consumption and on the welfare of other family
members some of whom may require special consideration, such as children and those with
vulnerable health status. We believe that the assumption of parental altruistic preferences has
face validity for children, since parents are interested in child quality and also seek to avoid the
costs associated with neglecting the health problems of children, and we assume similar
sentiments are present with regard to other family members in vulnerable health.
In this context, we can perceive of each family member having their own health
production function which depends on purchased medical care and time, and that the good health
thus produced provides a source of utility for each family member. The altruist’s utility function
thus depends on her own health and on the utility she derives from the health of other family
members who are the beneficiaries of the altruist’s health care spending on their behalf. To
simplify the discussion, we make the altruist’s utility function depend upon her medical care use
and that of her beneficiary, and assume that prices for medical care are the same for both. The
10

altruist will maximize her utility subject to a budget constraint in which her income is allocated
to health care services across family members. Utility maximization by the altruist is obtained
when the marginal utility of medical care for the altruist equals that of the beneficiaries (or the
ratio of these marginal utilities equal unity), and thus determines the allocation of health
spending within the family. Thus, the parent decision maker will allocate part of her income to
support the health care consumption of other family members, thus sacrificing her own
consumption of other health care and other commodities.
As Becker notes, an important implication of this model is that when the altruistic
decision maker experiences an economic shock which reduces her income, the consumption by
the altruistic decision maker will decline but by less than the full decline in income. More
specifically, the altruist will in effect “reclaim” part of the income previously allocated to her
beneficiaries to offset her potential consumption loss. Assuming health care to be a normal good,
the model will predict that an economic shock will reduce the health care spending by both the
altruist and her beneficiaries.
An implication of this behavior, not explicit in Becker’s discussion, is the consequence
for the share of total spending by the altruist and her beneficiaries. Since the altruist will reclaim
expenditures made on behalf of beneficiaries prior to the economic shock, the beneficiaries’
health care consumption will decline as the altruist either partially or fully restores her own
spending. This will shift spending in favor of the altruist and away from the beneficiaries and
thus increase her share of total spending. Thus, assuming altruistic parents, an economic shock
could shift spending shares to parents and away from children.
As noted earlier, Becker’s makes this point in the context of a two-person household
(husband and wife) and with regard to a generic consumption commodity. While we have

11

extended this to the family’s health care spending, allocation decisions regarding parents and
children are likely to be more complex. In particular, the altruist may be willing to absorb a
decline in her spending in response to an economic shock in order to preserve the health care
spending of children and other vulnerable family members, especially if the altruist places
greater value or utility on the health care use by vulnerable family members than on her own
health care use. In this case, the share of spending by the altruistic parents will decline and that
of her beneficiaries may increase. Thus, the consequence of an economic shock to the spending
shares by the altruist and her beneficiary is ultimately an empirical question.
Alternatively, we can posit a more generic “common preference” parental utility function
which depends on the welfare of the parents and dependent children (in our case based on
medical care use). Should the indifference curves from this parental utility function exhibit a
marginal rate of substitution (ratio of parents’ marginal utility from children’s medical care use
to that of parents own medical care use) in excess of unity (i.e., the parents exhibit greater
concern for children’s welfare relative to their own welfare), parents will favor children in their
initial intra-family resource allocation (Dickie and Messman 2004). These preferences will be
reflected in the respective expenditure shares of the groups. Should the family experience an
economic shock, the change in expenditure shares will depend on the behavior of the marginal
rate of substitution between children’s and parent’s health care use (i.e., the shape of these
indifference curves) as income declines. For preference functions that increasingly favor children
as family economic status diminishes, then the intra-family health care resource allocation (and
the expenditure share of children) will increase in response to the economic shock. Once again
the response of the intra-family health spending allocation becomes an empirical issue.

12

In what follows, we empirically investigate the implications of both realized and
anticipated economic shocks on family health care spending by first presenting descriptive
estimates of changes in family health care spending allocated to children during the Great
Recession and non-recessionary periods. For these analyses, we consider within-family changes
over two-year periods captured by the MEPS panel data. We next apply econometric models that
consider how expenditure shares and spending levels among parents and children respond to
actual economic shocks and those anticipated by the Great Recession over two-year observation
periods.

IV. Data and Empirical Approach
Data
The data for this analysis are from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey-Household
component (MEPS), a series of two-year panel data sets maintained by the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality. The MEPS collects data from a nationally representative
subsample of households that participated in the prior year’s National Health Interview Survey
(conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics). Respondents to the MEPS are surveyed
five times over a period covering two calendar years regarding their demographic characteristics,
health status, health care expenditures and utilization, health insurance coverage, income, and
employment status. Our analytical data set includes pooled two-year panels from the MEPS
covering the period 2004 through 2011.
Since the focus of our analysis is on intra-family resource allocation, we constructed
family units and obtained family-level characteristics for each of the two panel years based on
the characteristics of individual family members, family-level income, the insurance status of
each family member, and parent’s employment history. Our sample of families consists of those
13

with all members present for both years of the two-year panel and related by marriage or by
birth. Our family definition also is consistent with the definition of a health insurance eligibility
unit. We excluded families with individuals ages 65 years or older since such families typically
have members covered by Medicare. Such families are less likely than families with non-elders
to be affected by an economic shock that would compromise their health care spending or would
require a spending reallocation away from the elderly family member. Moreover, such families
may exhibit greater health care spending on average than families without elders. We also
excluded families with births during the two-year period since such families may have
experienced a one-time spike in their health care spending associated with pre-natal care and
childbirth. Finally, we also excluded families with children ages 19 or older in an attempt to
represent only nuclear families without children residing outside the household who may have
access to other sources of medical care (such as care obtained through a college health plan), or
who through their own employment obtained income and health insurance that were unlikely to
be affected by an economic shock experienced by their parents.
These exclusions resulted in a sample size of 43,629 individuals representing 13,821
families. Additionally, since our analysis focuses on the intra-family health care allocation
among adults and children, we restricted our analysis to married couples and single-parents
(mothers) with children. These restrictions yielded samples of 6019 two-parent families with
children and 2671 single-mother families for a total sample size of 8690 families. Finally, we
constrained our analysis to families with positive health care spending in both years in order to
assess the change in resource allocation for families who used health services in both periods.
These restrictions yielded a sample of 2478 single-mother families and 5772 two-parent families
for a total sample of 8250 families. For each family, we aggregated individual-level total health

14

care spending to obtain total family health care spending, and then using created variables
accounting for the share of total spending allocated to parents and children. In contrast to work
by Karaca-Mandic and colleagues, we focus on total health care spending for two reasons. First,
compared to OOP spending, total health care spending represents a measure of the family’s
overall health care utilization, and next, because family decision-makers may be uncertain as to
their OOPspending responsibility, and thus make their decisions based on total spending
commitments. 3 We express total health care spending by the family in 2011 dollars. Thus, our
key outcomes of interest are total expenditure shares for parents and children, and total spending
for these groups.
Empirical Approach
To assess the impact of anticipated and actual and realized economic shocks of the intrafamily health care spending allocation, we estimate several econometric models using the family
as the unit of analysis, and with the following general specification:
𝑂𝑖𝑡 = ∅(𝑋𝑖𝑡 𝛽 + 𝐴𝑖𝑡 𝛾 + 𝑃𝑟𝑡 𝛿𝑟 + 𝜏𝑖 + 𝜖𝑖𝑡 )
In this specification 𝑂𝑖𝑡 represents the outcome of interest for family i in time t, ∅ represents a

statistical operator which varies across model types, 𝑋𝑖𝑡 represents a vector of family-specific

characteristics with coefficient vector 𝛽 , 𝐴𝑖𝑡 represents a vector of actual economic shocks

experienced by the family with coefficient vector 𝛾, and 𝑃𝑟𝑡 is a vector of designated r=3

3

While research demonstrates that health care decision making is responsive to parameters of insurance
policies, it is also well known that individuals are not well informed regarding the specific payment
provisions of such policies. We also created similar variables for total family out-of-pocket

spending and the share of such spending for parents and children, and plan to examine behavior
with regard to outcomes based on this measure of spending.
15

recessionary and non-recessionary time periods and 𝛿𝑟 the coefficient vector. Finally, 𝜏𝑖 is a
family-specific error term, with 𝜖𝑖𝑡 representing a general stochastic error term.

In these models, the share of total health care spending allocated to children represents

the outcomes of interest. We control for various family characteristics including family size,
mother’s age and education, the health status of children and parents, mother’s race/ethnicity,
and the region in which the family resides. As described next, we include family income,
employment status, and insurance status to capture actual economic shocks over each two-year
observation period in our data, and identify families as to whether their two-year observation
periods encompass the pre-recession, recession, or post-recession time periods.
The econometric models include an pooled ordinary least squares model (OLS) that
provides estimates of the impact of the realized economic shocks on the outcomes of interest
averaged within and across families, and estimates of the impact of anticipated economic shocks
averaged across families for families observed in specific years of the pre-recession, recession,
and post-recession periods (since time periods do not vary across the two-year observation
periods for specific families). This model serves as a comparison for two alternative family
fixed-effects models for estimates of children’s expenditure shares. These models provide
estimates of the impact of the within-family change in actual economic status on children’s
health care spending shares over two-year time periods (relative to designated reference groups
for each component of economic status which do not change), and the within-family change in
spending allocation over each of the two-year designated recession/non-recessionary time
periods.
In the first linear fixed-effects model (as in the OLS model), we do not constrain
expenditure shares predictions to fall in the zero/one bound. Recognizing that these models can

16

predict outside this constraint, we follow work by Mullahy (2011), Papke and Wooldridge
(2008), and Wooldridge (2010) and estimate a fractional response model for children’s
expenditure shares. This model is essentially a generalized linear model (GLM) with proportions
as output and a probit function as the designated link function. Following Papke and Wooldridge
(2008) and Wooldridge (2010), this model also includes the two-year average values of our
explanatory variables which control for any correlation between our explanatory variables and
unobserved family effects yielding coefficient estimates that are equivalent to a family fixedeffects estimator.
Variables capturing realized economic changes
As noted earlier, we draw a distinction between realized and anticipated economic shocks
that can affect the family’s allocation of health care spending. To assess the impact of realized
changes in economic status over the two-year observation periods, we fit the above models using
measures of economic status within each MEPS panel year, focusing on family income,
employment status, and health insurance status. With regard to income changes, we include
dummy variable indicating family income relative to the federal poverty line (FPL), specifically,
whether the family is classified as poor or near-poor (less than 125% of the FPL), low income
(125% to less than 200% of the FPL), middle income (200% to less than 400% of the FPL), with
high income families (400% of the FPL or more) as the reference group. 4 We also characterize

4

Although we fit models with continuous income inflated to 2011 dollars, we focus on the poverty

level measures for the following reasons. First these measures capture any non-linearity in the
income/expenditure share relationship. Also, movement across these categories over time
represents significant income shifts. For example, moving from the income threshold of four
times the FPL in 2011for a family of four to the threshold for three times the FPL represents an
income loss of over $20,000 ($89,400 to $67,050). Such a dramatic shift is not likely to be
captured using a continuous measure of income which most accurately provides marginal
changes in income. The disadvantage in using the FPL measure is that we can miss some
significant changes within FPL classes.
17

the family’s employment status during each year of the two-year panel with a set of dummy
variables. For single-mother families, these variables indicate whether the mother was
continuously without employment during the year or lost employment during the year (full-year
employment is the reference group). For the two-parent families, similar variables were
constructed for mothers and fathers. In each case, the reference group indicates whether the
parent was continuously employed over the year or had acquired a job. Finally, we also account
for changes in the family’s health insurance status over each year in the two-year panel. We do
this with dummy variable indicating whether all family members were uninsured during the year;
whether at least one family member lost coverage during the year; and whether at least one
family member (but not all) was uninsured all year. We combined variables indicating full-year
coverage for all family members or the acquisition of coverage during the year as our reference
group. In our models that account for time-invariant family effects (our linear fixed-effects and
fractional response models), the coefficients of each set of these economic status dummy
variables convey the within-family time-varying change in economic circumstances over the twoyear panel observation period (i.e., from one-year to the next) relative to reference groups whose
status does not change over the two-year observation period.
Variables capturing anticipated economic changes
To assess the impact of anticipated economic shocks associated with the Great Recession,
we created several dummy variables indicating the two-year time periods in which families in
specific MEPS panels were observed. Families whose two-year observation period occurred
primarily prior to the recession (the years 2004-2005, 2005-2006, or 2006-2007) were designated
with the dummy variable PRE; families in panels whose two-year observation periods spanned
the onset and duration of the recession (either 2007 -2008 or 2008-2009) were designated with

18

the dummy variable REC; and families in panels whose two-year observation periods fell
primarily in the post-recession period (2009- 2010 or 2010- 2011) were designated with the
dummy variable POST. For each of our estimated models, we report our findings in a consistent
manner as the change in the outcomes of interest over each of the designated two-year
observation period.. As discussed next, the specification of these variables differed across our
alternative models. In each case, the variables were defined to capture the change in outcomes
for families observed between the first and second years of each designated economic time
period.
As noted above, we use three different estimating models: a pooled OLS model; a linear
fixed-effects model; and a fractional response model. The pooled OLS model provides a basis
for comparison with the linear fixed-effects and fractional models of children’s expenditure
shares. To accommodate the OLS model, we created a set of dummy variables indicating
whether a family is observed in the first or second year of each designated economic period (i.e.,
PRE1, PRE2; REC1, REC2; and POST1, POST2, respectively), with PRE1 serving as the
reference group. The difference in the estimated year-specific coefficients in this model (e.g.,
POST2 – POST1) represents the across-family change in our outcome of interest due to an
anticipated change in economic circumstances.
The linear fixed-effects and fractional response models employ different specifications
for these time-period effects. In the linear fixed-effects model, each designated time-period
dummy variable is defined for a second year of the designated economic period (e.g., PRE2,
REC2, and POST2). These variables capture the within-family change in outcomes between the
first and second years of these time periods. This specification also permits us to examine
whether the within-family differences in family health care spending over the two-years of the

19

recession differed from the effects observed over the two years specific to the other designated
time periods. Finally, in the fractional response models, we obtain similar comparisons of the
changes over the two-year periods based on the use of the full set of time-specific dummy
variables as defined for the OLS model. As noted below, we used differences in time period
predictions based on specific time period coefficients such as the coefficients of ONSET2 and
ONSET1) to estimate changes in outcomes over relevant time periods. 5
In what follows, we present descriptive findings describing the change in family health
care expenditure shares by family type and number of children over the different time periods
noted above (selected characteristics of single-mother and two-parent families are displayed in
appendix Table A). In our econometric work, we report on findings for each of the models noted
above, focusing on specifications that include both realized changes in economic status and
anticipated changes associated with the recession and its aftermath. Unless otherwise indicated,
all estimates are weighted by a MEPS family-level weight, standard errors are adjusted for the
MEPS complex survey design in our descriptive findings (while our econometric work employs
robust standard errors), and reported estimates and marginal effects are statistically significant at
the 0.05 level or greater. 6

The specification of the time-specific dummy variables vary between these models since the
family fixed-effects model is derived from an explicit within-family estimation, while the
fractional response model obtains within-family effects after controlling for the two-year family
averages in the explanatory variables. The latter variables, in effect, control for across-family
effects.
6
We derived family weights for our two-year panel file by taking the family weights from the
full-year file corresponding to the second year of each longitudinal file and adjusting these
weights for our specific sample. We did this by multiplying by the ratio of the sum of family
weights in this second-year file to sum of family weights for families who remained in the twoyear panel in the full-year file. We thank Steven Hill of AHRQ for his advice on this weighting
issue.
5

20

V. Findings
Descriptive results
In Table 1, we present estimates of children’s share of total health care spending by
family type, number of children in the family, and time period. We focus on these descriptive
estimates since they capture both actual and anticipated shocks and are more straightforward and
economical to discuss compared to the full set of realized economic effect variables. For specific
family types, these unadjusted estimates generally reveal a constancy of children’s expenditure
shares over each two-year period but with some noteworthy differences, particularly for singlemother families in the recession and post-recession periods. For these families with one child, we
observe a decline in the child’s total expenditure share in the post-recession period from 40.5%
to 35%. In data not presented, this decline does not represent a strict reallocation from child to
mother. Both mother and child experience a decline in total health spending, but the mother’s
decline of $322 (from $4083 to $3761; data not shown) is considerably smaller than the $626
decline for the child (mean total spending decline from $2376 to $1750). We also observe
declines in the recession and post-recession periods for children’s expenditure shares in singlemother families with two children (57.9% to 50.7% in the recession period, p < 0.10; 62.5% to
55.1% in the post- recession period, p < 0.10). In the former case, spending on both children and
mothers actually increase, but the spending increase for mothers exceeds that for children by
over $200. In the latter case, however, we observe nearly a $1500 decline in average spending
for children while mother’s spending declines by only $210 on average, suggesting a more
substantive reallocation of spending toward mothers. We observe no statistically significant
changes in children’s expenditure shares in the pre-recession period for these families,
suggesting that the observed changes in the recession and post-recession periods represent real

21

shifts in spending shares (albeit somewhat imprecisely estimated for families with two children)
compared to the earlier period.
In two-parent families with one child in the post-recession period, we observe a small
decline in children’s expenditure share from 28% to 24.6% (p < 0.10) (from $2202 to $1713, or
by nearly $500).This also represents a real reallocation to parents (notwithstanding the marginal
statistical significance), specifically to mothers (her share increased from 41.4% to 45.1%) while
father’s expenditure share remained roughly constant at just over 30% (data not shown). We find
no changes in children’s expenditure share in the pre-recession period for these family types. By
contrast, the only other change we observe is for two-parent, two-child families in the prerecession period. This is a relatively small decline in children’s expenditure share in these
families (from 44.4% to 42.3% p < 0.10) and is obtained at the expense of a decline in spending
allocated to mothers. Thus for two-parent families, we fail to observe any systematic change in
these unadjusted expenditure shares estimates related to specific time periods.
Econometric results
Children’s expenditure shares
In Tables 2 and 3, we present estimates of the impact of the actual and anticipated
economic shocks on children’s expenditure shares. These estimates represent marginal effects on
expenditure shares presented in terms of percentage point changes, with estimates for the
obtained directly from the model coefficients for the pooled OLS and linear fixed-effects models.
For the fractional response models, we estimated marginal effects as the difference in average
partial effects estimated for each set of variables. We obtained these average partial effects for a
standard population of families (either single-mother families or two-parent families) by first
predicting the expenditure share from our model by setting the relevant dummy variable equal to

22

one and obtaining predictions for each family, next setting this dummy variable equal to zero and
also obtaining predictions for each family, computing the difference in these predictions for each
family and then averaging. Standard errors were obtained using a bootstrapping procedure
specified by Wooldridge (2010) based on at least 100 sample draws.
In Table 2, we present marginal (percentage point) effects for single-mother families. The
pooled OLS model (column 1) provides some evidence of both actual and anticipated economic
effects across families, revealing that children’s expenditure shares increase for families
classified as poor/near poor (compared to those with high incomes) and for families with some
or all members uninsured (compared to those with full-year coverage or who acquired coverage).
We find that families in which the single mother is not employed shift spending away from
children to mothers (a decline in children’s expenditure share of 3.43 percentage points), and that
families in the post-recession period also shift spending away from children to mothers.
Both the family-fixed effects (column 2) and fractional response models (column 3)
provide strong evidence of within-family responses to economic shocks, with effects of
comparable magnitudes across these models. We find that families that become poor/near poor
over the two-year observation period (compared to families whose economic status remained
unchanged) shift spending toward children (increasing their spending share by13.1percentage
points in the fixed effects model and by 12.8 percentage points in the fractional response model,
respectively). Children also appear to obtain priority when some family members lose coverage
as their expenditure shares increase (by 8.66 and 8.57 percentage points respectively across these
two models). By contrast, children’s expenditure shares decline when single mothers’
employment status changed to not employed over the two-year period (by 5.25 and 5.31
percentage points across the models, p < 0.10). While such a shift could reflect a health-related

23

reason for the change in mother’s employment status, as we note below, we account for changes
in mother’s health insurance status in these models. Finally, we find some impact of the
anticipated change in economic status over the post-recession period, with children’s expenditure
share declining by roughly 4.69 percentage points in both the fixed-effects and fractional
response models. This finding may reflect a response by families to their diminished
expectations regarding future economic prospects. Thus, the consistent finding from both of
these models is that both realized and anticipated economic shocks affect the intra-family
resource allocation but in different ways, and the magnitude of the former exceeds the impact of
the latter effect.
By contrast, estimated marginal effects for two-parent families (Table 3) are strikingly
different. The across-family effects of the pooled OLS model dominate the within-family effects
of the linear fixed-effects and fractional response models (columns 2 and 3), as we observe little
in the way of within-family effects for both the realized or anticipated economic shock variables.
While we observe no time-period effects across families in the pooled OLS findings of column 1,
we do observe average (across and within) family effects that are consistent with the actual
economic shocks observed in the same model for single-mother families.
In sum, our findings reveal different within-family changes in children’s expenditure
shares over two-year observation periods single-mother as compared to two-parent families, and
these differences may reflect the more precarious economic conditions faced by single-parent
families compared to those with two-parents.
An aside: family health effects on children’s expenditure share
Since our models control for changes in family health status, it is instructive to see how
such changes affect children’s expenditure shares, both to provide another perspective on the

24

intra-family allocation of health care resources, and also to help validate our conceptual
framework. As regards the latter, our perspective on household behavior suggests that family
decision makers who weigh the welfare of family members such as children more heavily than
their own welfare would favor a resource allocation toward such family members so that we
would expect the health expenditure share to increase for children with vulnerable health status.
For this preliminary examination, we consider the response of spending shares to respondent
reports of being in fair/poor health relative to a reference group in excellent, very good, or good
health.
We present these findings in Table 4 and find results consistent with expectations. For
single-mother families (top panel), and focusing on our within-family models (columns 2 and 3),
a change in a child’s health status changes to fair/poor health has a positive impact on children’s
expenditure shares, and while the t-statistics exceed unity, these results are not statistically
significant. By contrast, any decline in mother’s health status over our two-year period (either a
change to fair/poor health, or a reported decline in health status) results in a shift in spending
away from children and toward the single parent, findings that are quite consistent in both linear
fixed-effects and fractional response models. We also find that a shift away from spending on
children to mothers when mothers report an improvement in health, a finding possibly reflect the
use of medical care services to attain such improved health over our observation period.
Our results for the impact of such changes in family health status on children’s
expenditure shares are also obtained for two-parent families (lower panel of Table 4) with a few
differences. Focusing again on the linear fixed-effects and fractional response model, we observe
a strong shift to spending on children when a child’s reported health status changes to fair/poor
health (in excess of a ten percentage point change for both models). For parents we find that an

25

observed health decline for mothers over the two-year period reduces spending on children (by
just over four percentage points). For fathers, a shift in reported health status to fair/poor health
yields a nearly seven percentage point decline in children’s health spending share, while a
reported decline in health yields just over a four percentage point decline in children’s share.
Impact on Children’s and Mother’s Health Care Spending
As a final analysis, we consider the impact of actual and anticipated economic shocks on
the amount of health care spending of children and mothers in single-mother families (data not
shown). We do so to provide some insight as to how the family allocated actual spending in
response to these factors. We focus on these families since our earlier results indicate that such
households were primarily affected by economic shocks.
We summarize results based on a GLM model of total spending for children and for
mothers using the basic model specification we developed for the expenditure share analyses.
The GLM model is estimated with logarithmic link and a gamma variance function, and
estimates are derived based on the MEPS family weight described earlier and using robust
standard errors. As in our fractional response model, we include two-year averages of our
independent variables to control for any correlation between these time-invariant observed
family characteristics and unobserved time-invariant family effects, and thus to obtain within
family effects. We obtain marginal effects as described in our discussion of the fractional
response model and obtain boot-strapped standard errors. Our findings thus can be considered
within-family responses to the actual and anticipated economic shocks.
Many of our finding from this model are imprecisely estimated, suggesting use of our
basic model requires some re-specification. In general, we find realized income shocks shift
spending levels toward children and away from single-mothers, while employment shocks and

26

changes in family insurance status tend to shift spending toward children. We also find that
within-family spending in the post-recession period declines for both children and single
mothers, but that children’s spending declines by over $700 over the two-year period compared
to a spending decline of over $400 for mothers. Our findings, albeit very preliminary in nature,
suggest that these spending shifts in response to economic shocks may not be trivial, but d
clearly more work is necessary to add precision to these estimates.

VI. Conclusion
The Great Recession and much of its aftermath have witnessed a general decline in
consumption by families that has resulted in weak economic growth and impeded a robust
recovery. Such a decline in consumption can be a response to realized economic shocks
experienced by the family as well as cut-backs in spending and changes in spending patterns
induced by expectations of poor future economic prospects. In this paper, we focus on how both
types of economic shocks affect one important component of family consumption – health care
spending – focusing on the intra-family allocation of health care resources. Using data from the
Medical Expenditure Panel Survey’s Household Component and models which estimate the
intra-family changes in health care spending over a two-year observation periods, we find
evidence that the share of the family’s health care spending allocated to children is sensitive to
both realized and anticipated economic shocks, with results most pronounced for single-mother
families.
Our empirical results suggest that in these single-mother families, mothers appear to
behave altruistically to children in the sense that they weight children’s welfare more than their
own welfare when the family experiences an actual economic shock and in response, increase

27

children’s share of total health care spending. We find evidence of such an increased spending
allocation to children when the family’s economic status declines to income classified as poor or
near poor or to low income compared to families whose economic status remains intact over the
two-year observation periods. We also find evidence of such an allocation when a family
member (typically the mother) experiences a loss of coverage or experiences a year-long spell
without health insurance. By contrast, we find that when mothers are not employed (a shift to
this employment status from a prior status of at least some employment), children’s health care
spending share is reduced (a finding which might reflect an unobserved change in health status
that led to the change in employment status). As for anticipated economic shocks, we find that
over the two-year period encompassing the post-recession period, children’s share of total health
care spending declines, suggesting that such spending was sensitive to the weak economic
recovery from the Great Recession as well as diminished expectations regarding family
economic status. Thus our findings suggest that both realized and anticipated economic shocks
play a role as the family determines how to allocate its health care spending among various
members, that these shocks have somewhat different impacts, and that the magnitude of a
realized shock exceeds that of an anticipated economic shock.
Finally, we acknowledge the preliminary and exploratory nature of our investigation, and
that fact that much more work needs to be done to understand the various dimensions through
which family health spending responds to economic changes. As noted in our introduction,
issues of spending allocations among family members with specific health attributes and across
specific health services pose interesting and compelling investigations that we hope to pursue.

28

References

Becker, Gary S. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2014 “Monthly Unemployment Rates, 2000 to 2011.” Available at
http://data.bls.gov/pdq/SurveyOutputServlet. Last accessed June 3, 2014.
Dickie, Mark and Victoria L. Messman. 2004. “Parental Altruism and the Value of Avoiding
Acute Illness: Are Kids Worth More than Parents?” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 48: 1146-74.
Economic Policy Institute. 2014a.”The Share of the Unemployed who have been Jobless for Six
Months or More, 1948 – 2014.” Available at http://www.stateofworkingamerica.org/charts/longterm-unemployment/ (last accessed 5/31/2004).
Economic Policy Institute. 2014b. The State of Working America: Real Median Household
Income. Available at http://stateofworkingamerica.org/charts/real-median-household-income/last
accessed June 3, 2014.
Galbraith, A., A. Sinaiko, S. Soumerai, D. Ross-Dugan, M. Dutta-Linn, and T. Lieu. “Some
Families who Purchased Coverage Through The Massachusetts Connector Wound Up with High
Financial Burdens.” Health Affairs 32:5: 974-983.
Goodman, Christopher J. and Steven M. Mance. 2011. “Employment Los and the 2007-09
Recession: An Overview. Monthly Labor Review, April, 3-12.
Hurd, M.D., and S. Rohwedder. 2010. “Effects of the Financial Crisis and Great Recession on
American Households.” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Research Working Paper 16407,
September.
Karac-Mandic, P., S. Choi Yoo, and B. Sommers. 2013. “Recession Led to a Decline in Health
Care Spending for Children with Special Health Care Needs.” Health Affair 32:6: 1054-1061.
Karaca-Mandic, Pinar; Sung Choi Yoo; Jinhyung Lee,; Peter Scal. “ Family Out-of-Pocket
Health Care Burden and Children’s Unmet Needs or Delayed Health Care.” Academic Pediatrics
(in press).
Leonhardt, David and Kevin Quealy. 2014. “U.S. Middle Class is No Longer World’s Richest.”
New York Times, April 23, A1.
Mullahy, John. 2011. “Multivariate Fractional Regression Estimation of Econometric Share
Models.” University College Dublin Geary Institute Discussion Paper Series (Geary WP
2011/33) November.
29

Papke, Leslie E. and Jeffrey M. Wooldridge. 2008. “Panel Date Methods for Fractional Response
Rates with an Application to Test Pass Rates.” Journal of Econometrics 145:121-133.
Pew Research Center. 2010. How the Great Recession has Changed Life in America.” June 30.
Schaller J. and A. Huff Stevens. 2014. “Short-Run Effects of Job Loss on Health Conditions,
Health Insurance, and Health Care Utilization.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 19884. February.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2010. “Correlated Random Effects Models with Unbalanced Panels.”
Unpublished manuscript. May.

30

Table 1. Children’s Share of Family Total Health Care Spending, Year 1 and Year 2.
Children’s Share of Health
Spending, Year 1
N
Family
Type

Single
Mother
Family

Two
Parent
Family

Number
of
Children
in Family

Standard
Standard
Median Mean
Error
Error

Median

Time Period

PreRecession
Onset and
1 Child
Recession
PostRecession
PreRecession
Onset and
2 Children
Recession
PostRecession
PreRecession
3 or more Onset and
Children
Recession
PostRecession
PreRecession
Onset and
1 Child
Recession
PostRecession
PreRecession
Onset and
2 Children
Recession
PostRecession
PreRecession
3 or more Onset and
Children
Recession
PostRecession

All (unique families)

Mean

Children’s Share of Health
Spending, Year 2

440

38.5

1.8

32.6

38.2

1.7

30.2

312

38.1

2.4

30.5

37.8

2.4

30.5

329

40.5

2.1

29.7

35.0

1.9

26.2

366

49.9

2.1

48.2

51.6

2.2

51.8

231

57.9

2.8

64.5

50.7

2.5

55.2

217

62.5

2.5

72.7

55.1

2.8

62.1

265

61.6

2.5

72.6

61.6

3.1

73.2

169

62.2

3.4

67.9

63.0

3.0

70.1

149

67.8

3.0

77.1

65.1

3.3

75.9

769

27.4

1.2

18.3

26.7

1.2

16.2

441

30.1

1.7

21.0

28.0

1.7

18.6

427

28.0

1.4

20.3

24.6

1.5

15.6

1148

44.4

1.0

41.9

42.3

1.0

38.4

719

43.0

1.2

39.3

42.3

1.2

41.7

639

44.2

1.4

41.9

42.1

1.4

38.9

755

56.5

1.3

57.2

54.4

1.2

55.7

456

51.7

1.6

52.5

53.7

1.6

61.0

418

55.9

1.8

56.9

55.6

1.6

57.3

8250

43.1

0.4

39.5

41.6

0.4

36.8

31

Table 2. Marginal Effects for Actual and Anticipated Impact of Economic Shocks on Children’s
Share of Family Health Care Spending: Single-Mother Families
Models

Actual economic
shocks:
Change in income:
Poor/near poor
Low income
Middle income

Change in employment:
Lost employment
Not employed

Change in health
insurance:
At least one member
(but not all) lost
coverage during year
All members uninsured
all year
One member, but not
all, uninsured all year
Anticipated economic
shock
Pre-recession effect
Onset/recessionary
effect
Post-recession effect

Pooled OLS
Fixed Effects
Fractional Response
(1)
(2)
(3)
Percentage point change (standard errors in parentheses)

4.19*
(2.41)
-0.65
(2.32)
0.45
(2.16)

13.1***
(4.46)
7.40*
(4.18)
3.99
(3.28)

12.8***
(4.30)
7.12*
(4.02)
3.83
(3.09)

-0.02
(1.52)
-3.43**
(1.52)

-1.33
(3.26)
-5.26*
(2.80)

-1.27
(3.35)
-5.31*
(2.74)

6.66***
(1.88)

8.66***
(2.37)

8.57***
(2.34)

2.41
(3.79)
15.23***
(1.64)

-3.69
(8.19)
-8.63***
(3.11)

-3.97
(7.96)
8.54***
(3.02)

0.41
(0.24)
-1.05
(0.50)
-5.36**
(2.62)

-0.71
(1.51)
-0.90
(1.84)
-4.69***
(1.65)

-0.77
(1.62)
-0.88
(1.80)
-4.68***
(1.64)

Number of
observations: 2478
unique families.
Source: Authors’ estimates from MEPS-HC longitudinal files, 2004 to 2011. * Statistically significant at
p < 0.10; ** at p < 0.05; *** at p < 0.01.
Model specifications include the following set of family characteristics: family size, mother’s age and

education, the health status of children and parents, mother’s race/ethnicity, and the region in
32

which the family resides. Actual economic shocks are captured by income as a percent of the
federal poverty line, mother and father’s employment status, and family insurance status, and the
change in these variables over the two-year observation periods. Dummy variables indicate
whether the family is observed in the first or second year of each designated economic period: In
the pre-recession (PRE1 or PRE2), recession (REC1 or REC2), or post-recession (POST1 or
POST2) time periods. In the OLS model, we include these dummy variable with PRE1 serving
as the reference group. In this model, the impact of an anticipated economic shock on children’s
expenditure share over the family’s two-year observation period is measured as the difference in
relevant OLS regression coefficients (i.e., POST2 – POST1). In the linear fixed-effects model,
we include the variables for second year of the designated economic period (e.g., PRE2, REC2,
and POST2) with the first year as the reference period, and the impact of an anticipated
economic shock is obtained directly from the time-period regression coefficient. In the fractional
response models, we use of the full set of these time-specific dummy variables as defined for the
OLS model and obtain marginal effects as described on pages 22 and 23 above.

33

Table 3. Marginal Effects for Actual and Anticipated Impact of Economic Shocks on Children’s
Share of Family Health Care Spending: Two-parent Families
Models

Actual economic
shocks
Change in income:
Poor/near poor
Low income
Middle income

Change in employment:
Mother lost employment
Mother not employed
Father lost employment
Father not employed
Change in health
insurance:
At least one member
(but not all) lost
coverage during year
All members uninsured
all year
One member, but not
all, uninsured all year
Anticipated economic
shock
Pre-recession effect
Onset/recessionary
effect
Post-recession effect
Number of
observations: 5772
unique families.

Pooled OLS
Fixed Effects
Fractional Response
(1)
(2)
(3)
Percentage point change (standard errors in parentheses)

3.88***
(1.34)
0.17
(1.17)
-0.38
(0.74)

2.72
(2.18)
0.07
(1.84)
1.39
(1.33)

2.78
(2.20)
0.04
(1.87)
1.39
(1.27)

0.95
(1.72)
-1.23*
(0.75)
-3.70*
(1.93)
-6.67***
(1.54)

0.23
(2.15)
-1.48
(1.99)
-2.00
(2.27)
-1.27
(2.80)

-0.19
(1.95)
-1.49
(2.39)
-2.08
(2.59)
-1.32
(3.19)

3.82**
(1.63)

0.79
(2.32)

0.80
(2.24)

0.66
(2.14)
9.24***
(1.16)

-7.54
(5.03)
3.81
(2.83)

-7.45
(4.81)
3.79
(2.95)

-1.45
(0.89)
-0.35
(0.30)
-1.49
(1.22)

1.34*
(0.76)
-0.33
(1.05)
-1.38
(1.02)

1.34*
(0.73)
-0.34
(1.03)
-1.40
(1.09)

Source: Authors’ estimates from MEPS-HC longitudinal files, 2004 to 2011. * Statistically significant at
p < 0.10; ** at p < 0.05; *** at p < 0.01
34

Model specifications include the following set of family characteristics: family size, mother’s age and

education, the health status of children, mothers, and fathers, mother’s race/ethnicity, and the
region in which the family resides. Actual economic shocks are captured by income as a percent
of the federal poverty line, mother and father’s employment status, and family insurance status,
and the change in these variables over the two-year observation periods. Dummy variables
indicate whether the family is observed in the first or second year of each designated economic
period: In the pre-recession (PRE1 or PRE2), recession (REC1 or REC2), or post-recession
(POST1 or POST2) time periods. In the OLS model, we include these dummy variable with
PRE1 serving as the reference group. In this model, the impact of an anticipated economic shock
on children’s expenditure share over the family’s two-year observation period is measured as the
difference in relevant OLS regression coefficients (i.e., POST2 – POST1). In the linear fixedeffects model, we include the variables for second year of the designated economic period (e.g.,
PRE2, REC2, and POST2) with the first year as the reference period, and the impact of an
anticipated economic shock is obtained directly from the time-period regression coefficient. In
the fractional response models, we use of the full set of these time-specific dummy variables as
defined for the OLS model and obtain marginal effects as described on pages 22 and 23 above.

35

Table 4. Family Health Status and Children’s Health Expenditure Share: Marginal Effects
Models
Pooled OLS
Fixed Effects
Fractional Response
(1)
(2)
(3)
Percentage point change (standard errors in parentheses)
Single-mother families
Any child in fair/poor
15.42***
3.98
3.99
health
(1.66)
(2.71)
(2.62)
Mother in fair/poor
-29.90***
-9.67***
-9.41**
health
(1.92)
(3.72)
(0.04)
Mother’s health declines
-11.75**
-7.68***
-7.56***
(2.23)
(2.99)
(2.78)
Mother’s health
-16.32***
-9.42***
-9.35***
improves
(1.94)
(3.55)
(3.60)
Number of
observations: 4,956
Two-parent families
Any child in fair/poor
health
Mother in fair/poor
health
Mother’s health declines
Mother’s health
improves
Father in fair/poor
health
Father’s health declines

17.44***
(1.35)
-12.32***
(1.60)
-9.81***
(1.48)
-7.32***
(1.51)
-16.51***
(1.47)
-8.87***
(1.63)
-8.81***
(1.38)

10.11***
(1.92)
-2.05
(2.39)
-4.13**
(1.94)
-1.55
(1.86)
-6.98***
(2.67)
-4.04*
(2.22)
-2.21
(1.80)

10.20***
(1.68)
-2.15
(2.49)
-4.23**
(2.04)
-1.56
(2.01)
-7.55***
(2.75)
-4.15*
(2.21)
-2.19
(1.74)

Father’s health
improves
Number of
observations:
11,544
Source: Authors’ estimates from MEPS-HC longitudinal files, 2004 to 2011. * Statistically significant at
p < 0.10; ** at p < 0.05; *** at p < 0.01
These marginal effects are derived from models for single-mother families. These models include the
following set of family characteristics: family size, mother’s age and education, the health status of

children and parents, mother’s race/ethnicity, and the region in which the family resides. Actual
economic shocks are captured by income as a percent of the federal poverty line, mother and
father’s employment status, and family insurance status, and the change in these variables over
the two-year observation periods. Dummy variables indicate whether the two-year observation
periods for families encompass the pre-recession, recession, or post-recession time periods.

36

Appendix Table A1: Selected sample characteristics ,
averages for 2004-2001
Single-Mother
Two-Parent
Families
Families
Mean
Standard Mean
Standard
error
error
Share of
family
spending on
children
% families
with poor/near
poor income
% families
with low
income
% families
with middle
income
% families
with high
income
% of families,
Pre-recession
year 1
% of families,
Pre-recession
year 2
% of families,
Recession
year 1
% of families,
Recession
year 2
% of families,
Post-recession
year 1
% of families,
Post-recession
year
% mothers
who are White

46.7

0.7

41.0

0.4

39.1

1.1

9.7

0.4

21.5

0.8

11.8

0.4

27.2

1.0

35.6

0.7

12.2

1.0

42.9

0.8

21.9

0.7

21.7

0.5

21.9

0.7

21.7

0.5

14.2

0.6

14.5

0.4

14.2

0.6

14.5

0.4

13.9

0.6

13.9

0.4

13.9

0.6

13.9

0.4

47.6

1.5

71.2

0.8

37

Appendix Table A1 continued: Selected sample
characteristics , averages for 2004-2001
Single-Mother
Two-Parent
Families
Families
Mean
Standard Mean
Standard
error
error
% mothers who
are Black
32.0
1.4
6.6
0.4
% mothers who
are Hispanic
16.1
1.0
15.1
0.7
% mothers of
other
race/ethnicity
4.3
0.5
7.1
0.4
% of mothers
with < 12 years
schooling
15.8
0.8
10.1
0.4
% of mothers
with12 years of
schooling
35.2
1.2
25.6
0.8
% mothers
with 13 -15
years of
schooling
30.1
1.1
25.3
0.7
% mothers
with 16 or
more years of
schooling
18.8
1.0
38.6
1.0
% mothers, no
education data
0.1
0.1
0.3
0.1
Mother’s age
37.0
0.227
39.2
0.117
west
18.3
1.1
23.3
0.9
south
41.1
1.5
36.0
1.1
northeast
18.2
1.2
17.9
0.9
% families,
everyone
insured all year
58.1
1.2
73.2
0.7
% families,
everyone
uninsured all
year
3.1
0.3
3.4
0.3
% families,
one member
(but not all)
uninsured all
17.2
0.9
13.2
0.6
38

Appendix Table A1 continued: Selected sample
characteristics , averages for 2004-2001
Single-Mother
Two-Parent
Families
Families
Mean
Standard Mean
Standard
error
error
% families one
member (but
not all) lost
insurance
% families one
member (but
not all) gained
insurance
% families
with at least
one member
with unstable
insurance
coverage
% families
with missing
insurance data
% families
with at least
one child in
fair/poor health
Family income
% of mothers
employed
% mothers not
employed
% of mothers
who lost
employment
% of mothers
who acquired
employment
% of mothers
with unstable
employment
% of fathers
employed

9.0

0.5

4.2

0.2

7.9

0.5

3.7

0.2

4.5

0.4

1.9

0.2

0.3

0.1

0.5

0.1

10.5
$33,968

0.6
814

5.8
$91,877

0.3
1189

64.4

1.1

61.0

0.7

18.6

0.9

26.0

0.6

5.3

0.5

3.5

0.2

10.2

0.5

8.8

0.3

1.5

0.2

0.6

0.1

84.2

0.4

39

Appendix Table A1 continued: Selected sample
characteristics , averages for 2004-2001
Single-Mother
Two-Parent
Families
Families
Mean
Standard Mean
Standard
error
error
% of fathers
not employed
4.5
0.3
% of fathers
who lost
employment
2.3
0.2
% of fathers
who acquired
employment
8.4
0.3
% of fathers
with unstable
employment
0.5
0.1
% of mothers
in fair/poor
health
7.9
0.6
3.3
0.2
% of mothers
in good/very
good/excellent
health
75.9
1.0
86.8
0.4
% of mothers
whose health
improved
7.5
0.6
4.3
0.2
% of mothers
whose health
declined
6.1
0.4
3.9
0.2
% of mothers
with unstable
health
2.6
0.2
1.7
0.1
% of mothers
with missing
health data
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
% of fathers in
fair/poor health
3.1
0.2
% of fathers in
good/very
good/excellent
health
86.9
0.4
% of fathers
whose health
improved
4.8
0.2
40

Appendix Table A1 continued: Selected sample
characteristics , averages for 2004-2001
Single-Mother
Two-Parent
Families
Families
Mean
Standard Mean
Standard
error
error
% of fathers
whose health
declined
3.8
0.2
% of fathers
with unstable
health
1.3
0.1
% of fathers
with missing
health data
0.2
0.0

41

