NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTREPRENEURSHIP AS EXPERIMENTATION
William R. Kerr
Ramana Nanda
Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Working Paper 20358
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20358
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We appreciate comments and editorial direction by David Autor, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Tim Taylor.
The research in this paper was conducted while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers
of the US Census Bureau at the Boston Census Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research
from the NSF grant ITR-0427889 [BRDC] and the Division of Research and Faculty Development
at Harvard Business School is gratefully acknowledged. Research results and conclusions expressed
are the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Census Bureau or the NSF. This paper
has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by William R. Kerr, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Entrepreneurship as Experimentation
William R. Kerr, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
NBER Working Paper No. 20358
July 2014
JEL No. G24,L26,O32
ABSTRACT
Entrepreneurship research is on the rise but many questions about its fundamental nature still exist.
We argue that entrepreneurship is about experimentation: the probabilities of success are low, extremely
skewed and unknowable until an investment is made. At a macro level experimentation by new firms
underlies the Schumpeterian notion of creative destruction. However, at a micro level investment and
continuation decisions are not always made in a competitive Darwinian contest. Instead, a few investors
make decisions that are impacted by incentive, agency and coordination problems, often before a new
idea even has a chance to compete in a market. We contend that costs and constraints on the ability
to experiment alter the type of organizational form surrounding innovation and influence when innovation
is more likely to occur. These factors not only govern how much experimentation is undertaken in
the economy, but also the trajectory of experimentation, with potentially very deep economic consequences.
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu
Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

Matthew Rhodes-Kropf
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 313
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mrhodeskropf@hbs.edu

Although the fundamental importance of entrepreneurship has been generally recognized
by economists since at least Schumpeter (1934; 1942), it has not been the subject of substantial
research and is more-or-less absent from standard textbooks. Over the last decade, however,
entrepreneurship has flourished as a research topic within economics. As entrepreneurship
emerges from the shadows, many central and unresolved questions linger: How should we define
entrepreneurship? What are its key aspects? Is entrepreneurship about the next Skype or the next
self-employed accountant? We assert in this paper that effective entrepreneurship—especially
among high-growth ventures and for the economy as a whole—builds upon a process of
experimentation in deep and nuanced ways.
Entrepreneurship is fundamentally about experimentation because the knowledge
required to be successful cannot be known in advance or deduced from some set of first
principles. As Hayak (1948) put it, “the solution of the economic problem of society is... always
a voyage of exploration into the unknown.” For entrepreneurs, it can be virtually impossible to
know whether a particular technology or product or business model will be successful, until one
has actually invested in it.
Two interesting examples help frame the discussion: In 1999, the venture capital firms
Sequoia Capital and Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers each invested $12.5 million in Google, a
brand new startup that claimed to have a superior search engine. By the time Sequoia sold its
stake in 2005, that investment was worth over $4 billion, returning 320 times the initial cost
(Sahlman, 2010). The staggering success should not obscure a key point—Google was by no
means a sure-shot investment in 1999. The search algorithm space was already crowded and
dominated by other players such as Yahoo! and Altavista. Google, founded by two students, may
well have turned out to just be a “me too” investment. In fact, other venture capitalists had turned
down the opportunity to invest in Google at the time. One such firm was Bessemer Ventures,
whose partner David Cowan, on being asked to meet with the two Google founders working in
the garage, is believed to have quipped, “Students? A new search engine? ... How can I get out of
this house without going anywhere near your garage?” Over the years, Bessemer has been so
successful that they playfully mock at their “anti-portfolio” of deals that they passed on (at
http://www.bvp.com/portfolio/antiportfolio). Not many investors are as candid about great
2

opportunities that they have passed on, but more recently, Fred Wilson of Union Square
Ventures has similarly written about his regret at passing on Airbnb, a startup that lets people
rent rooms or homes to prospective guests online. Started in 2008, Airbnb currently lists 500,000
properties in more than 34,000 cities across 192 countries, far larger than any hotel chain—
thereby making it the largest lodging company and brand in the world (Levere, 2013). Wilson
(2011) writes of Union Square Venture’s decision to pass on the deal in 2009 that “we couldn’t
wrap our heads around air mattresses on the living room floors as the next hotel room…. Others
saw the amazing team that we saw, funded them, and the rest is history.”
These two examples highlight several challenges associated with commercialization of
new ideas, products and technologies. First, the actual distribution of returns in such ventures has
a low median value but very high variance (Scherer and Harhoff, 2000; Hall and Woodward
2010). Most new ventures fail badly, but some turn out to be wildly successful. Second, even for
professional investors or managers making resource allocation decisions, it is impossible to
know in advance which ideas will work. As we describe in greater detail below, venture capital
investors make their returns on the one investment out of many that turns out to be a wild success
like Google or Airbnb. The vast majority of venture capital investments, however, return less
than the face value of the investment.
How entrepreneurs and investors respond to these inherent challenges has important
implications for their own success and also the broader economy in terms of the “best ideas”
being commercialized. To flesh this point out, it is important to separate two frames of reference
regarding experimentation. The first relates to economic experimentation in a Darwinian sense,
which is the natural starting point for most economists. In this conceptual model, new ventures
compete with existing products and technologies, and the ensuing competition leads to the
survival of the fittest, just as Google surpassed its early rivals due to its superior technology. This
competition can be described as experimentation at the level of the economy. In settings where
the best approach among several options is unknown, a great benefit of market-based economies
is that winners are often chosen by consumers and competition. As Rosenberg (1994) has argued,
one of the defining features of capitalism is the freedom it provides entrepreneurs to pursue
novel approaches to value creation in the pursuit of economic gain. The promise of large rewards
drives entrepreneurs to experiment with new ideas, helping to create a dynamic and growing
3

economy. An institutional environment that facilitates experimentation is thus central to
maintaining a vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystem (Dosi and Nelson, 2010). This experimentation,
combined with a willingness to let losing incumbents fail, is the underlying notion behind
Schumpeter’s (1942) process of “creative destruction.”
While this Darwinian depiction is important and a natural starting point, a second
reference point emphasizes that we should be cautious of assuming that market-based
mechanisms can always serving as a guiding hand with respect to experimentation. As in the
Google example, it is often very difficult to know whether a particular technology or venture will
succeed until one has made an investment. Moreover, the investments to obtain this vital
information can be non-trivial: in Google’s case, a total of $25 million was invested in the first
round. Table 1 documents some basic facts about the venture capital industry, including the
number of active investors. Given the relatively small number of financiers that invest in this
sector, it is easy to imagine scenarios where Google or other highly productive investments fail
to receive the required funding.

Table 1: Venture Capital Statistics for 2010, from NVCA
Number of active venture capital firms
Amount invested by venture capital firms
Number of companies receiving venture capital investment
Number of companies receiving funding for first time
Share of dollars invested in Information Technology firms
Share of dollars invested in Life Sciences firms

462
$ 22 billion
2,749
1,001
51%
27%

Source: National Venture Capital Association, nvca.org

In an entrepreneurial setting, where the benefits of pursuing different approaches is not
clear and the costs of tests are expensive, each individual endeavor is also engaged in a process
of experimentation. As these experiments provide information about the likelihood of ultimate
success, entrepreneurs and investors gain information about whether to continue the project.
However, the investment and continuation decisions for entrepreneurs are often not made in a
competitive Darwinian contest, because the decisions to invest further or shut down a firm are
often made by only a few investors, well before startups can compete in the product market or
4

have positive cash flow. Moreover, the decisions are made by discrete individuals, often in
venture capital firms or other early-stage financing vehicles, whose actions are impacted by a
myriad of incentive, agency and coordination problems. Thus, the extent to which the best idea
goes forward may depend on factors such as the organizational structure or incentive system of
the firm where the investor is based, available information sets (for example, access to certain
networks), coordination costs, and other such frictions. Taken together, these factors affect how
much experimentation is undertaken in the economy and also the trajectory of experimentation,
with potentially very deep economic consequences.
The lens of experimentation has implications for what types of innovations will occur,
who will pursue them and when. As Stern (2005) argued, “a favorable environment for
entrepreneurship and a high level of economic experimentation go hand in hand.” Although
experiments can be conducted in large companies or in the public sector, new technologies and
innovative products are often commercialized by entrepreneurs and often cluster at particular
times. We argue that costs and constraints on the ability to experiment alter the type of
organizational form surrounding innovation and influence when innovation is more likely to
occur.
This article considers these costs and constraints to experimentation by investors and the
implications that these issues have on the type of entrepreneurship across time and across
economies. We start with a micro level examination of experimentation and focus on the
processes used by investors to experiment and issues that individual firms face. We then turn to
the macro-perspective of the economy and the policies that shape entrepreneurship and its
effectiveness.

A Closer Look at the Process of Experimentation
High-impact entrepreneurship requires, almost by definition, going against the grain.
Rajan (2012) argues that an entrepreneur “must be willing to strike out, largely on the basis of
intuition, on courses of action in direct opposition to the established settled patterns.” A
consequence of this setting is extreme uncertainty about whether a particular technology,
product, or business model will be successful. As Knight (1921) stressed, this uncertainty is
fundamentally different from risk. With risk, such as placing money on a spin of a roulette
5

wheel, one can define exact probabilities and expected values. With Knightian uncertainty, these
probabilities are not known, and even the form of the potential outcomes may be unclear. For
example, looking forward from today, at what rate will electric cars, if at all, replace traditional
automobiles and how will the supporting infrastructure for battery recharging be designed? What
will be the impact of nascent augmented reality technologies for how humans interact? Which, if
any, of the several current ideas to cure cancer will be successfully commercialized?
In this environment of tremendous uncertainty, experimentation allows entrepreneurs and
investors to assess and commercialize projects without investing the full amount. Crucially,
experimentation offers more than just a possibility of higher returns—it also allows
entrepreneurs and investors to pursue projects that are not feasible in an all-or-nothing bet. For
example, consider a project that requires $110 to commercialize, will be worth $0 with 99
percent probability, and will be worth $10,000 with 1 percent probability. This project will not
be pursued, because its expected value is negative (-$10). But imagine we can conduct an
experiment that will reveal if the project has a 10 percent chance of working. (Suppose further
that the probability of the experiment having a positive outcome is only 10 percent, so that in this
example the 1 percent chance of overall success is unchanged.) If the experiment gives a positive
signal, the project has a larger expected value of $890. Thus, as long as the experiment costs less
than $89 (10 percent x $890), the experiment should be conducted, with the project then being
either shut down or commercialized based upon the results.
This simple example provides insights into many features of the entrepreneurial
landscape, as we elaborate below. The test resolves uncertainty about the project’s potential and
creates a real option value for further pursuit. Thus, financial experimentation is particularly
valuable in cases where initial information can be especially informative about the overall
quality of the project and is cost effective to obtain.1
The example illustrates that the costs of experimenting are important. Our simple
example was phrased in terms of the direct costs of conducting the test. More broadly, important
indirect costs must be borne by either the investor or entrepreneur when they fail. Even if direct
costs are small, significant indirect costs like a stigma of failure (Landier, 2005) may still prevent
1

Weitzman (1979) introduces and analyzes the optimal search behaviors under these uncertainties.

6

entrepreneurs from pursuing otherwise valuable tests if they only have a 10 percent chance to
succeed. Moreover, the ability to document and transmit the results of experiments is important,
because the information from the experiment is only valuable if it can be acted upon. Can an
investor use the information to decide to provide the follow-on investment required to realize the
project? The framework also begins to highlight the distinct roles of the entrepreneur and the
investor.
We trace these features out next by first looking more closely at the economics of a
venture capital firm. This setting provides a powerful archetype of high-impact entrepreneurship
more broadly and the role of experimentation. We then discuss micro-level frictions to
experimentation that are observed in the economy and the extent to which agents are able to
address them.

The Economics of Experimentation in a Venture Capital Firm
The economics and structure of a venture capital firm provide insights into
entrepreneurship as experimentation (Sahlman, 1990). A crucial starting point is the recognition
that venture capital firms do not simply act as a portfolio of risky startups. While the portfolio
nature of a venture capital firm is important, it is quite distinct from what is observed in stock
market mutual funds, for example, where the portfolio is designed to smooth out the
idiosyncrasies of individual stocks. Venture capital firms are better thought of as conducting a
portfolio of tests across a number of highly uncertain ideas with skewed economics similar to the
example described above. In most cases, the tests come out negative. In fact, the majority of
venture capital-backed firms fail, despite the investments made into them by highly skilled
investors. Once venture capital firms identify the cases that deliver positive test results, however,
they pursue them aggressively and invest ever larger amounts on the promising candidates to
scale them up. Whereas mutual fund investors do not need to be an early investor in a company
in order to be allowed to invest more later, this is precisely the way that venture capital firms aim
to make money—by starting small and owning a larger share of the firms that turn out to be
successful, while attempting to cut their losses on the unsuccessful ones as early as possible.2
2

Gompers and Lerner (2002) and Da Rin, Hellman and Puri (2013) provide a comprehensive overview of
these intermediaries. Chemmanur et al. (2011) and Puri and Zarutskie (2012) provide recent evidence on the

7

Some simple calculations document these skewed returns using data on all venture capital
investments in the United States. Using data from Thompson Venture Economics, we identify
all startup ventures that received their first round of early stage financing for the years between
1985 and 2009. We calculate both the total investment made by venture capital investors in each
of these firms, as well as the gross return at the time of exit — either through an acquisition deal,
an initial public offering or when the firm went bankrupt. We then group each of these startups
based on their economic return to investors at the time of exit—that is the ratio of the gross
return at the point of exit divided by the total amount invested in the startup. About 55 percent of
startups that received venture capital over this period were terminated at a loss, and only 6
percent of them returned more than five times their investment. This 6 percent group, however,
was extremely successful and together accounted for about 50 percent of the gross return
generated over the period.3 The fact that the returns are so skewed across the portfolio is prima
facie evidence that the (quite knowledgeable) investors cannot distinguish in advance the next
Google from the other cases.
A second example provides more systematic evidence on the difficulty to predict
outcomes, even conditional on a venture capital firm making an investment. For a single large
and successful venture capital firm that has invested more than $1 billion over the last decade,
we have access to both the outcomes of individual investments and the scores that partners
assigned to each venture at the time of their first investment.

performance of venture capital-backed startups. Parker (2009) provides a broader review of the literature on
entrepreneurship.
3

Total gross returns need to be estimated due to the fact that a venture’s value at exit is missing for a large
number of acquisitions, for firms that went bankrupt, and for the ‘living dead’—firms that are coded as still private
but have not received follow on financing for several years. Our research suggests that most of the acquisitions
without data are fire sales and that firms that are coded as alive, but have not received a follow-on round of
financing within three years of the last financing, are likely to be bankrupt. In the calculation reported above, we
have conservatively assumed that unreported acquisitions were undertaken at 1.5 times cost and that firms that did
not receive subsequent rounds of financing for three years, but were coded as still private, were liquidated at 0.25
times cost. The results are robust to assuming a wide range of possible values for these outcomes, including an
(implausible) average of two times the dollars invested in the firm. These numbers correspond closely with numbers
from Sahlman (2010) who uses data from 11 early stage venture capital firms to show that 64 percent of their
investments were terminated at a loss, while the 8 percent of the investments that returned over five times the
investment generated about 60 percent of the gross return of the portfolio.

8

Figure 1

Ultimate return <=1X
Ultimate return 1-3X
Ultimate return >3X

0

.2

Density

.4

.6

Figure 2A

Average score from partners at time of first investment

9

0

1

2

3

Log of (1+ Multiple)

4

5

Figure 2B

Average score from partners at time of first investment

Figure 1 shows that the distribution of outcomes for this firm follows the same pattern as
the aggregate data on venture capital (with 62 percent of investments terminated at a loss and 10
percent generating a return more than five times the capital invested). The firm has an excellent
track record in the industry, which implies a well-functioning algorithm for choosing and
managing investments. Conditional on making an investment, however, Figures 2a and 2b show
the limited ability of the venture capital investors to tell the most successful investments from the
less successful ones—even for these experienced investors. Figure 2a highlights that the
distribution of scores assigned to investments that ended up performing extremely well is
statistically no different from the distribution of scores assigned to investments that ultimately
failed or had mediocre returns.4 (The labels on the horizontal axis have been suppressed to
maintain the confidentiality of the investor’s rating scale, but lower predictions were on the left
and higher predictions were on the right.) Figure 2b shows that the raw correlation between
scores and the return multiple from the investments is 0.1.

4

Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions could not reject the hypothesis that these
were the same.

10

This example shows that even conditional on making an investment, it is hard to for the
investors to predict which firm will be successful. Using a similar framework from a sample of
early-stage “angel investors” in Kerr et al. (2014), the correlation among the interest levels
assigned to funded deals and their ultimate success is less than 0.1. Again, these examples help
illustrate the high degree of uncertainty present in these investments.
Thus, venture capital firms need to experiment, and many aspects of their business model
facilitate or emphasize this experimentation. One example is their focus on sectors that are
capital-efficient for both experimentation and subsequent scaling and that can generate large
returns for the successful investments in a short period of time. Under these conditions, most
notably associated with information technology investments, venture capital firms can run initial
experiments of manageable financial sizes and then fund the winners to completion. The
corollary to this, which is further elaborated upon below, is that venture capital activity is
concentrated in a narrow range of technological opportunities. Some sectors, like renewable
energy production, need to be proven at large scale to demonstrate technical feasibility and unit
economics. Commercializing such ventures requires building large manufacturing plants and
hence is significantly more capital intensive, as well as takes much longer. Following a brief
period where venture capitalists invested heavily in biofuel and solar technologies only to learn
these lessons the hard way, they have largely shied away from funding renewable energy
production startups, instead devoting their attention within clean energy to startups
commercializing energy efficiency, smart grid and other software technologies (Nanda et al.,
2013). Fleming (2001) and Fleming and Sorenson (2004) discuss the aggregate implications of a
narrower range of search or recombination.
In addition to focusing on specific sectors, venture capital structures and contractual
choices also address experimental challenges. For example, in a way similar to our earlier
numerical example, venture capital investors provide staged financing to startup companies that
tie each financial infusion to milestones—points at which information is revealed about the
quality of the project. This structured financing builds real options (for example, Gompers, 1995;
Bergemann and Hege, 2005; Bergemann et al., 2008), by matching the amount of money raised
in each round to the specific uncertainty that needs to be resolved with that round of funding: for
example, proof that the technology works, that consumers will buy the product, and so on. The
11

most successful investors and entrepreneurs are able to identify the most important uncertainties
facing a new idea and experiment in a way that resolves the greatest proportion of the uncertainty
around them effectively and quickly.
The consequence of this staging approach is that an important role of venture capital
firms is to shut down ventures that are receiving bad signals. Investors exercise the abandonment
options in several ways. Across financing rounds, the investors can choose to not reinvest in the
company; within each financing round, venture capital firms also structure contracts to provide
them with control and cash flow rights. Control rights allow venture capital firms to replace
underperforming chief executive officers, and the investors can also push the company to
reposition itself if the chosen path turns sour. These rights appear to be exercised often (for
example, Hellman and Puri, 2000; Kaplan et al., 2009; Tian, 2011).5
The available evidence suggests that this process of venture capital experimentation does
lead to successful economic outcomes. Kortum and Lerner (2000) and Samila and Sorenson
(2011) document spillover effects from venture capital activity within industries and cities,
respectively. In Figure 3, we provide descriptive evidence of how this greater experimentation is
associated with outcomes of venture capital-backed ventures using Census Bureau data. We use
name and address matching to identify new entrants that received venture capital investments
during the 1986-1997 period. Looking ahead to 2007, 75 percent of these venture capital-backed
ventures have shut down, but the remaining firms have grown to a level where they combine to
equal 364 percent of the total employment of the original investments (including those that
failed). For comparison, we generated a second sample of non-venture capital-backed entrants
that have the same four-digit industry, year, and starting employment level as the investment
sample. In 2007, a greater share of this second group remains alive—only 66 percent have shut
down. However, those that are alive only account for two-thirds (67 percent) of the total
employment of their original sample. These matched ventures have thus grown, but not nearly to
the extent of the venture capital-backed group. While our simple matching procedure may leave
5

Many other aspects of the venture capital model reflect these conditions (for example, Kaplan and
Stromberg, 2003, 2004). One prominent example is convertible preferred stock that protects venture capital firms in
bad outcomes by allowing them to redeem the full value of their investment, thereby treating the investment as debt
to the extent that the failed venture has any residual value. On the other hand, in positive outcomes, they can choose
to convert the preferred to common stock, allowing them to share in the upside when things go well.

12

residual differences across the groups and also does not account for either the role of selection or
the impact of venture capital on startups’ outcomes, it should not obscure the broad overall
point—the venture capital-backed ventures experienced a higher if similar rate of failure (75 vs.
66 percent), but also experienced far greater employment gains (364 vs. 67 percent).

Figure 3

High-growth ventures typically constitute a small proportion of new startups, but are
responsible for a disproportionate share of employment and GDP. As a rough benchmark, about
1,000 of the over 500,000 firms founded each year obtain venture capital finance, but these firms
account for about 40 percent of new U.S. publicly-listed companies over the last three decades
(Ritter, 2014).

Frictions for the Process of Experimentation—Costs of Experiments
The costs of running experiments play a big role in entrepreneurship. Technological
change in the last decade has dramatically lowered these costs, particularly in industries that
have benefited from the emergence of the Internet, open source software, cloud computing, and
13

other trends. Industry observers suggest that firms in these sectors that would have cost $5
million to set up a decade ago can be done for under $50,000 today. For example, open source
software lowers the costs associated with hiring programmers. In addition, fixed investments in
high quality infrastructure, servers and other hardware are no longer necessary at the birth of
many software firms as they can be rented in tiny increments from cloud computing providers
and efficiently scaled up as demand for their products increases (Blacharski, 2013; Palmer,
2012). This reduced entry barrier has led to an explosion of experimentation with new
entrepreneurial ideas in this area. Funding sources have also proliferated as the ability to finance
these smaller and cheaper experiments is possible for individuals and groups beyond the
traditional venture capital investors with large pools of capital.
One prominent example of this shift is the Lean Startup methodology advocated by serial
entrepreneur Steve Blank and popularized by Ries (2011). Many startup founders have shaped
their efforts using the Lean Startup approach and the ideas have reached the leadership of large
companies like Jeff Immelt, the chief executive officer General Electric. The core of the
management style is a focus on identifying and developing “minimal viable products” (MVPs)
that reveal how well the overall opportunity will fare. An example of an MVP is the release of a
consumer website that has only 10 percent of the functionality that the founders ultimately
envision for the product. However, by quickly building a workable version with only the bare
essentials, the MVP approach seeks to validate as many assumptions as possible about the
viability of the final product before expending enormous effort and financial resources. From the
information collected during these experiments, the venture adjusts its course in a way that may
involve pivoting from the original agenda. The followers of this methodology frequently discuss
how to make their experiments ever more cost-effective, in large part so that they do not need to
raise as much money to pursue a range of possible ideas.
This approach to building companies has coincided with the rapid rise of angel investors
and crowd-funding platforms, particularly for consumer internet startups. For example,
AngelList, a platform dedicated to matching startups with angel investors had experienced rapid
growth since its founding in 2007 and in June of 2013 had approximately 100,000 startups and
18,000 accredited investors on its platform of which 2,000 had been funded (Nanda and Kind,

14

2013).6 The lower costs associated with initial experiments implies that those with pools of
capital smaller than typical venture capitalists can more easily become involved in these
financing decisions. Since positive information from experiments leads the valuation of startups
in subsequent rounds to increase substantially, this leads to less dilution for early-stage financiers
and makes is even more attractive for investors with smaller pools of capital to get involved with
financing decisions. Equally important, however, is the fact that as these experiments get better
at quickly telling apart projects with high and low potential, they allow startups that would
probably not have received funding in the past due to their uncertain outcomes to now receive
financing. Ewens et al. (2014) show that these are particularly likely to be startups that had a
very small chance of being extremely successful, such as those founded by young,
inexperienced, first-time entrepreneurs. While these individuals would not have received capital
in the past, the financing environment has changed in recent years, creating room for cohortbased accelerator programs with an educational component such as Y-combinator, that aim to
provide mentoring, networks and capital to such founders (Graham, 2008). Fehder and
Hochberg (2014) document that there were no such programs in the United States in 2004, but
by 2013 over 40 such accelerators were functioning across the United States.
While this trend is particularly true in software and information technology businesses,
where the cost of experimentation has declined dramatically and the frequency with which one
learns new information about the product is very high, the same forces exist in very capitalintensive industries as well. An example is Terrapower, a startup trying to commercialize a new
way of producing nuclear energy (Sahlman et al., 2012). Bill Gates, an early backer of
Terrapower, noted that rapid advances in computing power provide this startup with significant
advances towards experimentation. In the past, Terrapower would have had to construct an entire
6

Angel investors are defined as individuals investing their own capital in startup ventures. Given the
decentralized nature of such investments, it is extremely difficult to accurately quantify the size of the market. The
Angel Capital Association estimates that its membership consists of about 8000 accredited investors (individuals
allowed by the SEC to make investments in risky, private startups) who invest is approximately 800 companies per
year. The size of the broader angel market has been estimated to be as large as $20 billion dollars, but the vast
majority of this is tiny investments made by individuals in firms that are already cash flow positive (Shane, 2009). It
does, however, provide a sense of how large the crowd-funding market could be, given recent changes in regulation
through the JOBS Act that would allow a larger number of individuals to legally invest in private companies (Nanda
and Kind, 2013).

15

nuclear power plant to test whether their new technology would work in practice, costing several
billion dollars and taking years to complete, making it impossible to finance in the first place.
Now, with the introduction of supercomputers, Terrapower’s engineers can simulate the inside of
a nuclear reactor, learn whether their technology will work, and make rapid (and much cheaper)
iterations to gain much more confidence about the potential of the technology before ever
constructing the physical nuclear power plant. This in turn makes it viable to finance an initial
exploration for an early stage investor.
These examples reinforce two points about the cost of experimentation. First, differences
across industries in the ability and cost to learn about the final outcome have a huge bearing on
the degree of experimentation that we see in early stages—the very long time frames and costs
for learning about potential technologies in renewable energy or different approaches to curing
cancer create a dearth of experimentation, despite intense societal interest (Fernandez et al.,
2012). Even for venture capital firms, the levels of investment required for clean energy efforts
or certain healthcare investments tend to be too high per project for them to bear.
Second, the pace of technological progress has a feedback effect on new innovations. As
technological advances such as supercomputers or cloud computing diffuse, they affect the cost
of experimentation in completely different sectors like nuclear energy and consumer internet.
The advances make viable projects that had a negative expected value in the past. In our earlier
numerical example, they drop the cost of the hypothetical test from several hundred dollars to
less than $89. This spillover effect helps sustain and potentially even increase high rates of
technological progress.

Frictions for the Process of Experimentation—Organizational
A key part of experimentation is the ability to terminate projects, but organizations differ
in their ability and willingness to terminate underperforming ventures. The venture capital
industry has long used the expression “throwing good money after bad money” to warn against
continual investment in startups for whom the initial experiments reveal poor information.
Venture capital firms that shut-down more ventures do not necessarily perform worse, and, in
fact, some of the best venture capital firms have among the highest rates of abandoning

16

projects—in part because their skill at designing experiments and acting upon the results allows
them to pursue more aggressive strategies and enter into more uncertain domains.7
This capacity to terminate projects, while certainly not exclusive to the venture capital
community, is often difficult to replicate. Large corporations, for example, often find it difficult
to terminate experiments that aren’t working out, due in part to career concerns of the managers
in charge of the effort, the “soft budget constraints” that arise when the large corporation can
keep providing funding for a time, and similar traits. The initial experiment may also provide
ambiguous or slightly negative information that can be interpreted in different ways depending
upon the biases of parties. In several ways, the venture capital system is designed to counteract
these tendencies. For example, new investors are often brought in with each financing round to
ensure that the deal is evaluated by an outsider.8 In academia, the academic tenure process that
includes external review after a specific time horizon generates comparable features.
Of course, since venture capital investors consider each investment as contributing to
overall portfolio returns, their incentives are not always aligned with entrepreneurs in terms of
strategic decisions such as when to shut down or exit an investment. For example, Gompers
(1996) has documented the incentives of venture capital firms to engage in grandstanding (taking
companies public earlier than may be optimal) to develop a reputation that enables them to raise
follow-on funds. Venture capital investors may also choose to shut down an underperforming
firm if it is unlikely to generate high gross returns or may continue to reinvest if they want to
build a reputation as entrepreneur-friendly. These decisions may not always be optimal for the
firm.
These examples highlight a related tension with organizational design, however.
Innovation requires running experiments that will often fail, and such failures will occur even if
7

While the higher rate of abandoning projects does not jump out from the statistics we provided above, it is
worth noting that venture capital investors also likely select better projects, so that a simple comparison of realized
failure rates does not provide a complete picture of how much more they abandon projects compared to non-venture
capital backed firms.
8

Grenadier and Malenko (2011) document how incentives to grandstand can create distortions even with
these contractual mechanisms. Nevertheless, these mechanisms and others such as the industry’s structure of VC
firms that are separate from the startup itself but still enable intensive monitoring, are difficult or impossible to
replicate within large corporations or through equity markets.

17

the idea looked promising at the start and all parties acted in good faith. These features require an
organizational tolerance for failure in the short-term, with compensation rewards over the longrun based upon success (Manso, 2011). This tolerance allows opportunities for early
experimentation to identify the best course of action, while the long-term compensation tied to
performance combats the “moral hazard” concern that decision-makers might take excessive
risks and solicits their best efforts.
How organizations balance the termination of poor experiments and maintaining a
tolerance for failure in turn affects the overall set of projects that they choose to start. Nanda and
Rhodes-Kropf (2012) show that the inability or the unwillingness to terminate projects when
intermediate information is negative leads organizations to start projects that are less
experimental in the first place. In other words, organizations can pick a radical range of projects
at the start and terminate a high percentage of them, or pick a more limited range of projects at
the start and terminate fewer of them. Large bureaucratic organizations often struggle with
terminating projects, and these differences provide a rationale for why large companies are
comparatively better at pursuing incremental improvements than radical innovations, although
this is of course not true in every case. March (1991) and Akcigit and Kerr (2011) provide
greater discussion on firm sizes and exploration versus exploitation choices. Lerner (2012)
provides a discussion of the relative benefits of the traditional model of R&D within firms and
that of venture capital investors, and Thomke (2003) discussed how large companies can take
insights from the model of experimentation to improve the way in which they develop and
progress innovations in their organizations.

Frictions for the Process of Experimentation—Continuation and Financing Risk
Successful experimentation requires being able to capitalize on experiments that reveal
positive outcomes, and these upside scenarios can be as tricky as termination decisions.
Financing projects in stages requires that startups return to the capital markets at regular intervals
for more capital. Thus far, we have emphasized positive perspectives of multiple financing
rounds (for example, having an outside investor not previously involved with the company value
the venture). Yet these are also instances when entrepreneurs and early-stage investors feel
vulnerable to the state of the financial markets at the time. At times, financial capital is freely
18

available, while in other instances it may be hard to come by, even for otherwise sound projects.
These financing constraints can be market-wide or they can be specific to sectors due to the
degree to which investors herd around certain hot sectors.
Venture capital investors routinely refer to “financing risk” (similar to rollover risk) to
describe how otherwise sound projects may not obtain capital for the next experiment. One way
to protect against financing risk is to go less frequently to the capital markets, by taking larger
chunks of money at each stage. This, however, reduces the value of the abandonment options for
venture capital firms. Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2010, 2013) argue that hot markets—times
when financing risk is low—allow projects with the highest real option values to be funded
because the continuation risk is lower. Empirically, these are times when venture capital-backed
firms have the highest failure rates, but conditional on being successful, startups funded in more
active periods were valued higher at IPO or acquisition even compared to startups funded in less
active periods exiting at the same time. Financing risk is most salient for projects that need to go
back to the capital markets many times, and thus projects that are worst hit are experimental new
technologies. In fact, a possible implication of this work that is related work on the role of stock
markets in financing innovation (Brown et al., 2009), is that the most innovative projects in the
economy may need times of low financing risk (“hot financial markets”) to drive their initial
commercialization.
Financing risk is representative of a broader class of continuation features that govern the
degree to which experimentation can be pursued. To illustrate, consider some of the differences
between clean energy and biotech, which also requires substantial investment and very long
horizons but is the beneficiary of substantially more venture capital investment. Biotech startups
and the pharmaceutical industry are part of a vibrant “market for ideas” (Gans et al., 2002) that
allows biotech companies to sell the results of their experiments at milestones. That is, a biotech
company can undertake a first experiment to show that a project that originally seemed to have
had a 0.1 percent chance of becoming a block-buster drug has in fact a 5 percent chance. This
experiment has generated substantial information value, and pharmaceutical companies are
willing to buy the remaining 1-in-20 opportunity for their drug development portfolios. This
market works because the science used in the first experiment is observable and verifiable, a
patent system protects the startup from intellectual theft, and the long-term opportunity is more
19

protected compared to clean energy innovations (which can face competition from all alternative
sources of energy, including opening up strategic oil reserves). Such a “market for ideas” is
much less developed for clean energy, and as a consequence entrepreneurs and investors who are
considering an experiment in this area face due additional continuation risks (Nanda et al., 2013).
Relatedly, competition to acquire new technologies among pharmaceutical firms combined with
a relatively robust market for initial public offerings have meant that the upside from
biotechnology innovation, if successful, is sufficiently high to warrant the financing of upstream
experimentation. We return to the role of the markets for initial public offerings in greater detail
in the next section.

Discrete Choices and Individuals—A Process of Experimentation
We close this section by emphasizing its most prominent feature—the role of humans,
often just a few humans, in making these decisions. Economic models often focus on the fact that
in well-functioning economies, good ideas are rewarded and flourish relative to worse ideas. But
they are silent on how these ideas emerge.
A central theme of this section is that entrepreneurs and investors must make discrete
choices, often with quite incomplete information and uncertainty about the future, about which
ideas to progress and which to shut down. Financiers rather than markets dictate which projects
are realized, as they choose which experiments to attempt, how to interpret the results, and
whether to continue or abandon the investment. The entrepreneurial landscape at the micro-level
is thus characterized by individuals choosing the fate of a venture based on what they have
learned about what is likely to work and before it competes in the product market.
This section has emphasized how constraints on the ability of investors to experiment
efficiently can shape which industries, organizations and time periods see the most radical
innovations. It also sets the framework for understanding where barriers to experimentation may
lead to market failures. For example, intermediate experiments may reveal very little about the
ultimate success of some projects (such as a particle collider or the nuclear power startup before
the advent of simulation), requiring extremely large investments before one can learn about its
viability. Alternatively, the horizon for commercialization may be extremely uncertain and
distant, such as in the case of research in basic science. Institutional regimes such as academia
20

(and at times the government) may thus be critical to enable experimentation in areas that are of
importance to society but where a process of serial experimentation by profit-seeking investors is
unlikely to provide as set of stepping-stones to the technologies behind disruptive entrepreneurial
innovation.

Economic Experiments at the Society Level
While we have focused our attention on the difficulty in predicting outcomes for new
technologies, many of these challenges exist even for firms in the broader economy. For
example, Shane (2009) documents that of the approximately 500,000 startups that were founded
in the United States in 1996, over half had failed by 2002 and only about 3,500 achieved sales of
greater than $10 million. Haltiwanger et al. (2013) note the difficulty to predict upfront which
firms will succeed even among producers of homogeneous goods such as cement. The laws and
institutions at the regional and national level can therefore play a critical role in driving
productivity growth—often through the incentives they create or the costs that they impose on
the ability to effectively experiment. For example, Glaeser et al. (2014) trace the impact of
entrepreneurship on long run urban growth by documenting how cities with industrial and
mining legacies in 1900 made it harder to create the up-or-out dynamic associated with
productivity growth. They argue that the institutions created in the 1900s hindered
entrepreneurship in the modern era, leading to systematically lower urban growth in these
regions post 1970. Hsieh and Klenow (2009, 2012) and others have noted that small firms in
India survive too long while staying small—that is, there is no entrepreneurial dynamic to the
market where the best ideas are identified and scaled up. More generally, a lesson from the
development of micro-data on firm dynamics is the high degree to which we see accentuated
firm entry and exit occurring together.9
Although some institutions are extremely persistent and hard to change, we outline some
types of policies that seem to be particularly effective in promoting “economic experiments” in
the form of entrepreneurship.

9

Manso (2013) argues that entrepreneurial experimentation can explain the lower cross-sectional earning
for entrepreneurs observed by Hamilton (2000) and related studies.

21

Democratizing Entry and Facilitating Efficient Failure
Bank finance and debt financing more generally is an extremely important source of
capital for young companies. The United States Small Business Administration has estimated
that there were 21 million Small Business Commercial and Industrial loans outstanding in 2010
(defined as loans being below $1 million) that were valued at $310 billion (Office of Advocacy,
U.S. SBA, 2013). While many small businesses are not young, Robb and Robinson (2014)
document that debt finance is important even among young firms. They look at the sample of
startups in the Kauffman Firm Survey and find that within the first three years of founding, 40%
of the funding source for these startups is constituted by outside debt, over and above the 4% of
owner debt that consists of credit cards and personal loans.
Changes in the availability and terms of bank finance can therefore have important
implications for entrepreneurship. For example, Kerr and Nanda (2009) consider how the
banking competition fostered by the state-level U.S. banking deregulations during the 1970s
through 1990s affected entrepreneurship and the economy. These deregulations facilitated
greater competition by allowing out-of-state banks to enter local markets, thereby increasing
access to credit and lowering the cost of external finance. Using micro-level data from U.S.
Census Bureau, Kerr and Nanda (2009) find evidence for the standard story of creative
destruction—a few strong entrants challenging and later replacing incumbent firms. However,
the mechanism through which this was achieved was through widespread entry that largely
resulted in failure, so that the most pronounced impact was a massive increase in churning
among new entrants.10 Similarly, Chava et al. (2013) examine innovation outcomes following the
banking deregulations and find that it facilitated greater risk taking and experimentation by small
firms. Because it is hard to know beforehand which projects are going to be successful,
“democratizing entry” seems to be an important trait of well-functioning capital markets.
Efficient experimentation implies that institutional environments facilitating exit are as
important as those that facilitate entry. Two areas that have received significant attention in
10

Prior work by Black and Strahan (2002) and Cetorelli and Strahan (2006) connected the deregulations to
higher entry rates, but it was quite puzzling that the elasticity for entrepreneurship was about ten times higher than
the response observed on any other dimension like productivity change.

22

recent years are the role of bankruptcy law and employment protection laws and tradeoffs
involved as they relate to experimentation.
On one hand, bankruptcy laws that favor creditors allow them to recoup as much capital
as they can from the startup—encouraging them to lend in the first place (Berkowitz and White,
2004; Cumming, 2012; Cerqueiro et al., 2013). Such laws also discourage the moral hazard that
might otherwise arise among entrepreneurial agents if they faced little need to repay creditors.
On the other hand, entrepreneurial failure allows society to test uncertain projects. This process
requires separating the entrepreneur from the firm, as is accomplished to some extent by the
limited liability provision that entrepreneurs are not personally liable for the debts of a firm, and
thus provides entrepreneurs with the ability to terminate projects and move on. As an example,
Eberhart et al. (2012) find that a bankruptcy reform in Japan that reduced the consequences of
closing a firm encouraged greater levels of entrepreneurship and risk taking following the
reform. The best policy appears to involve striking a balance between a good measure of limited
liability for entrepreneurs, allowing them to transition across projects without severe and lasting
penalties, along with some protections or restrictions for small or unsophisticated investors who
may not comprehend fully the low likelihood of the entrepreneur’s success. While legal factors
play a role in reducing the downside from failure, cultural factors such as a stigma of failure can
also play a role in hindering entry. In some regions, such as Silicon Valley, it can even be seen
as a badge of honor, making it much easier for individuals to take big risks in terms of startup
ventures.
A related set of issues can arise from strict employment protection laws that limit the
ability of firms to adjust their workforce rapidly, and in that way acting as an effective tax on
employment adjustments (Autor et al., 2007). Many ultimately successful startups have had to
undertake one or more critical changes in their business model, which in turn require substantial
adjustments in their workforce. One of the tradeoffs of legal mandates for employment is that
they make it much more difficult for high-growth startups to experiment and for innovative,
volatile sectors to form (for example, Saint-Paul, 2002; Samaniego, 2006). Indeed, venture
capital investment is lower in countries with stringent employment protection laws, and the more
volatile sectors are the most affected (Bozkaya and Kerr, 2013). In this sense, the flexibility of

23

labor markets governs the types of projects that entrepreneurs can undertake (Fallick et al.,
2006).

Appropriating Value in Successful States of the World
Beyond the policies that shape entrepreneur’s ability to experiment when things are going
poorly, policies or conditions that limit the value that entrepreneurs or investors receive in good
states of the world are also important. Some conditions like the extent of patent protection were
noted earlier in our comparison of biotech and clean energy investments. More generally, the
investors and state-contingent financial contracts that we describe require strong property rights
and a sound rule of law (for example, La Porta et al., 1997). Similarly, public equity markets are
critical to rewarding startups that are successful, by allowing investors and entrepreneurs to cash
out on the expectation of future growth. When equity markets do not work well or there are
limited opportunities to exit and retrieve at least a portion of the earlier investment, it becomes
much harder to experiment (for example, Black and Gilson, 1998; Michelacci and Suarez, 2004).

Policy Implications
How should policymakers interested in promoting entrepreneurship think about the role
of experimentation? Clearly, difficult entry regulations suppress the experimentation undertaken
by startups (Klapper et al., 2006) and often are difficult to justify on any grounds. As one
example, Fairlee et al. (2013) describe the extent to which the prevalence of employer-provided
health insurance in the U.S. economy serves as an implicit entry barrier for potential founders of
new firms, making it more difficult for them to leave current jobs.
In addition, taking the experimental perspective seriously suggests that it is a poor idea
for government to seek to pick and promote individual firms. After all, even the mostexperienced venture capital firms have substantial success in only one of every ten investments
they pick, so we shouldn’t expect inexperienced and possibly not-very-objective politicians to do
better. Indeed, one of the features that make market based economies better at commercializing
radical innovations is the decentralized and parallel nature with which new ideas are tested
(Rosenberg, 1994; Qian and Xu, 1998; Scherer and Harhoff, 2000). Politicians also have greater
difficulty terminating projects—that is, telling taxpayers that legislative decisions have spent
24

their money with little or no return. In our experience, most economists buy into this wariness of
policy makers acting as a venture capital firm, and many go a step further and caution against
picking an individual sector or industry to support. Virtually every state has a biotech initiative,
but few will be successful. Lerner (2009) emphasizes the dismal performance of policies
attempting to seed specific ventures or industries.
Governments are more likely to facilitate effective entrepreneurship if they work to
reduce the costs of experimentation in general. What we have in mind here is not so much
government programs that seek to target startups with particular benefits, but instead a careful
consideration of the broader regulatory framework, including labor laws and requirements with
which new entrants need to comply, with a focus on how they affect incentives for entry. These
efforts to set-up a better playing field are admittedly less glamorous than announcing a new
biotech cluster initiative, but they are far more likely to have sustained effects.
As alluded to in the previous section, the experimentation view also suggests that there
may be systematic market failures when the costs associated with experimentation are too high
or the returns are too uncertain and far into the future. This creates a framework for thinking
about which sectors, such as say basic science, may warrant sustained government support.
Finally, government should be cautious we about industrial policies that seek to minimize
business failures, as such policies may only be propping up firms that need to fail. As a recent
example, Acemoglu et al. (2013) highlight a key role for new entrants in policies to promote
innovation and growth. While policies like research and development tax credits to entrants can
help and may encourage growth, their impact pales in comparison to removing artificial support
for inefficient incumbents and similar efforts that better reallocate scarce skilled labor to these
firms and lower experimentation costs.

25

Conclusions
The prominent venture capitalist Vinod Khosla likes to emphasize (as in
http://www.wundermanreports.com/fail-as-often-as-you-want-and-fail-well), playing off a
comment from the basketball player Michael Jordan about missing shots, “our willingness to fail
gives us the ability and opportunity to succeed where others may fear to tread.” Viewing
entrepreneurship as experimentation allows individuals and societies to evaluate businesses and
technologies in domains with greater uncertainty than otherwise possible, unlocking deep growth
opportunities.
Economists should bear in mind two very different forms of experimentation that are
associated with entrepreneurship. One form is the economic experimentation that takes place in
market-based economies, when several new ideas, products and technologies are continually
tested and either displace existing technologies or more likely fail themselves. A second less
appreciated form of experimentation happens at the micro-level, before these ideas compete, and
relates to the process of bringing new ideas to the market. There are too many opportunities to
pursue with scarce resources, and the best-designed experiments can come back with misleading
or ambiguous results. Under these conditions, specific choices made by discrete individuals—
especially founders of firms and early-stage investors—become very important. Recent research
in financial economics, organizational design, and related fields highlight how the costs
associated with the ability of investors to experiment can alter the nature of entrepreneurship and
help to explain why entrepreneurship is more prevalent in certain industries, regions or periods
of time.
Less than a decade ago, research on entrepreneurship within economics had little internal
cohesion; instead, researchers working on entrepreneurship were spread out within broader fields
like finance, labor economics or macroeconomics. Today, while most researchers in this area
continue to keep one foot firmly planted in a traditional field, the internal cohesion for
entrepreneurial research has formed and is rapidly obtaining scale. Researchers on
entrepreneurship are themselves are experimenting with new ideas and new directions, and we
expect this area of research to develop rapidly in the coming years.

26

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, Nicholas Bloom, and William Kerr, 2013, Innovation, reallocation and
growth. NBER Working Paper 18993.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and William Kerr, 2011, Growth through heterogeneous innovations. NBER Working
Paper 16443.
Angel Capital Association, 2012, ACA, Angel Groups and Angel-Backed Companies,
http://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/data/Documents/Resources/ACAandAngelGroupBackgro
und09-12.pdf
Autor, David, William Kerr, and Adriana Kugler, 2007, Does employment protection reduce
productivity? Evidence from U.S. states. Economic Journal 117:521, 189-217.
Bergemann, Dirk, and Ulrich Hege, 2005, The financing of innovation: Learning and stopping. RAND
Journal of Economics 36, 719-752.
Bergemann, Dirk, Ulrich Hege, and Liang Peng, 2008, Venture capital and sequential investments.
Working paper.
Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Michelle White, 2004, Bankruptcy and small firms’ access to credit. Rand
Journal of Economics 35, 69-84.
Blacharski, Dan, 2013. “Top Ten Ways the Cloud Has Changed How Startups Launch.” Techie.com
November, 26. http://techie.com/top-ten-ways-the-cloud-has-changed-how-startups-launch/ .
Black, Bernard, and Ronald Gilson, 1998, Venture capital and the structure of capital markets: Banks
versus stock markets. Journal of Financial Economics 47, 243-77.
Black, Sandra, and Philip Strahan, 2002, Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability. Journal of Finance
57:6, 2807-33.
Bozkaya, Ant, and William Kerr, 2013, Labor regulations and European venture capital. Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy, forthcoming.
Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari and Bruce C. Petersen, 2009, Financing Innovation and Growth:
Cash Flow, External Equity and the 1990s R&D Boom. Journal of Finance 64:1, 151-185.
Cerqueiro, Geraldo, Deepak Hegde, María Fabiana Penas, and Robert Seamans, 2013, Debtor rights,
credit supply, and innovation. Working paper
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Philip Strahan, 2006, Finance as a barrier to entry: Bank competition and industry
structure in local U.S. markets. Journal of Finance 61:1, 437-61.
Chava, Sudheer, Alexander Oettl, Ajay Subramanian, and Krishnamurthy Subramanian, 2013, Banking
deregulation and innovation. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Chemmanur, Thomas, Karthik Krishnan, and Debarshi Nandy, 2011, How does venture capital financing
improve efficiency in private firms? A look beneath the surface. Review of Financial Studies
24:12, 4037-90.
Cumming, Douglas, 2012, Measuring the effect of bankruptcy laws on entrepreneurship across countries.
Journal of Entrepreneurial Finance 16:1, 80-6.
Da Rin, Marco, Thomas Hellmann, and Manju Puri, 2013, A survey of venture capital research. In
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of
Finance, Vol. 2, Amsterdam, North Holland.
Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, 2010, Clusters and entrepreneurship. Journal of
Economic Geography 10:4, 495-518.
Dosi, Giovanni, and Richard R. Nelson, 2010, Technical change and industrial dynamics as evolutionary
processes. In B.H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation,
Amsterdam: North Holland, Vol. 1, 51-127.

27

Eberhart, Robert, Charles Eesley, and Kathleen Eisenhardt, 2012, Failure is an option: Failure barriers
and new firm performance. Stanford University working paper.
Ewens, Michael, Ramana Nanda, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, Entrepreneurship and the cost of
experimentation. Working paper.
Fairlee, Robert, Kanika Kapur, and Susan Gates, 2013, Is employer-based health insurance a barrier to
entrepreneurship? Journal of Health Economics 30:1, 146-62.
Fallick, Bruce, Charles Fleischman, and James Rebitzer, 2006, Job-hopping in silicon valley: Some
evidence concerning the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster. Review of Economics
and Statistics 88:3, 472-81.
Fehder, Daniel, and Yael Hochberg, 2014, Accelerators and the regional supply of venture capital
investment. MIT Sloan working paper.
Fernandez, Jose-Maria, Roger Stein, and Andrew Lo, 2012, Commercializing biomedical research
through securitization techniques. Nature Biotechnology 30, 964-75
Fleming, Lee, 2001, Recombinant uncertainty in technological search. Management Science 47:1, 11732.
Fleming, Lee, and Olav Sorenson, 2004, Science as a map in technological search. Strategic Management
Journal 25, 909-28.
Gans, Joshua, David Hsu, and Scott Stern, 2002, When does startup innovation spur the gale of creative
destruction? RAND Journal of Economics 33, 571-86.
Glaeser, Edward, Sari Pekkala Kerr, and William Kerr, 2014, Entrepreneurship and urban growth: An
empirical assessment with historical mines. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Gompers, Paul, 1995, Optimal investment, monitoring, and the staging of venture capital. Journal of
Finance 50, 1461-89.
Gompers, Paul, 1996, Grandstanding in the venture capital industry. Journal of Financial Economics 42:1,
133-56.
Gompers, Paul, and Josh Lerner, 2002, The Venture Capital Cycle, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Graham, Paul, 2008, A New Venture Animal, http://paulgraham.com/ycombinator.html
Grenadier, Steven, and Andrey Malenko, 2011, Real options signaling games with applications to
corporate finance. Review of Financial Studies 24:12, 3993-4036.
Hall, Robert, and Susan Woodward, 2010, The burden of the nondiversifiable risk of entrepreneurship.
American Economic Review 100:3, 1163-1194.
Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, 2013, Who creates jobs? Small vs. large vs. young.
Review of Economics and Statistics 95:2, 347-61.
Hamilton, Barton, 2000, Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to selfemployment. Journal of Political Economy 108, 604-631.
Hayak, Friedrich, 1948, Individualism and Economic Order, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri, 2000, The interaction between product market and financing
strategy: The role of venture capital. Review of Financial Studies 13, 959-84.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow, 2009, Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124:4, 1403-48.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter Klenow, 2012, The life cycle of plants in India and Mexico. Working paper.
Kaplan, Steven, and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private equity performance: Returns, persistence and
capital flows. Journal of Finance 60, 1791-823.
Kaplan, Steven, and Per Strömberg, 2003, Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An empirical
analysis of venture capital. Review of Economic Studies 70:2, 281-315.

28

Kaplan, Steven, and Per Strömberg, 2004, Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from venture
capitalist analyses. Journal of Finance 59, 2177-210.
Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy, and Per Strömberg, 2009, Should investors bet on the jockey or the horse?
Evidence from the evolution of firms from early business plans to public companies. Journal of
Finance 64, 75-115.
Kerr, William, Josh Lerner, and Antoinette Schoar, 2014, The consequences of entrepreneurial finance:
Evidence from angel financings. Review of Financial Studies 27:1, 20-55.
Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, 2009, Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing
constraints, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94:1, 124-49.
King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993, Finance, entrepreneurship, and growth: Theory and evidence.
Journal of Monetary Economics 32:3, 513-42.
Klapper, Leora, Luc Laeven, and Raghuram Rajan, 2006, Entry regulation as a barrier to
entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 82, 591-625.
Knight, Frank, 1921, Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner, 2000, Assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation.
RAND Journal of Economics 31:4, 674-92.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, Legal
determinants of external finance. Journal of Finance 52:3, 1131-150.
Landier, Augustin, 2005, Entrepreneurship and the stigma of failure. Working paper.
Lerner, Josh, 2009, Boulevard of Broken Dreams, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Lerner, Josh, 2012, The Architecture of Innovation: The Economics of Creative Organizations, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Levere, Jane L. 2013, “Airbnb Campaign Uses Birdhouses to Widen Its Reach.” New York Times
December
15.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/16/business/media/airbnb-campaign-usesbirdhouses-to-widen-its-reach.html.
Manso, Gustavo, 2011, Motivating innovation. Journal of Finance 66, 1823-69.
Manso, Gustavo, 2013, Experimentation and the return to entrepreneurship. Working paper.
March, James, 1991, Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning. Organizational Science 2,
71-87.
Michelacci, Claudio, and Javier Suarez, 2004, Business creation and the stock market. Review of
Economic Studies 71, 459-81
Nanda, Ramana, and Liz Kind, 2013, AngelList, Harvard Business School Case 814-036.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2010, Financing risk and innovation. Harvard Business
School Working Paper 11–013.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2012, Innovation and the financial guillotine. Harvard
Business School Working Paper 13–038.
Nanda, Ramana, and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2013, Investment cycles and startup innovation. Journal of
Financial Economics 110, 403-18.
Nanda, Ramana, Ken Younge and Lee Fleming, 2013, Innovation and entrepreneurship in renewable
energy. In Adam Jaffe and Ben Jones, edited NBER volume on “The Changing Frontier:
Rethinking Science and Innovation Policy”, forthcoming.
Office of Advocacy, U.S. Small Business Association, 2013, Small Business Lending in the United States
2012, http://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/files/sbl_12study.pdf

29

Palmer, Maija 2012. “Cloud Computing cuts startup costs.” Financial Times February 29.
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/fc871bca-58e1-11e1-b9c600144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz30UiXKcsi .
Parker, Simon, 2009, The Economics of Self-Employment and Entrepreneurship, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Puri, Manju, and Rebeca Zarutskie, 2012, On the lifecycle dynamics of venture-capital- and non-venturecapital-financed firms. Journal of Finance 67:6, 2247-93.
Qian, Yingyi, and Chenggang Xu, 1998, Innovation and bureaucracy under soft and hard budget
constraints, Review of Economic Studies 65, 151-164.
Rajan, Raghuram, 2012, The corporation in finance. Journal of Finance 67:4, 1173-1217.
Ries, Eric, 2011, The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create
Radically Successful Businesses, Crown Business Publishing.
Ritter, Jay R., 2014, Initial Public Offerings: Updated Statistics, http://bear.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter
Robb, Alicia and David Robinson, 2014, The capital structure decisions of new firms. Review of
Financial Studies 27:1, 153-79
Rosenberg, Nathan, 1994, Economic experiments. In Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics,
and History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 87-108.
Saint-Paul, Gilles, 2002, Employment protection, international specialization, and innovation. European
Economic Review 46, 375-95.
Sahlman, William, 1990. The structure and governance of venture-capital organizations. Journal of
Financial Economics 27, 473-521.
Sahlman, William, 2010. Risk and reward in venture capital. Harvard Business School Note 811-036.
Sahlman, William, Ramana Nanda, Joseph B. Lassiter III and James McQuade, 2012, Terrapower,
Harvard Business School Case Study 813-108.
Samaniego, Roberto, 2006, Employment protection and high-tech aversion. Review of Economic
Dynamics 9, 224-41.
Samila, Sampsa, and Olav Sorenson, 2011, Venture capital, entrepreneurship and economic growth.
Review of Economics and Statistics 93, 338-49.
Scherer, F.M., and Dietmar Harhoff, 2000, Technology policy for a world of skew-distributed outcomes.
Research Policy 29:4-5, 559-66
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1934, The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital,
Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
Schumpeter, Joseph, 1942, Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. Harper Brothers, New York, NY.
Shane, Scott, 2009, Fool’s Gold? The Truth Behind Angel Investing in America, Oxford University Press.
Stern, Scott, 2005, Economic experiments: The role of entrepreneurship in economic prosperity. In
Understanding Entrepreneurship: A Research and Policy Report, Ewing Marion Kauffman
Foundation, 16-20.
Thomke, Stefan, 2003, Experimentation Matter: Unlocking the Potential of New Technologies for
Innovation, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Tian, Xuan, 2011, The causes and consequences of venture capital stage financing. Journal of Financial
Economics 101:1, 132-159.
Weitzman, Martin, 1979, Optimal search for the best alternative. Econometrica 47:3, 641-654.
Wilson, Fred, 2011, “Airbnb.” March 16. http://www.avc.com/a_vc/2011/03/airbnb.html.

30

