                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HISTORY OF AMERICAN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE:
                          LAW, INSTITUTIONS, AND POLITICS

                                                 Eric Hilt

                                         Working Paper 20356
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20356


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2014




I would like to thank Carola Frydman, David Robinson, Naomi Lamoreaux, Antoinette Schoar, and
Marc Weidenmier for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Eric Hilt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
History of American Corporate Governance: Law, Institutions, and Politics
Eric Hilt
NBER Working Paper No. 20356
July 2014
JEL No. G3,N21,N81

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper presents an overview of the history of corporate governance in the United States, emphasizing
the period before the advent of federal securities laws and the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Recent research has overturned many widely accepted beliefs about corporate governance
during this period. In particular, the evolution of American corporate governance has not followed
a simple, linear trajectory, beginning with small, well-governed firms and ending with large, poorly
governed ones. Over time, economic and institutional changes have given rise to successive generations
of corporations with their own governance problems and their own mechanisms to address those problems.
When existing governance mechanisms failed, the United States experienced corporate governance
crises—episodes that shattered investors’ faith in corporate management and the legal institutions
intended to protect their rights. The resolutions of these crises have sometimes been found in legal
innovations, and in other cases, in institutional or market-based solutions.


Eric Hilt
Wellesley College
Department of Economics
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ehilt@wellesley.edu
1. Introduction: History and the American Corporation

       Across the world today, there is a striking relationship between legal institutions
and financial development. Countries with legal systems that offer robust protections for
minority shareholders have larger equity markets, and firms in those countries make
greater use of outside finance (La Porta et al. 1997). The United States in particular
offers relatively strong legal protections to investors and possesses deep capital markets.
Its corporations’ ownership structures are also distinctive: America’s public companies
are usually not dominated by controlling investors, and in particular family business
groups, pyramidal structures, ownership by banks, and dual-class shares that allocate
control to minority owners are all uncommon. Widely dispersed ownership is more
typical of American public corporations than those of most other countries (La Porta et
al. 1999).

       When did this distinctive style of corporate ownership, and the legal institutions
that support it, emerge in the United States? Did American corporate ownership and
governance once resemble those of other countries, or was it always relatively unique? If
it evolved over time, what accounts for this evolution? Answers to these questions can
help evaluate competing explanations of the ownership patterns of American
companies, such as those suggesting that populist politics has restrained financial
institutions and large investors (Roe 1994) or that strong legal protections for investors,
originating in the common law, have made dispersed ownership possible (La Porta et al.
1998). Moreover, they can shed light on the level and nature of the investor protections
offered in the United States when it was an emerging market---which is in some ways
the relevant comparison to today’s developing countries (see Morck 2011 for an
overview).

       This article presents an overview of the history of corporate governance in the
United States, emphasizing the period before the advent of federal securities laws and
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in the 1930s. The legal and institutional
protections of investors, and their evolution, are analyzed, and data on the ownership
structures of corporations at different points in time are presented. The discussion
emphasizes large, publicly traded corporations, the historical equivalents of the modern
enterprises that are the focus of the literature on corporate governance today. The

                                             1
ownership data presented include New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)-traded firms in the
1820s, which mostly consisted of banks and insurance companies; Boston Stock
Exchange--traded industrials and utilities in the 1870s, when the Boston Stock
Exchange was the premier market for industrials in the United States (Atack and
Rousseau 1999); and finally, NYSE-traded railroads in 1910, when railroads were the
largest American business enterprises.

       Until relatively recently, the early history of the corporation in America has been
a somewhat neglected subject. In part, this reflects the influence of a literature on the
evolution of business enterprise that has mostly ignored issues relating to the law or to
the internal governance of corporations (for example, Chandler 1977). But it also reflects
the frustrating complexity of early legal history. Corporation law in the United States is
state law, and early enterprises could only incorporate in their home states (see
Henderson 1918). Studying the history of the corporation requires analyzing many
states’ early laws, and any existing data on early corporate ownership likely resides in
the archives of state governments. The early nineteenth century is a statistical dark age,
particularly for business records (David 1967).

       Among the literature that does exist on the topic, Berle and Means’ (1932) work is
the most important and influential. They argue that the separation of ownership from
control was a recent development and that that in the early nineteenth century, it had
not occurred. Berle and Means (1932, p. 135, footnote 14) claim that for early American
corporations, “the number of shareholders was few; they could and did attend meetings;
they were business-men; and their vote meant something.” They then argue that legal,
organizational, and technological developments in the late-nineteenth and early-
twentieth centuries led to the emergence of large, diffusely held enterprises controlled
by professional managers or by minority interests. Much of the scholarship on corporate
governance that has been produced since Berle and Means has accepted their
characterization of the history of American corporations (see, e.g., Dodd 1938,
Hovenkamp 1991, and Coffee 2001; an important exception is Werner 1986). But the
early history of American corporations has not been well documented, and the
arguments of Berle and Means may have been accepted simply because they seemed



                                             2
appealing and persuasive in light of what is known about corporate governance in the
twentieth century.

       Recent years have seen a wave of research on early corporations and their
governance that has made use of archival data.1 Much of this research has concluded
that the Berle and Means view of early corporate governance is simply incorrect:
Evidence of substantial governance problems has been found among early American
companies. Although the average size of public corporations certainly grew over time,
the evolution of American corporate governance has not followed a simple, linear
trajectory, beginning with small, well-governed organizations in which shareholders
participated actively and eventually ending with large, poorly governed organizations
with absentee owners and opportunistic managers.

       Over its long history, American corporate governance has been concerned with
three interrelated problems (see Lamoreaux 2009). The first, which I term Problem 1, is
the familiar managerial incentive problem that arises when ownership is highly diffuse:
Control falls into the hands of managers, who may act in self-interested ways. Problem
2, which is also familiar today, and arises in circumstances where Problem 1 is unlikely
to be present, is that of controlling shareholders taking actions that benefit themselves
at the expense of minority or outside investors. Finally, Problem 3, which is now far less
familiar in the United States, arises from the power of the state to control the creation of
corporations or expropriate existing enterprises.

       Today, much of the scholarship on corporate governance in the United States is
focused on Problem 1 (see, for example, Jensen and Meckling 1976), whereas much of
the research on developing country firms is focused on Problem 2 (for example,
Bertrand, Mehta and Mullainathan, 2002). But the history presented in this article
indicates that Problem 2 and also Problem 3 were significant sources of concern in the
United States during the early nineteenth century. Episodes where Problem 1 plagued
the governance of some early American corporations also occurred. Over time, economic


1This work is not confined to the history of the United States (see, e.g., Acheson et al. 2014;
Franks, Mayer and Rossi 2009; Freeman, Pearson and Taylor 2012; Guinnane et al. 2007;
Hannah 2010; Morck 2005a; and Musacchio 2009).


                                                 3
and institutional changes gave rise to successive generations of corporations with their
own governance problems and their own mechanisms to address those problems. When
existing governance institutions failed on a large scale, the United States experienced
what might be termed corporate governance crises—episodes that shattered investors’
faith in corporate management and the legal institutions intended to protect their rights.
The resolutions of these crises have sometimes been found in new laws, and in other
cases, in institutional or market-based solutions.

       Another major theme of the literature on modern corporate governance has been
the absence of pyramidal business groups in the United States (Becht and Delong 2005,
Villalonga and Amit 2009). It has been argued that the United States once had such
groups on a large scale but that the imposition of taxes on intercoporate dividend
payments during the New Deal made pyramids unattractive and broke them apart
(Morck 2005b). In contrast, this article argues that pyramidal business groups were
never important in the United States. They failed to arise on a large scale because
historically, wealthy families and important businesses have not felt they were
necessary.

2. Early American Corporations and their Governance

2.1. Corporate Ownership in the Early Nineteenth Century

The earliest existing data on the ownership of a relatively large cross-section of
American public companies can be observed is from NYSE-traded companies in the
1820s. By that time, the growing concentration of wealth from trade and finance within
New York City made the NYSE the most active market for corporate securities in the
United States. The exchange had no formal listing requirements; it simply facilitated
trade in shares of corporate stock, as well as in the bonds of the federal, state, and city
governments. In 1825 the shares of 67 corporations, mostly those of banks and
insurance companies, saw trading.2 These firms, whose headquarters were
overwhelmingly located on or near Wall Street, were often enormously profitable, partly


2There were 19 banks and 44 insurance companies; the remainder included a water company, a
gas company, and two coal companies.


                                              4
                                       Table 1:
                         Ownership of NYSE-Traded Firms, 1826

                                                                       % of Votes:     % of Votes:
                                                    % Widely Held:        Shares         Shares
                                   Total            10%        20%       Owned        Controlled by
                                Shareholders       Cutoff     Cutoff   by Directors     Directors
                                     (1)            (2)          (3)       (4)             (5)
All NYSE- Listed Companies           139            52           75        21.7           39.6

  Above-median capital               201             71          94        15.9           25.2

  Median capital or below             101            42           65      26.0            47.4
Sources: Author’s calculations from data presented in Hilt (2008).



because of the robust demand for financial services in America’s growing economy, but
also because the state government tightly rationed access to corporate charters with the
power to enter the banking industry, an issue we will analyze below.

        Ownership records from this era are extremely scarce, but in the 1820s New York
State implemented an unusual capital tax that required all corporations to submit lists
of their stockholders to the state government. These were first uncovered and analyzed
in Hilt (2008). Table 1 presents ownership data for the companies that were traded on
the NYSE in 1826. The mean paid-in capital of these enterprises was $605,000,
equivalent to $14.5 million in 2012 dollars, and the median capital was $500,000.

        The data in Table 1 indicate that even as far back as 1826—prior to the
introduction of virtually any statutory investor protections in the modern sense—
publicly traded companies had a wide range of ownership structures, and there were
some widely held firms. NYSE-listed companies had on average 139 shareholders, a
number that might seem miniscule today, but which nonetheless is consistent with these
firms having substantial numbers of owners holding small stakes. Columns 2 and 3
present the rates at which the firms were widely held by the definitions of La Porta et al.
(1999). Just over 50% were widely held in the sense of not having a 10% owner; 75% did
not have a 20% owner. The lower two rows present the ownership of the corporations by
size. Those with median capital or above were widely held at rates similar to those of the
modern American corporations in the La Porta et al. (1999) dataset. Column 4 of the
data presents the percentage of the votes represented by the shares standing in the

                                                   5
names of the directors. For all firms, this was approximately 20% and it was
approximately 5% lower than that for the large firms and 5% higher for the smaller
firms.

         With regard to the governance of these enterprises, Problem 2 would seem to
have been much more likely to be a concern than Problem 1. But in order to analyze the
problems these enterprises actually faced, we must first examine the legal rights of early
shareholders, and the political context within which they were determined.

2.2. Early Corporate Charters

Today, the procedure for incorporating a business in the American states is routine and
inexpensive: One simply submits a certificate of incorporation—usually a one-page
form—to the secretary of state and pays a nominal fee. The documents that govern the
internal relations of the firm are drawn up separately by the incorporators, who have
broad freedom to structure their corporation as they wish. In this sense, the formation
of a corporation is fundamentally a contracting process among the incorporators, which
is simply registered with the state. Businesses can in fact choose to incorporate in any
state, irrespective of where their operations are located; approximately 85% of those
incorporating out of state choose Delaware (Bebchuk and Hamdani 2002).

         Until the mid- to late-nineteenth century, the process of forming a corporation
was radically different. The only procedure for incorporation was to appeal to the state
government for a special legislative act: For a business to become a corporation, the
state had to pass a law, and the contents of that law—the corporation’s charter—were the
outcome of a negotiation between the incorporators and the state government. The
formation of early corporations was not merely a contracting process among the
incorporators; it was also a contract between the incorporators and the state. And the
state frequently renegotiated the terms of that contract by granting charters of limited
duration and imposing changes or exacting concessions or payments in exchange for
renewals. The state also carefully rationed charters in some industries, particularly
banking, to raise the value of the charters it granted and thereby enhance the power of
the political factions in control of the government (Bodenhorn 2006). Early



                                              6
corporations were intimately tied to politics, and Problem 3 was an issue of central
concern.

       What rights did early corporation law grant to shareholders? In contrast to other
areas of the law, the United States did not inherit a well-developed set of judicial
precedents or regulatory statutes relating to business corporations from England
(Gower 1956, Harris 2000). Although English business corporations were created
beginning in the sixteenth century, they were not common, and English corporation law
remained in a relatively primitive state at the time of the American Revolution. Among
early American corporations, practices that followed tradition rather than law were
generally adhered to. On many issues relating to the rights of stockholders or the
authority and responsibilities of directors, the law was silent. Were directors obligated
to disclose their own transactions with the corporation to the shareholders? To what
extent could they engage in self-dealing or utilize the resources of the firm for their own
personal gain? Did shares that were borrowed from a broker, or repurchased by the
company, or subscribed for but not fully paid-in, entitle their holders to votes?
Traditional practices offered answers to each of these questions, but the law did not.
Stockholders who felt they had been wronged in such matters might claim they had been
the victim of fraud, which is a civil tort at common law, or attempt to hold directors
accountable as fiduciaries, a strategy for which there was a strong foundation in English
case law (Dodd 1954). But in the early years of the American republic, these strategies
were still untested.

       Most of the legal rights to which shareholders were entitled were specified in the
corporations’ charters. Voting in annual meetings was the principal mechanism by
which stockholders participated in the governance of corporations, and the charters
typically dictated how director elections would be conducted and how the president
would be chosen. Although voting in early corporations was relatively similar to modern
shareholder voting, one striking difference is that many early charters configured the
voting rights of stockholders in a way that enhanced the relative influence of small
investors, using what has been termed graduated voting rights. With graduated rights,
the votes per share to which an investor was entitled was a decreasing function of the



                                             7
number of shares held.3 The effect was the opposite of most of today’s dual-class shares,
which typically increase the voting power of a founding blockholder (Gompers Ishii and
Metrick 2010).

       Hilt (2008) develops an index of the degree of diminishment of the voting power
of large shareholders by graduated voting rights schemes, based on the average level of
votes per share across all possible levels of shareholdings. The index increases in the
voting power of large blocks of stock, and ranges from approximately 0 for a rule of one
vote per shareholder, to 1 for the rule of one vote per share.4 In an analysis of all 812
corporate charters granted up to 1825 in New York—the largest and most legally
influential state at the time—the average value of this index was 0.63. It was highest
among firms in industries that did not typically seek the participation of small investors,
and lowest among firms in industries that did. This is an indication that graduated
voting rights were imposed with the intention of helping incorporators address Problem
2 and attract investments from small shareholders.5 However, there is some evidence
that these schemes were sometimes circumvented by dividing individuals’ blocks of
shares into small holdings in the names of different family members (Hammond 1957;
Dunlavy 2004). This may account for the diminished use of graduated voting rights
over the nineteenth century.

       Two other elements of early corporate governance are worth noting. The first is
dividend payments, which were likely used to address Problem 2. To outside investors,

3For example, the original 1791 charter of the bank of New York specified that the stockholders
were entitled to “one vote for each share not exceeding four, five votes for six shares, six votes
for eight shares, seven votes for ten shares, and one vote for every five shares above ten” (Laws
of New York, 1791, chapter 37.) Thus an owner of four shares received four votes, but an owner
of 20 shares received nine votes, or 0.45 votes per share.
4The impact of a graduated voting rights scheme on the voting power of each shareholder
depends on the actual distribution of shares; only in the presence of small shareholders does the
proportion of votes held by blockholders fall. The index is therefore a measure of the potential
of a voting rights configuration to restrict the voting power of large shareholders.
5Graduated voting rights originated among early business corporations in England; see Scott
(1912). A substantial literature has developed that analyzes the purpose and effects of graduated
voting rights in the American context; on their political significance, see Dunlavy (2004, 2006);
on their effects among nineteenth-century American banks, see Bodenhorn (2014); and see
Hansmann and Pargendler (2010) on their effects on consumers. Hilt (2013) presents a
synthesis.


                                                8
the operations and finances of corporations were likely quite opaque, and the extent of
self-dealing by insiders may have been impossible to observe. By committing
themselves to making regular dividend payments, managers may have signaled to
investors that they would not expropriate the assets of the company (see Baskin and
Miranti 1997). The second is the composition of the boards. Among the directors of
early corporations were many wealthy, prominent, and politically connected men (see
Hilt and Valentine 2012), and the names of the directors were well publicized. A board
seat likely signaled that such men were willing to stake their own reputations on the
business’ success, or at least that the managers would operate the firm according to
principles suitable to such men. This may also have helped the corporations address
Problem 2. However, the political connections of the directors were perhaps even more
important. Boards of directors often included sitting officeholders or important figures
from political parties. This identified the business with the political forces responsible
for its incorporation, and indicated how well the corporation’s interests would be
represented in the state government, for example by blocking entry by potential
competitors, or by renewing the charter on favorable terms when it expired. This helped
the corporation address Problem 3.

       Finally, it is also likely that the firms relied on what has been termed “informal
relations of trust” (Franks, Mayer and Rossi 2009). The ownership of these
corporations was predominantly local, which may have facilitated personal contact and
trust between investors and the directors and managers.

       The mechanisms developed to address the fundamental problems of the
governance of early corporations functioned reasonably well under ordinary
circumstances. But they were mostly informal and based on tradition, rather than law—
and even those that did carry the force of law could be circumvented. When aggressive
entrepreneurs who had little patience for those traditions obtained control over several
prominent corporations, spectacular governance failures resulted.

2.3. Breakdown: Wall Street’s First Corporate Governance Crisis

The year 1826 was a tumultuous one in New York. Several of New York’s insurance
companies, operated by men who were not politically connected enough to obtain a

                                             9
bank charter, had defied state law and entered the banking business, issuing banknote-
like instruments to finance their lending (see Hilt 2009a). Effectively, their solution to
Problem 3 was to act as proto-shadow banks and evade the state’s banking statutes and
regulations. To do this, the managers of insurance companies engaged in financial
transactions that violated tradition, but not necessarily any law. For example, they used
the assets of companies they controlled as collateral for loans to acquire other
companies, sometimes in their own names. And in cases where their firms held large
blocks of stock that had been subscribed for but not paid in, or repurchased by the
company from subscribers, the directors voted those shares to perpetuate their control.

       Column 5 of Table 1 illustrates the effect of these transactions: Many of the
directors controlled, and voted, shares held in the name of other corporations, as well as
treasury shares. These holdings often created substantial wedges between the directors’
cash-flow rights and their control rights, as in modern pyramidal structures. For 12 of
the corporations, the additional votes gave the directors majority control over their
corporations.

       An economic downturn began in 1825, as a serious financial panic hit England.
As the recession spread to New York, stock prices fell, and risk spreads in financial
markets widened. In the summer of 1826, a New York newspaper began publishing
letters and editorials claiming that the speculators running several insurance companies
were utilizing fraudulent transactions among the companies they controlled to meet
their growing interest obligations. When one of the most vulnerable of these firms
stopped payments on its liabilities, panic broke out, and several large banks and
insurance companies faced runs and closed. It was quickly revealed that many of these
firms were deeply insolvent and had been so for long periods of time. Insiders had
successfully concealed the state of their enterprises by continuously paying substantial
dividends, apparently with borrowed money. It was also revealed that several of the
wealthiest and most prominent of the directors of the failed corporations had not
attended any board meetings in years and had not bothered to even monitor the
activities of the other directors. The traditional solutions to governance problems had
clearly failed.



                                             10
       The public was shocked and outraged. New York’s district attorney obtained at
least six different indictments against the men at the center of the scandals, which
resulted in a series of spectacular criminal trials (see Hilt 2009b). More importantly, a
wave of litigation initiated by the stockholders and creditors of the failed companies
quickly overwhelmed New York’s chancery courts. The stockholders of the New York
Coal Company, whose capital had been used by its directors as collateral in an
unsuccessful attempt to take over City Bank (the predecessor of today’s Citibank),
successfully argued that minority stockholders had the right to sue directors of a
corporation for malfeasance. The court’s ruling in the 1832 case Robinson v. Smith
became a general principle of equity jurisprudence and established the basis of the
shareholder derivative suit (see Boyle 1965).6

       The state government also responded with sweeping changes to its laws,
particularly intended to address issues relating to Problem 2. In 1828, New York enacted
a series of detailed statutes that specifically prohibited many of the transactions at the
heart of the failures and also imposed financial reporting requirements, prohibited large
loans to directors, and created a presumption of fraud, and with it, personal liability for
directors and stockholders, in all bankruptcies. (This latter term was quickly found to be
too severe, and was repealed.) The provisions also clarified and strengthened the rights
of stockholders and creditors to use the court of chancery to seek injunctions against
malfeasant directors and place insolvent corporations in the hands of receivers. This
legislation was probably the first major investor protection law enacted in any common
law jurisdiction.

       New York’s experience was extreme, but as corporations proliferated, American
state legislatures sought to define the rights of these organizations and their
stockholders and creditors through an enormous body of statutes. Many states adopted
significant portions of New York’s 1828 law (Kehl 1939). As the first treatise on
American corporation law noted in 1832 (Angell and Ames 1832, p. 357), “the statute
books of many states will show that an opinion has strongly and extensively prevailed


6This is a suit brought by a shareholder on behalf of a corporation, generally against a
controlling insider.


                                                11
that the common law relative to commercial corporations is not adequate to their proper
regulation and government.” Gradually, an indigenous corporation law developed in the
United States that blended common-law institutions with American innovations. In
response to this corporate governance crisis and others like it, more robust mechanisms
to address Problem 2 were sought in the form of stronger legal protections for investors.

         Over time, reformist political factions in New York and other states attempted to
eliminate Problem 3 by adopting general incorporation acts. General acts provided
open access to incorporation, replacing the regime of granting charters by special
legislative act (see North, Wallis and Weingast 2009). The early versions of these laws
often imposed a rigid governance template on the businesses created through their
terms, for example requiring a rule of one vote per share and regulating the size of the
board. In some cases, this one-size-fits-all approach may have prevented incorporators
from having the freedom to adopt their own solutions to Problem 2. That is, the solution
found to Problem 3 aggravated other problems (Lamoreaux 2009).

2.4. Industrial Companies in the Mid-Nineteenth Century: Massachusetts

The next point at which we can observe corporate ownership is in mid-nineteenth-
century Massachusetts. At the time, that state had the greatest number of business
corporations per capita in the United States, and possessed sophisticated corporation
laws (see Wright 2014). Massachusetts was the center of several important
manufacturing industries, especially textiles, and its manufacturing corporations were
unusually large and widely held, relative to their peers in other states (see Scranton
1983).

         Although most of the states’ major manufacturing corporations were quite
successful, a number of prominent figures in the Massachusetts’ business community
argued that the diffuse ownership of large corporations caused their governance, and
operating results, to suffer. The issues they described often related closely to Problem 1.
One investor named J.C. Ayer (1863) produced a pamphlet that claimed that the
directors of these firms were paid excessively high salaries; hired their relatives for
lucrative managerial positions; sold the corporations’ finished products through
mercantile firms they owned, and paid themselves excessive fees for those services; and

                                             12
concealed the effects of these practices from the shareholders. Ayer specifically ascribed
these problems to the passivity of the firms’ many small shareholders. He also argued
that the directors, whose ownership stakes were quite low, perpetuated their control
over their firms by soliciting proxy votes from the shareholders through duplicitous
means, and, where necessary, by holding the annual meetings of companies with
shareholders in common simultaneously, thereby preventing many shareholders from
participating in more than one.

        These problems were probably not acute or widespread enough to threaten
investors’ confidence in the governance of firms generally—there probably was no full-
blown corporate governance crisis among these firms. However, in response to the
complaints of shareholders, Massachusetts enacted at least two changes to its
corporation laws in the 1850s and 1860s in order to help protect investors. One required
corporations to make their books accessible to stockholders, and the other prohibited
directors from voting more than 20 shares by proxy. Also, beginning in the 1870s,
Massachusetts law required all of the state’s manufacturing corporations to submit
certificates of condition to the state government, which included basic balance sheet
information, as well as the names of all stockholders and directors. These forms provide
a window into the firms’ ownership and governance.

        Hilt (2014) analyzes these data. In 1870, the shares of 58 of the largest and most
important manufacturing firms, and also 11 utilities, traded on the Boston Stock
Exchange. Table 2 presents ownership data for the publicly traded companies from that
year. Total paid-in capital for these firms was on average approximately $716,000,
equivalent to $13 million in 2012 dollars. Median capital was $550,000. Although the
firms of 1870 were similar in size (as measured in paid-in capital) to New York’s
financial companies from 1826, they were much larger than manufacturing firms from
1826.

        The data in Table 2 indicate that the 1870 manufacturing firms were quite widely
held. Although the total numbers of shareholders were not that different from the 1826
New York corporations, their ownership was far less concentrated. The directors of the
1870 firms held only approximately 7% of the shares in their own names—complaints
that the firms were managed by boards with small ownership stakes seem well-founded.

                                             13
                                      Table 2:
                     Ownership of Boston Stock Exchange Traded
                      Manufacturing Firms and Utilities, 1870


                                                     % Widely Held:
                                      Total          10%       20%      % Owned       % Controlled
                                   Shareholders     Cutoff    Cutoff   by Directors   by Directors

All Boston Stock Exchange Corps         184            80       98         6.8            8.7

  Above-median capital                  261            86       95         8.6            9.6

  Median or below                        110          75         100       5.3            8.2
Source: Author’s calculations from data presented in Hilt (2013b).



The directors were in a position to vote approximately 2% more—these were nearly
always shares held in family trusts where the director was a trustee—entitling them to
about nine percent of the total votes. The governance issues related to Problem 1 that
Berle and Means claimed were new among the enormous enterprises of the early
twentieth century were in fact likely to have been present among industrial firms
decades earlier than they claimed.

        The Massachusetts corporations also exhibit a reliance on some of the same
governance mechanisms as the New York corporations from 50 years earlier. Their
ownership was overwhelmingly local (Davis 1958), and their boards of directors were
dominated by wealthy and prominent men. Regular dividend payments were also
regarded as critically important (McGouldrick 1968).

3. Economic Transformation: Railroads, Big Business, and Bankers

Over the course of the nineteenth century the development of railroads helped facilitate
the economic integration of the different regions of the United States, which as we will
see led to subsequent changes in the scale and organization of firms in other industries.
However, the railroads themselves quickly grew into businesses of unprecedented size,
and faced their own governance challenges. By the 1860s, several railroad corporations
had been created with paid-in capitals of $20 million or more; the capitalization of the
largest of these enterprises was equal to approximately 40% of the total capital



                                                  14
capitalization of all manufacturing enterprises traded on the Boston Stock Exchange at
that time.

         As with early nineteenth century banks, the creation of railroads and their
operations were intimately tied to government policy. The entrepreneurs who founded
railroad enterprises often allied themselves with political parties, purchased control of
newspapers, or held public office. But the railroads’ solutions to Problem 3 severely
exacerbated Problem 2. Railroad insiders engaged in numerous forms of self-dealing or
tunneling—including paying themselves exorbitant salaries, contracting with firms they
controlled, borrowing their firm’s securities for their own use, and issuing themselves
shares of stock in exchange for worthless securities—and used their political influence to
perpetuate their control.7 The construction of the transcontinental railroads in
particular was subsidized by the federal government, and railroad insiders used those
subsidies to enrich themselves personally at the expense of the public and the other
shareholders. The directors of the Union Pacific, for example, created their own
construction company, which they named Crédit Mobilier of America, and awarded it
lucrative contracts to build the line and also distributed Crédit Mobilier shares to
important congressmen. White (2012) chronicles this and many other such episodes
among the transcontinentals. Other railroad insiders enriched themselves by
coordinating the release of rumors or insider information with their own trading in their
companies’ stock; insider trading was not prohibited by law or regarded by jurists as a
breach of directors’ fiduciary responsibilities.8

         In the 1860s and 1870s, these practices led to a series of corporate governance
crises among major railroads. Addressing the problems exposed in these crises required
substantial institutional innovations, which would have long-lasting implications for the
governance of all major American corporations.




7See Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2006, pp.126--27) and the legal cases cited therein. It is
perhaps worth noting that in this industry, tunneling occurred in both the literal and figurative
sense.
8   Banerjee and Eckhard (2001) analyze insider trading associated with merger announcements

                                                15
3.1. Railroads and Contests for Control

The enormous cash flows that could be generated by a large railroad attracted the
interest of politically powerful groups of investors who sought to dislodge sitting
directors and obtain control so that they could enrich themselves. Incumbent managers
of course resisted the attempts of such men to take over their enterprises, using
whatever tactics they could. When a formidable group of investors sought to unseat
equally powerful and well-connected directors, spectacular contests for control—
railroad “wars”—were the result. The competing sides each used their influence over the
judiciary or members of the legislature in their campaigns, which often generated
dozens of different lawsuits and even specific pieces of legislation.

       These contests of control were important because they revealed the limits of
states’ legal protections of investors in an era of politically powerful investors—who were
denoted by contemporaries as railroad barons. In the most egregious cases, laws
intended to protect minority investors were utilized in ways that were the opposite of
what their legislative authors intended: Rather than a powerless minority owner as
presumed in the statute, major shareholders wielded these laws in their attacks on one
another.

       The nature of these conflicts is best illustrated with an example from New York,
whose corrupt state government and judiciary during the Gilded Age created an ideal
environment in which railroad barons could operate. Consider the Albany &
Susquehanna (A&S) railroad, which Jay Gould attempted to take over in 1869. In the
face of large stock purchases by Gould’s men, the president of the A&S “sold” to his
allies on the board thousands of newly issued shares, lending them the required initial
payment for the shares by issuing company bonds as collateral for a loan from a broker.
The A&S’s president then hid the company’s books in a nearby cemetery. Meanwhile
Gould’s attorneys used a provision of New York law that originated in the legal
protections of investors enacted in 1828 (which were detailed above) to obtain an
injunction from a judge affiliated with their political party—New York’s Tammany Hall
Democrats. The injunction suspended the president and most of the board from their
offices. At the same time, the A&S board obtained a competing injunction from a judge
they could influence, vacating the original injunction, and suspending the one A&S

                                             16
director loyal to Gould. Ultimately, both sides sued to have the railroad put in
receivership, obtaining many more injunctions in the process. In an attempt to enforce
their side’s legal dicta, Gould’s men raided the A&S headquarters and, unable to locate
the company’s books, ultimately resorted to a campaign to physically take possession of
the railroad. With a gang of hired thugs, Gould’s men took over an A&S train and rode
down the line, taking control of stations as they proceeded. Some A&S men responded
by derailing the Gould-controlled train, provoking a physical battle between the two
sides. Ultimately, the governor ordered the state’s militia to take charge of the road,
amid many further suits and countersuits, and efforts to bribe legislators to pass laws to
legitimate each side’s position. The details of this and several similarly outlandish
episodes are presented in Adams and Adams (1871).

       The confidence of railroad securities holders was shattered, and the financiers
involved in distributing those railroad securities were appalled. One New York lawyer
(George Templeton Strong; see Nevins and Thomas 1952, p. 264), observing a wave of
railroad wars and the legal tactics employed, noted that “the abused machinery of the
law is a terror to property owners.” Ultimately, the situation was resolved when a brash
young banker was elected vice president of the A&S and presided over negotiations with
a different railroad for an alliance that would keep the A&S out of the reach of Gould,
and also his rivals (Carosso 1987). That banker was the 32-year-old J. Pierpont Morgan,
who later founded the investment bank bearing his name, and would make his
reputation not just as a financier, but as an organizer and reorganizer of railroads and
later, industrial giants.

       In response to this and similar episodes, the NYSE in 1869 required the
registration of securities by listed companies, making it more difficult for insiders to
secretly issue huge amounts of stock, as the A&S directors did. And efforts were made to
reform the jurisdiction of New York’s courts, to prevent rival factions from utilizing
different judges in order to invalidate each other’s injunctions.

       But the most important solution to the problems posed by the railroad barons for
investors and creditors was not legal in nature, for the railroad barons were more than
powerful enough to subvert the law for their own ends. The solution that was ultimately
found was for investment bankers to assume an active role in the governance of

                                             17
railroads. With their influence over access to capital, and with their incentives aligned
with those of securities holders, investment banks sought to rein in the worst excesses of
railroad managers (Carosso 1970; Redlich 1951). Firms such as J.P. Morgan & Co. hired
partners with elite social backgrounds and worked assiduously to maintain prestigious
reputations (Pak 2013). The value of the firms’ high social standing may have helped to
signal that they would ensure that their clients would be free of scandals or
unscrupulous management. Ultimately financiers began assume a significant role in the
governance of industrial corporations as well.

3.2. Bankers and Railroad Governance

In the 1860s and 1870s, a relatively small number of investment banks capable of
raising large sums of capital began to dominate the industry and establish relationships
with prominent railroads.9 Initially, railroads’ relationships with their bankers were
arms-length in nature, and they might have used different banks over time. But
eventually, following the scandals of the 1860s and 1870s, and particularly after the
financial panic of 1893, major railroads established durable relationships with an
investment bank (Carosso 1970). Those relationships were frequently cemented with
board seats, as the partners of investment banks began to actively participate in the
management and governance of railroads. In restructurings out of bankruptcy, a
circumstance in which many of these relationships were first established, the shares of
the railroad’s stock were often placed in what was known as a voting trust, with the
bankers as trustees, giving them total control over the enterprise for a specified period
of time, usually several years.




9These included Drexel, Morgan & Co. (the predecessor to J.P. Morgan & Co.), J & W Seligman
& Co., and Speyer & Co., as well as the Boston firms Lee, Higginson & Co., and Kidder, Peabody
& Co. (see Davis 1963 and Carosso 1970). Benmelech (2010) studies railroad capital structures.


                                              18
                                     Table 3:
                      Ownership of NYSE-listed Railroads, 1910

                                                   % Widely Held:      % Owned by     % Owned by
                                  Total           10%         20%      Investment        Other
                               Shareholders      Cutoff      Cutoff      Banks         Railroads

NYSE - Listed Railroads           14,928           32          44           5.9           22.8

  Above-median capital             17,724          48          65           2.8           15.8

  Median or below                   3,740            16         25          8.9            29.6
Sources: Author’s calculations from data presented in New York Times, 16 January 1909. Total
shareholders from Warshow (1924).



       With their growing influence over railroad management, investment banking
partnerships sought to curb practices in the industry that were harmful to the interests
of the firms’ creditors or led to instability. Competing railroads sometimes engaged in
rate wars, and some entrepreneurs even constructed new routes that competed with
successful railroads, with the intent of forcing the incumbent firms to buy them out on
favorable terms. Although their power in some contexts was limited, investment
bankers, particularly J.P. Morgan, actively worked to halt such practices.

       Railroads were regulated by the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), created
in1887, which compelled them to produce detailed annual financial reports. The ICC at
times collected ownership data, and in 1910 they published data on the largest owners of
major railroads. These data are presented in Table 3. At the time, the shares of 72
railroads were listed on the NYSE, and the average paid-in capital of the firms was $75.5
million (equivalent to $1.9 billion in 2012 dollars). Median capital was $47 million.

       The data in the table show that the ownership of these very large enterprises was
rather concentrated, with relatively few of them widely held. Ownership by the board
cannot be computed from the available data, but ownership by other railroads can, and
this was often quite substantial. Often a parent railroad owned substantially all the
stock of a smaller one but did not actually combine the assets of the two firms and
dissolve the smaller one as a separate enterprise because of obstacles created by state
corporation laws or railroad regulations, or because of the bond covenants of some of
the companies.

                                                 19
3.3. Industrial Mergers: 1895--1904

With the economy becoming more integrated, industrial firms in distant regions that
once enjoyed some measure of local monopoly power found themselves in competition
with one another. In the face of overcapacity and ruinous price cutting, firms in some
industries began to establish cartels, sometimes through trade associations.

       Horizontal mergers became common in the late 1890s, in response to conditions
that both strengthened the impetus to combine and helped facilitate combination. The
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 made collusive agreements among competitors illegal,
but in its 1895 decision United States v. E. C. Knight Co., the Supreme Court held that
mergers among competing manufacturing firms did not violate the Sherman Act, even if
the merged firm controlled virtually all capacity in its industry. Around this time, the
state of New Jersey liberalized its corporation laws, granting businesses incorporated in
that state the right to operate in any other state and also the right to own shares in other
corporations, thus creating a legal vehicle to facilitate mergers across state lines.

       Between 1895 and 1904, an enormous number of industrial mergers occurred,
most of which were incorporated in New Jersey (Lamoreaux 1985). The outcome of this
wave of consolidation, which was the largest in American history when measured
relative to GDP, was that for the first time large industrial corporations were created
that dominated national markets. Thousands of firms such as those from the Boston
Stock Exchange in the 1870s were rapidly combined into industrial giants. These
industrial mergers typically resulted in consolidations in which the assets of the
constituent companies were combined into a single new firm, rather than into a
pyramidal holding company structure (Bonbright and Means 1932).

       The investment bankers who organized and promoted mergers typically retained
strong affiliations with the companies they created (see Moody 1904). As was the case
with railroads, the participation of financiers was a critical element in the governance of
these new enterprises. That is, investors were protected only to a limited extent by the
law, and in much more important ways through the delegated monitoring that occurred
with bankers participating on boards of directors. There were, of course, limits to the
effectiveness of this mechanism. Some of these mergers failed quickly, and the


                                             20
promoters of some of the failed mergers resorted to accounting fraud and paid
dividends out of their firms’ capital, in order to quickly market their firms’ securities to
outsiders (Dewing 1914).

       Berle and Means’ (1932) study of the governance of the 200 then-largest
enterprises in the United States includes many of the industrial giants created at the
beginning of the twentieth century. They present a typology of different control
structures, and document the extent of the separation of ownership from control among
their sample firms. In their focus on control rights flowing from ownership stakes,
however, Berle and Means omit any role for financiers, whose power may have been
much greater than the votes their securities holdings entitled them to.

4. The Twentieth Century

4.1. Progressive Backlash Against Bankers

The role of financiers in creating and operating the new industrial giants, as well as
major railroad systems, aroused considerable populist hostility. Like the so-called trusts
that monopolized many industries, critics argued that a money trust consisting of a
small number of New York financial institutions controlled access to finance, and
dominated the American economy.10 The Panic of 1907, which began with runs on the
shadow banks that had been heavily involved in financing major corporations (Frydman
and Hilt forthcoming), further increased anti-banker sentiment. In 1912, the US House
of Representatives authorized an investigation of the money trust by a committee
headed by Representative Arsène P. Pujo (Pujo Committee, 1913). The committee’s
findings were popularized by progressive lawyer Louis Brandeis (1914) in a series of
essays published as the book Other Peoples’ Money and How the Bankers Use It.
Brandeis argued that the money trust dominated many of the largest nonfinancial



10
  The term trust is used in connection with monopoly in the United States because in the early
1880s Standard Oil and a few other early giants organized themselves in the legal form of the
trust in order to circumvent the limitations of corporation laws. Standard Oil’s trust agreement
was ruled to be an illegal restraint of trade in 1892, and that firm, along with the others that had
used the trust form, later reorganized as New Jersey corporations. Nonetheless the firms
continued to be known as trusts.


                                                 21
corporations, and used its position in numerous ways to enrich itself at the expense of
ordinary investors.

       Many found these arguments persuasive. A new sort of corporate governance
crisis occurred—one of the most important mechanisms in the governance of American
institutions was criticized not for being ineffective (although critics did make this
argument), but for creating a politically unacceptable concentration of economic power.
Thus, one of the solutions developed to address both Problem 1 and Problem 2 was seen
as creating a different set of problems, and a wave of new regulations restricting the role
of financiers followed.

       At the federal level these new regulations included the Clayton Antitrust Act of
1914, which contained several provisions intended to curtail the role of bankers in
corporate governance. At the state level, numerous so-called Blue Sky Laws were passed,
which regulated the issuance of securities.11

       Financial historians have expressed skepticism of the progressives’ negative view
of financiers’ influence on nonfinancial corporations (Morrison and Wilhelm 2007). De
Long (1991) and Cantillo Simon (1998) find the presence of J.P. Morgan partners on a
firm’s board to be associated with higher firm values, and Ramirez (1995) find them to
be associated with better access to credit. Others have argued that the progressive view
of the role of bankers significantly exaggerated their influence (Carosso 1970, Redlich
1951). In more recent work, Frydman and Hilt (2014) use a provision of the Clayton Act
that compelled investment bankers sitting on railroad boards to resign or stop
performing any underwriting services for their railroads to estimate the effects of
investment bankers’ roles in corporate governance. They find no evidence in support of
the view that banker-directors harmed their client firms, and in fact following the
implementation of the Act railroads with strong financial relationships with




11Although marketed as investor protections, Blue Sky Laws effectively protected local banks
and savings institutions from competition from major securities underwriters (Macey and Miller
1991). However, Agrawal (2013) finds evidence that Blue Sky Laws actually did induce the
riskiest class of securities issuers – mining companies – to increase dividends, and raised their
market valuations.


                                               22
underwriters saw their investment rates, market values, and borrowing levels fall, and
their borrowing costs rise.

4.2. The Roaring Twenties

Similarly to the 1990s, the 1920s in the United States witnessed relatively stable
macroeconomic growth, technological innovations, and, of course, rapid increases in
stock prices (White 2006). Ordinary households, many of which were induced to
purchase financial assets for the first time during the Liberty Bond drives of World War
I, began to participate in the stock market at ever higher rates (Mitchell 2007). And the
number of listed companies increased substantially, as many innovative industrial firms
were founded and went public.

       Within these ebullient markets, changes occurred in the composition of public
companies and in their governance. Many of the companies entering the market were
incorporated not in New Jersey—which had been taken over by progressives who
repealed the state’s liberal corporation laws in 1917—but in Delaware, which had
adopted the most liberal provisions of New Jersey’s former statutes into its own laws
and further liberalized them in several ways (Larcom 1937). Delaware’s corporation laws
eroded or eliminated some rights of stockholders that had been traditionally part of
most states’ corporation statutes, such as the preemptive rights of existing stockholders
to participate in new share issuances, prohibitions against changes in the dividend
requirements of certain classes of stock, and changes to the voting rights of shares
(Seligman 1976).

       Perhaps more importantly, in the 1920s pyramidal holding company structures
emerged in the United States for the first time. Making use of Delaware’s liberal
corporation statutes, financiers and corporate promoters created some very large
pyramidal groups that sometimes included hundreds of small operating companies (see
Berle and Means 1932). The governance problems that can be created by such structures
are well known, and recent research has ascribed substantial importance to those
enterprises (e.g., Morck 2005b, Morck and Yeung 2005).




                                            23
       But it remains true that pyramidal business groups never actually became
common in the United States.12 They were almost never created among industrial
companies (Bonbright and Means 1932), which were by far the dominant category of
public firms and also the fastest-growing.13 Instead, they were prevalent mostly among
utilities and to a lesser extent, among railroads. Among utilities, the complex holding
company structures that emerged in the 1920s were created principally in response to
local utilities regulation and public service commissions. Among railroads, the principal
motive for their creation also appeared to be circumventing certain industry regulations.
There were many family firms, but just as today, there were almost no family business
groups organized as pyramidal organizations (Villalonga and Amit 2009).

4.2. The Great Crash, Financial Crisis, and New Deal Reforms

The Glass-Steagall Act, contained within the Banking Act of 1933, prohibited investment
banks from engaging in deposit banking or holding directorships with commercial
banks. The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 resulted in the creation of the SEC, required
publicly traded companies to file periodic financial statements with the SEC, required
company insiders to report their securities transactions and outlawed insider trading,
and regulated proxy solicitations and the stock exchanges themselves. The registration
and disclosure requirements of the Securities Exchange Act likely diminished the
influence of investment banks in the certification of new issues. And the Glass-Steagall
Act cut them off from important sources of clients, funding, and customers. Together,
these changes likely diminished the role of investment banks in corporate governance.
With their influence over access to capital markets weakened, their power and
importance as voices in corporate management were likely also weakened.


12In recent work, Kandel et al (2013) argue that pyramids were common and persistent. It is
worth noting that a large fraction of the business groups identified in that paper are railroads
and utilities.
13Holding company structures were indeed created in connection to industrials in the 1920s, but
mostly to facilitate consolidations in which substantially all of the stock of the subsidiary
companies was acquired by the parent, and in which there was only two “layers.” These were
therefore not pyramidal business groups in the definition of La Porta et al. (1999) or in the sense
of extending control over subsidiary companies without proportionate ownership stakes. See
Bonbright and Means (1932).


                                                24
       Did the stronger disclosure requirements enforced by the SEC actually have any
meaningful effects for shareholders? The NYSE had already required listed companies
to produce annual financial reports, although it did not rigorously enforce any standards
regarding the level of detail of those reports, and the disclosures did not include the
identities and stakes held by large shareholders, the extent of ownership of the board, or
the level of executive compensation. For companies listed on the NYSE, the
requirements of the SEC should be considered much more detailed and more strictly
enforced versions of the private rules they were already subject to. Careful empirical
evidence by Simon (1989) indicates that following the creation of the SEC, the risks of
new issues, as measured by the variance of returns over various time horizons, fell by
statistically significant margins. Prior to the SEC, investors’ expectations regarding new
issues had not been biased—the average level of returns of new issues did not rise—but
their forecast errors were larger.14

       Morck (2005b) argues that New Deal changes in taxation policy, and in particular
the imposition of taxes on intercorporate dividends, eliminated pyramidal business
groups in the United States. Others are skeptical of this view and have claimed that tax
changes had little effect on patterns of intercorporate ownership (Cheffins and Bank
2010). Certainly other New Deal regulations contributed to the decline of pyramids in
the United States; the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, for example,
required that those enterprises simplify their structure and adopt stricter financial
standards. But whatever the ultimate source of change, pyramidal groups were never
commonplace.




14For new issues on other exchanges with lower standards and weaker disclosure requirements
than the NYSE, Simon (1989) finds that average abnormal returns of new issues did in fact rise
following the creation of the SEC—relative to the post-SEC era, initial public offerings had been
systematically overpriced.


                                               25
5. Conclusion: Insights from American History

The business corporation has a long history in the United States. Over time, economic
changes have given rise to successive generations of these enterprises, each operating
within its own institutional context and facing its own governance problems. The
solutions to those problems have sometimes been sought in legal innovations, and in
other cases, institutional or market-based solutions emerged. And the changes made to
address one set of problems in some cases may have made others worse, and in other
cases were later rejected as politically unacceptable. What are the main insights from all
this history, and what unresolved questions have been raised?

       First, the evolution of the corporation in the United States has not followed a
simple, linear trajectory, beginning with small, well-governed organizations in which
shareholders participated actively and eventually ending with large, poorly governed
organizations with absentee owners and opportunistic managers, as claimed by Berle
and Means (1932). Early corporations were smaller than modern industrial firms, but
they were quite large relative to the early economy. Perhaps more importantly, they
sometimes suffered acute governance failures, often arising from the predations of
controlling insiders.

       Second, the United States has experienced significant episodes of what might be
termed corporate governance crises—events that shatter investors’ faith in corporate
management and the governance institutions intended to protect their rights. Economic
change brought about new enterprises, new business strategies, and new financial
manipulations that rendered existing protections of investors ineffective. In some of
these episodes, a resolution has been found not through legal change but through other
institutional changes. For example, in the late nineteenth century, politically connected
railroad barons capable of subverting the law emerged. They were restrained through
greater participation by financiers in corporate governance, rather than through new
legal reforms. In other cases, new legislation, not unlike Sarbanes-Oxley, has been
enacted, as in 1820s New York.

       Third, with the exception of utilities and to a lesser extent, railroads, pyramidal
business groups have never been important in the United States. At times, wealthy


                                             26
families held sufficient stakes in sufficient numbers of major corporations to create such
groups; however, they never cemented their control into pyramidal business group
structures. This may have been due to the limitations of corporation laws at the time or
to fears regarding antitrust prosecutions. Perhaps the right combination of capital
market conditions, lax antitrust enforcement, and liberal corporation laws emerged only
briefly in the 1920s. But it is also possible that wealthy families did not perceive any
need to organize their holdings in the way that families in other countries do. The
reason that the United States does not have pyramidal business groups today may be
due to wealthy families not having felt they were necessary, rather than to the taxation
of intercorporate dividends, as has been suggested (Morck 2005b).

        Fourth, there is the question of legal origins. The common-law origins of
America’s legal system, it has been argued, has produced laws that protect the rights of
investors well. But the history presented in this article has shown that many of the legal
rights of shareholders did not come from English law or from judicial precedent but
were written by state and federal legislators. When problems have been found in
American corporate governance, legislators have responded in ways antithetical to
common law: by writing codes. Some of those codes have been deeply flawed, and the
role of common-law courts in adjudicating them has also been quite important. But the
modern American legal system is a partially codified hybrid of common-law institutions
and indigenous innovations. It is difficult to determine which has been more important
in producing the beneficial characteristics of America’s legal system today.

        Finally, politics has been critically important in the evolution of the American
corporation. Popular hostility to monopolies and the corrupting influence of political
control over access to corporate charters led to the enactment of general incorporation
laws that made the corporate form with strict regulations freely accessible. And
antibanker sentiment has led to measures that constrained the role of financiers in the
economy, and in nonfinancial corporations in particular. These deeply American
sentiments have been quite influential in shaping the evolution of modern corporations
and the governance problems they face, as well as the solutions available to address
them.



                                             27
References

Acheson, Graeme, Campell, Gareth, Turner, John D., and Nadia Vanteeva. 2014.
   “Corporate ownership and control in Victorian Britain.” European Association for
   Banking and Financial History Papers, No. 14-02.

Adams, Charles F., and Henry Adams. 1871. Chapters of Erie, and Other Essays.
   Boston: James R. Osgood & Co.

Agrawal, A. 2013. “The Impact of Investor Protection Law on Corporate Policy: Evidence
   from the Blue Sky Laws.” Journal of Financial Economics 107(2):417-435

Allen, F., and R. Michaely. 2003. “Payout Policy,” in Constantinides, Harris, and Stulz,
    ed: Handbook of the Economics of Finance. Amsterdam: North Holland.

Angell, Joseph K., and Samuel Ames. 1832. A Treatise on the Law of Private
  Corporations Aggregate. Boston: Hilliard, Gray, Little & Wilkins.

Atack, Jeremy, and Peter L. Rousseau. 1999. “Business Activity and the Boston Stock
   Market,” Explorations in Economic History, 36(2): 144-79.

Ayer, J.C. 1863. Some of the Usages and Abuses in our Manufacturing Companies.
   Lowell: C M Langley & Co.

Banerjee, Ajeyo and E. Woodrow Eckard. 2001. Why Regulate Insider Trading?
   Evidence from the First Great Merger Wave, 1897-1903. Am. Econ. Rev. 91(5):1329-
   49.

Baskin, Jonathan B., and Paul J. Miranti. 1997. A History of Corporate Finance. New
   York: Cambridge University Press.

Becht, Marco, and J. Bradford Delong. 2005. “Why Has there been so Little
   Blockholding in America?” in Morck, ed., A History of Corporate Governance
   Around the World. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bebchuck, Lucian A., and Assaf Hamdani. 2002. “Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk:
   Reconsidering Competition Over Corporate Charters,” Yale Law Journal, 112: 553-
   615.

Benmelech, Efraim. 2009. “Asset Salability and Debt Maturity: Evidence from
   Nineteenth-Century American Railroads,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(4): 1545-
   84.

Benmelech, Efraim and Tobias Moskowitz. 2010. “The Political Economy of Financial
   Regulation: Evidence from U.S. State Usury Laws in the 19th Century.” Journal of
   Finance 65: 1029-73.


                                           28
Berle, Adolf A., and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation & Private
   Property. New York: Harcourt, Brace.

Bertrand, Marianne, Mehta Paras, and Senhil Mullainathan. 2002. “Ferreting Out
   Tunneling: An Application To Indian Business Groups.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 117(1):121-148.

Bonbright, James C., and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Holding Company: Its Public
   Significance and its Regulation. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2006. “Bank Chartering and Political Corruption in Antebellum
   New York: Free Banking as Reform,” in Goldin and Glaeser, eds., Corruption and
   Reform: Lesson's from America's Economic History. Chicago: University of
   Chicago Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2011. “Federal and State Commercial Banking Policy in the
   Federalist Era and Beyond,” in Irwin and Sylla, ed., Founding Choices: American
   Economic Policy in the 1790s. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2012. “Voting Rights, Share Concentration and Leverage in
   Ninteenth-Century U.S. Banks.” NBER Working Paper Series, number 17808.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2013. “Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards
   of Directors and Bank Value in the Nineteenth Century, NBER Working Paper
   Series, number 18955.

Boyle, A. J. 1965. “The Minority Shareholder in the Nineteenth Century: A Study in
   Anglo-American Legal History,” Modern Law Review, 28(3): 317-29.

Braggion, Fabio and Lyndon Moore. 2011. “Dividend Policies in and Unregulated
   Market: The London Stock Exchange, 1895-1905,” Review of Financial Studies,
   24(9): 2935-73.

Braggion, Fabio, and Lyndon Moore. 2013. “The economic benefits of political
   connections in late Victorian Britain.” Journal of Economic History, 73(1): 142-176.

Brandeis, Louis D. 1914. Other People’s Money and How the Bankers Use it. New
   York: Frederick A Stokes Company.

Cantillo Simon, Miguel. 1998. “The Rise and Fall of Bank Control in the United States:
   1890-1939,” American Economic Review, 88 (5), 1077-93.

Carosso, Vincent. 1970. Investment Banking in America. Cambridge: Harvard
   University Press.

Carosso, Vincent. 1987. The Morgans: Private International Bankers, 1854-1913.
   Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

                                           29
Chandler, Alfred. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
   Business. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Cheffins, Brian R., and Steven A. Bank. 2010. “The Corporate Pyramid Fable,” Business
   History Review, 84: 435-58.

Claessens, Stijn, and B. Burcin Yurtoglu. 2013. “Corporate Governance in Emerging
   Markets,” Emerging Markets Review, 15: 1-33.

Coffee, John C. 2001. “The Rise of Dispersed Ownership: The Roles of Law and the State
   in the Separation of Ownership and Control,” Yale Law Journal, 111 (1), 1-82.

David, Paul. 1967. “New Light on a Statistical Dark Age,” American Economic Review,
  57(2): 294-306.

Davis, Joseph S. 1917. Essays in the Earlier History of Corporations. Cambridge:
  Harvard University Press.

Davis, Lance E. 1958. “Stock Ownership in the Early New England Textile Industry”
  Business History Review 32: 204-222.

Davis, Lance E. 1963. “Capital Immobilities and Finance Capitalism: A Study of
  Economic Evolution in the United States, 1820-1920,” Explorations in
  Entrepreneurial History, 2 (I): 88-105.

Delong, J. Bradford. 1991. “Did J.P. Morgan’s Men Add Value? A Historical Perspective
   on Financial Capitalism,” in Peter Temin, ed. Inside the Business Enterprise.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Dewing, Arthur S. 1914. Corporate Promotions and Reorganizations. Cambridge:
  Harvard University Press.

Dodd, Edwin M. 1938. Lectures on the Growth of Corporate Structure in the United
  States with Special Reference to Governmental Regulation. Cleveland: Cleveland
  Bar Association.

Dodd, Edwin M. 1954. American Business Corporations Until 1860. Cambridge:
  Harvard University Press.

Dunlavy, Colleen A. 2004. “From Citizens to Plutocrats: Nineteenth-Century
  Shareholder Voting Rights and Theories of the Corporation.” In Constructing
  Corporate America: History, Politics Culture, ed. Lipartito and Sicilia. Oxford:
  Oxford University Press.

Dunlavy, Colleen A. 2006. “Social Conceptions of the Corporation: Insights from the
  History of Shareholder Voting Rights.” Washington & Lee Law Review 63: 1347-87.

                                          30
Franks, Julian, Mayer, Colin, and Stefano Rossi. 2009. “Ownership: Evolution and
   Regulation,” Review of Financial Studies, 22(10): 4009-50.

Freeman, Mark, Pearson, Robin, and James Taylor. 2012. Shareholder Democracies?
   Corporate Governance in Britain and Ireland Before 1850. Chicago: University of
   Chicago.

Frydman, Carola, and Eric Hilt. 2014. “Investment Banks as Corporate Monitors in the
   Early Twentieth Century United States.” Working paper, Northwestern University
   and Wellesley College.

Frydman, Carola and Eric Hilt. Forthcoming. “Economic Effects of Runs on Early
   Shadow Banks: Trust Companies and the Panic of 1907.” Journal of Political
   Economy.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “Rise of the Regulatory State,” Journal of
   Economic Literature, 41(2): 401-25.

Gompers, Paul, Ishii, Joy, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “Extreme Governance: An
  Analysis of Dual-Class Firms in the U.S.” Review of Financial Studies 23: 1051-88.

Gower, L.C.B. 1956. “Some Contrasts Between British and American Corporation Law,”
  Harvard Law Review, 69(8): 1369-1402.

Goodrich, Carter. 1960. Government Promotion of American Canals and Railroads.
  New York: Columbia University Press.

Guinnane, Timothy, Harris, Ron, Lamoreaux, Naomi, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal.
   2007. “Putting the Corporation in its Place,” Enterprise & Society, 8(3): 687-729.
Hammond, Bray. 1957. Banks and Politics in America From the Revolution to the Civil
   War. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hannah, Leslie. 2010. “The ‘Divorce’ of Ownership From Control from 1900 Onwards:
  Calibrating Imagined Global Trends,” Business History, 49(4): 404-38.

Hansmann, Henry, and Mariana Pargendler. 2010. “Voting Restrictions in 19th Century
  Corporations: Investor Protection or Consumer Protection?” Working paper, Yale
  Law School.

Harris, Ron. 2000. Industrializing English Law: Entrepreneurship and Business
  Organization,
  1720-1844. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Henderson, Gerard C. 1918. The Position of Foreign Corporations in American
  Constitutional Law. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.


                                           31
Hilt, Eric. 2008. “When did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance
   in the Early Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic History 68: 645-85.

Hilt, Eric. 2009a. “Rogue Finance: The Life and Fire Insurance Company and the Panic
   of 1826,” Business History Review, 83: 87-112.

Hilt, Eric. 2009b. “Wall Street’s First Corporate Governance Crisis: The Conspiracy
   Trials of 1826,” NBER Working Paper Series, number 14892.

Hilt, Eric. 2013. “Shareholder voting rights in early American corporations,” Business
   History, 55(4): 620-635.

Hilt, Eric. 2014. “Corporate Governance and the Development of Manufacturing
   Enterprises in New England,” NBER Working Paper Series, number 20096.

Hilt, Eric and Jacqueline Valentine. 2012. “Democratic Dividends: Politics, Wealth and
   Stockholding in New York, 1790-1826.” Journal of Economic History 72: 332-63.

Holderness, Clifford G., Randall S. Kroszner, and Dennis P. Sheehan. 1999. “Were the
   Good Old Days that Good? Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership Since the Great
   Depression.” Journal of Finance, 54: 435-69.

Hovenkamp, Herbert. 1991. Enterprise and American Law, 1836-1937. Cambridge:
  Harvard University Press.

Huebner, Solomon. 1903. “The Distribution of Stockholdings in American Railways,”
  Annals of the American Academy of Political Science, 22(3), 63-78.

Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
   behavior, agency costs, and ownership structure,” Journal of Financial Economics,
   3: 305-60.

Kandel Eugene, Kosenko, Konstantin, Morck, Randall, and Yishay Yafeh. 2013.
   “Business Groups in the United States: A Revised History of Corporate Ownership,
   Pyramids and Regulation, 1930-1950 NBER Working Paper Series, number 19691.

Kehl, Donald. 1939. “The Origin and Early Development of American Dividend Law,”
   Harvard Law Review, 53(1): 36-67.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 1997. “Organization Structure and
   Credibility: Evidence from Commercial Bank Securities Activities Before the Glass-
   Steagall Act,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 39 (4), 475-516.

Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan. 2001. “Bankers on Boards: Monitoring,
   Conflicts of Interest, and Lender Liability,” Journal of Financial Economics, 62 (3),
   415-52.


                                           32
La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny.
   1997. “Legal Determinants of External Finance.” Journal of Finance, 52: 1131-50.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanez, Florencio, Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny.
   1998. “Law and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106: 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Andrei Shleifer. 1999. “Corporate
   Ownership Around the World,” Journal of Finance, 54(2), 471-517.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 1985. The Great Merger Movement in American Business, 1895-
  1904. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 1996. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections and
  Economic Development in Industrial New England. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 2009. “Scylla or Charybdis? Historical Reflections on Two Basic
  Problems of Corporate Governance,” Business History Review, 83: 9-34.

Lamoreaux, Naomi, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2006. “Corporate Governance and
  Minority Shareholders in the United States Before the Great Depression,” in
  Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s Economic History, ed. Glaeser
  and Goldin. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Larcom, Russel C. 1937. The Delaware Corporation. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
   University Press.

Macey, Jonathan, and Geoffrey Miller. 1991. “Origin of the Blue Sky Laws.” Texas Law
  Review 70(2):347-97

Mahoney, Paul G. 2003. “The Origins of Blue-Sky Laws: A Test of Competing
  Hypotheses,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46: 229-51.

Martin, Albro. 1971. Enterprise Denied: Origins and Decline of the American
  Railroads, 1897-1917. New York: Columbia University Press.

McCraw, Thomas K. 1984. Prophets of Regulation. Cambridge: Belknap Press.

McGouldrick, Paul F. 1968. New England Textiles in the Nineteenth Century.
  Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Mitchell, Lawrence E. 2007. The Speculation Economy: How Finance Triumphed Over
   Industry. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

Moody, John. 1904. The Truth About the Trusts. New York: Moody Publishing
  Company.


                                           33
Morck, Randall. 2005. “Title: How to Eliminate Pyramidal Business Groups: The
  Double Taxation of Inter-corporate Dividends and other Incisive Uses of Tax Policy,”
  in Poterba, ed, Tax Policy and the Economy, 19: 135-179.

Morck, Randall (ed.). 2005. A History of Corporate Governance Around the World.
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Morck, Randall. 2011. “Finance and Governance in Developing Countries,” NBER
  Working Paper, number 16870.

Morck, Randall, and Bernard Yeung. 2005. “Dividend Taxation and Corporate
  Governance,”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3): 163-180.

Morrison, Alan D., and William J. Wilhelm. 2007. Investment Banking: Institutions,
  Politics and Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Musacchio, Aldo. 2009. Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance
  and Financial Development in Brazil, 1882-1950. New York: Cambridge University
  Press.

Nevins, Allen and Milton H. Thomas, eds. 1952. The Diary of George Templeton Strong.
   4 vols. New York: Macmillan.

North, Douglass C., Wallis, John J., And Barry R. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social
  Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History. New
  York: Cambridge.

Pak, Susie J. 2013. Gentlemen Bankers: The World of J.P. Morgan. Cambridge:
   Harvard University Press.

Porter, Glenn, and Harold C. Livesay. 1971. Merchants and Manufacturers: Studies in
   the Changing Structure of Nineteenth-Century Marketing. Baltimore: Johns
   Hopkins University Press.

Pujo Committee. House Committee on Banking and Currency. 1913. Money Trust
   Investigation. Washington: Government Printing Office.

Ramirez, Carlos D. 1995. “Did J.P. Morgan’s Men Add Liquidity? Corporate
  Investment, Cash Flow, and Financial Structure at the Turn of the Twentieth
  Century,” Journal of Finance, 50(2), 661-78.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
   Financial Development in the 20th Century.” Journal of Financial Economics 69: 5-
   50.

Redlich, Fritz. 1951. The Molding of American Banking: Men and Ideas. New York:
   Hafner Publishing Co.

                                          34
Roe, Mark. 1994. Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American
   Corporate Finance. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Scott, William R. 1912. The Constitution and Finance of English, Scottish, and Irish
   Joint-Stock Companies to 1720. Cambridge: The University Press.

Scranton, Philip. 1983. Proprietary Capitalism: The Textile Manufacture at
   Philadelphia, 1800-1885. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Seligman, Joel. 1976. “A Brief History of Delaware’s General Corporation Law of 1899,”
    Delaware Journal of Corporate Law, 1(2): 249-87.

Seligman, Joel. 1982. The Transformation of Wall Street: A History of the Securities
    and Exchange Commission and Modern Corporate Finance. Boston: Houghton
    Mifflin.

Simon, Carol J. 1989. “The Effect of the 1933 Securities Act on Investor Information and
   the Performance of New Issues,” American Economic Review, 79(3): 295-318.

Strouse, Jean. 2000. Morgan: American Financier. New York: HarperPerrenial.

Villalonga, Belen, and Raphael Amit. 2009. “How Are U.S. Family Firms Controlled?”
    Review of Financial Studies, 22(8): 3047-91.

Warshow, H.T. 1924. “The Distribution of Corporate Ownership in the United States,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 39(1), 15-38.

Werner, Walter. 1986. “Corporate Law In Search of Its Future,” Columbia Law Review,
  81, 1610-1666.

White, Eugene N. 2006. “Bubbles and Busts: the 1990s in the Mirror of the 1920s,”
  NBER Working Paper Series, number 12138.

White, Richard. 2012. Railroaded: The Transcontinentals and the Making of Modern
  America. New York: W.W. Norton.

Wright, Robert E. 2013. Corporation Nation. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
  Press.




                                           35
