                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      URBAN VIBRANCY AND CORPORATE GROWTH

                                            Casey Dougal
                                        Christopher A. Parsons
                                          Sheridan Titman

                                         Working Paper 20350
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20350


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We thank Andres Almazan, Aydoğan Alt, Cesare Fracassi, Luigi Zingales (discussant), and seminar
participants at Hong Kong University; Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; NBER
Corporate Finance Meetings (2012); Renmin University; Rice University; Southern Methodist University;
University of California, Los Angeles; University of Colorado, Boulder; University of Michigan; University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; University of Oklahoma; University of Southern California; University
of Texas at Austin, and University of Washington for helpful feedback. All errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Casey Dougal, Christopher A. Parsons, and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Vibrancy and Corporate Growth
Casey Dougal, Christopher A. Parsons, and Sheridan Titman
NBER Working Paper No. 20350
July 2014
JEL No. G3,G31,R10,R12

                                              ABSTRACT

We find that a firm's investment is highly sensitive to the investments of other firms headquartered
nearby, even those in very different industries. It also responds to fluctuations in the cash flows and
stock prices (q) of local firms outside its sector. These patterns do not appear to reflect exogenous
area shocks such as local shocks to labor or real estate values, but rather suggest that local agglomeration
economies are important determinants of firm investment and growth.


Casey Dougal                                         Sheridan Titman
Drexel University                                    Finance Department
3220 Market St. #1125                                McCombs School of Business
Philadelphia, PA 19104                               University of Texas at Austin
cmd433@drexel.edu                                    Austin, TX 78712-1179
                                                     and NBER
Christopher A. Parsons                               titman@mail.utexas.edu
University of California at San Diego
Rady School of Management
Wells Fargo Hall, Room 4W115
9500 Gilman Drive #0553
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
caparsons@ucsd.edu
Twenty-five years ago, Detroit-based Unisys was the second largest computer company in the
United States, and Whole Foods was still a fledging organic grocer, with scarcely a presence
beyond its headquarters in Austin, Texas. Since that time, it would be hard to find cities
with more different trajectories. Austin’s population has exploded, while Detroit has suffered
population declines, the departure of key employers, and increased crime.1 Meanwhile, Whole
Foods has grown to become an industry leader in the grocery business, with Unisys reduced
to a bit player, having twice flirted with bankruptcy in recent years.
    Urban economists have long explored the connection between location and economic
variables, for example, finding large differences in worker wages and productivity rates across
geographic areas. We observe similar cross-sectional variation in the investment rates of
public firms. In Figure 1, we plot contours of raw (Panel A) and industry-adjusted (Panel
B) investment rates for firms headquartered in the twenty largest U.S. cities. Note two
observations. First, the differences are large, with cities in the highest quartile such as
Minneapolis and Denver (blue line in Panel A) investing at roughly twice the rate as cities in
the lowest quartile such as Cleveland or Indianapolis (orange line). Second, these differences
are persistent: the blue and orange lines never cross in either figure, and in most years, the
ordering for all four contours is preserved. If we are willing to assume that investment rates
are at least partially correlated with investment opportunities, then this evidence indicates
large, persistent cross-city differences in investment opportunities.
    Though interesting on its own, a perhaps more important question is what drives differ-
ences in investment rates across cities.. One possibility is that an area’s exogenous attributes,
like access to transportation or good weather, attract certain types of firms or workers, and
this sorting generates differences in investment opportunities. A second is that the political
environment, such as low taxes or business-friendly politicians, allows firms in some areas
to thrive more than others. Finally, it is possible for cities to generate their own internal
momentum through endogenous interactions: one firm experiences a positive shock, and
through spillover effects, propagate this shock to their neighbors. These spillovers arise
from the endogenous interactions of the people living in the city – what we call vibrancy –
that influence knowledge diffusion between a city’s workers, technology spillovers between
neighboring firms, or consumption externalities between its residents.2
    The goal of this paper is to gauge the importance of these endogenous interactions on
corporate investment choices. The general idea is that these interactions can potentially
improve the overall quality of a firm’s top management, thereby improving investment op-
portunities. Moreover, because these endogenous interactions are inherently dynamic, as we
explain below, it is possible to separate these endogenous people-based explanations from the
exogenous geographic and political explanations by examining the time series determinants


                                               2
of investment expenditures.
    Our methodology is best illustrated with an example. Consider another Detroit-based
firm, retailer K-Mart, and Minneapolis-based Target. These firms historically competed in
essentially the same markets, but are headquartered, and hence managed, from different
cities. In each year, we ask whether the investment rates of K-Mart and Target are related
to the investment rates of other non-local retailers such as Arkansas-based Wal-Mart, as well
as to the investment rates of non-retail firms headquartered within their respective areas.
For example, we explain the investment rate of K-Mart with the investment rates of other
Detroit companies like Ford Motor Company and Dow Chemical, and the investment rate
of Target with investment rates of other Minneapolis companies like General Mills or paint
manufacturer Valspar.
    The results of this exercise reveal that time-varying locational factors play an important
role in determining a firm’s investment expenditures. In the regressions described above, the
city effect (e.g., using Dow to explain K-Mart’s investment rate) is more than half as large
as the industry effect (e.g., using Wal-mart to explain K-Mart’s investment rate). To put
this magnitude in perspective, and continuing with the example above, suppose that 1997
was a good year for retail, and that the typical U.S. retailer increased its investment rate
by 10% year over year. Now, suppose that K-Mart’s non-retailing neighbors like Ford have
a flat year (0% investment change), and Target’s non-retail peers like General Mills have a
banner year (20% investment increase). In this case, our parameter estimates suggest that
Target would expect to realize an increase in its yearly investment rate of over twice that
of K-Mart.
    We extend these benchmark results by augmenting traditional investment-q regressions
to account for the prospects of a firm’s local peers. Even when controlling for a firm’s own q
and cash flows, a firm’s investment remains strongly related to the average q and cash flows
of its neighbors, even those in very different sectors. The latter result is noteworthy for two
reasons. First, the magnitude alone: the impact of local cash flows on a firm’s investment is
nearly double that of its own cash flows! Second, it contributes to the longstanding debate
of whether investment-cash flow sensitivities are more likely to reflect financial constraints
or response to growth opportunities.3 Because the cash flows of other firms (i.e., those of
its neighbors) cannot reflect its own financing frictions, our results suggest that at least in
some settings, cash flows are associated with investment expenditures because they provide
information about a firm’s investment opportunities (as discussed previously in Poterba
(1988), Alti (2003)).
    The fact that we are analyzing dynamic effects within cities means that the results cannot
be explained by static geographical attributes such as access to waterways or good weather.


                                              3
On the other hand, the results could still be generated by local firms being subject to the
same time-varying area shocks, like extreme weather events, local elections, and changes in
municipal tax rates, rather than the local spillovers, which is the focus of our analysis.
    The ideal laboratory for identifying local spillovers is to identify regions where only a
fraction of firms are initially influenced by an exogenous shock, and then look for a response
by nearby firms. We carry out this identification strategy by focusing on cities dominated
by a single industry, such as San Francisco and the technology sector or Houston and the
energy industry. For these cities, we examine shocks to firms in the dominate industries,
e.g., Houston oil firms, using the investment rates of firms outside the city as an instrument.
We then look at the investment rates of other firms in the city, which we interpret as
evidence of spillovers. For example, we ask whether a Houston-based furniture manufacturer
is abnormally sensitive to the investment rate of non-Houston oil firms, or whether a biotech
firm in the Bay Area is abnormally sensitive to the investment rates of tech companies outside
of the Bay area. Because the initial shocks in these tests are measured outside of the city,
the evidence cannot be generated from exogenous area shocks.
    We also conduct additional analysis to rule out fluctuations in real estate prices driving
our results. As a recent paper by Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar’s (2011) shows, real estate is
often used as collateral for debt finance, mitigating financial frictions for constrained firms,
and facilitating investment (see also Peek and Rosengren (2000), Gan (2007), and Tuzel
(2010)). Consequently, increases in real estate prices could simultaneously ease financial
frictions for many firms in an area leading to correlated investment behavior, but not neces-
sarily because of spillovers.4 While important for constrained firms, the ‘collateral channel’
does not appear to explain our results. First, we find that large firms rather than small firms
tend to be most influenced by area effects. Second, the local co-movement in debt issuance –
which higher collateral values facilitates – tends to be strongest among the least financially
constrained firms.
    Beside those mentioned already, our paper is related to previous work on the effects of
location on stock returns, a literature beginning with Coval and Moskowitz’s studies of the
home bias among retail traders (1999) and the flow of private information in geographic net-
works (2001). Building upon this earlier work, Pirinsky and Wang (2006) find that stocks
of firms in the same city tend to move together, and Korniotis and Kumar (2011) find that
statewide economic factors (e.g., unemployment) forecast returns for stocks headquartered
in those states roughly two quarters in advance. While these studies indicate that regional
factors can impact firm valuation via local investment demands, our results suggest a com-
plementary channel: the stocks of local firms move together due to fluctuations of investment
opportunities.


                                               4
    The paper is organized as follows. Section I provides some additional background and a
simple framework for organizing our empirical tests, followed by a description of our data
in Section II. We present our main empirical results in Section III, namely that firms head-
quartered nearby exhibit similarity in their investment expenditures. Then, in Section IV,
we design tests intended to better identify the specific mechanisms responsible for these
regional correlations in investment. Section V considers some additional robustness checks
and extensions to our main results. We then conclude and provide suggestions for future
research.


         I.     Motivation and hypothesis development
    In this paper we find that year to year changes in firm investments tend to have significant
city affects. As we will show, there are strong regional effects in investment expenditures
within the same industry (e.g., the investment expenditures of two Chicago-based paint
manufacturers move together), as well as between dissimilar industries (e.g., the investment
expenditures of a Chicago-based paint manufacturer and a Chicago-based pharmaceutical
firm move together). The hope is that in addition to identifying these phenomena, our
empirical tests will help us better understand why location is so important for corporate
investment. In this section, we describe in more detail the various reasons why investment
expenditures may be related to location, and discuss the extent to which our empirical tests
can make these distinctions.
    To be concrete, consider two nearby firms A and B, headquartered in the same city.
Broadly, their investment expenditures may covary because: 1) of common exposure to some
unobserved factor X, so that causation runs X → A and X → B, and 2) through interactions
between A and B, so that causation is either X → B → A or X → A → B. As discussed
as early as Marshall (1890), the difference between 1 and 2 is crucial for understanding the
role local externalities play not only in city growth, but also for firms’ investment policies.
    As an illustration of common shocks that may simultaneously influence firms headquar-
tered in a given region, consider the city of New Orleans. Strategically located at the mouth
of the Mississippi, New Orleans’ location was extremely advantageous for a number of in-
dustries in the 19th and early 20th century. However, over time, the city (and therefore, the
firms operating in it) experienced two exogenous shifts, one over several decades and one at
a discrete point in time. The long-lived effect, which stems from the decline in land-based
transportation, has impacted a number of “waterway” cities including Buffalo, Rochester,
and St. Louis. (Clearly, railroad and road construction had nothing specifically to do with
the New Orleans economy, so we can think about these technological changes as being im-

                                               5
posed on New Orleans from the outside.) The second effect is, of course, Hurricane Katrina,
which devastated much of the city in 2005. In both cases, what is important is that there
were exogenous shocks that simultaneously effected the prospects of most New Orleans firms
(X → A, X → B).
    This is different from the second family of effects, which Manski (1993) refers to as “en-
dogenous” local effects. In this case local firms behave similarly, not because of a systematic
exogenous factor, rather, it is because the endogenous choices of local firms influence each
other. Such endogenous local effects give rise to agglomeration economies (and occasionally
diseconomies), and provide the theoretical foundation for much of the modern urban eco-
nomics literature. Part of our goal in this paper is to argue that these endogenous, local
interactions that contribute to city growth also contribute to investment opportunities.
    Below we describe a few specific types of local, endogenous interactions that are capable
of generating common fluctuations in investment opportunities:

  1. Skill or knowledge spillovers. An employee at firm A learns or develops new skills,
     and through social interactions, these skills diffuse to employees of firm B.
  2. Consumption externalities. As discussed by Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2001),
     the modern “consumer city” leads to consumption externalities that arise because of
     economies of scale in the production of some luxury and public goods (e.g., symphonies
     and fancy restaurants). As a result, if firm A becomes more prosperous, the consump-
     tion opportunities for the employees of firm B may improve, making it easier for firm
     B to attract employees. Here, the externality can be negative as well as positive, e.g.,
     the prosperity of Firm A may drive up the cost of housing, increasing the cost of living
     for the employees of Firm B.
  3. Infrastructure. Firm A invests more, leading to the development of infrastructure
     such as airports, roads, ports, power plants, etc. This may, in turn, lower firm B’s cost
     of doing business, and change its investment decisions.
  4. Collateral values. Firm A invests more, increasing its demand and the demands of
     its employees for real estate, driving up prices. If firm B also owns land, it can use
     its (now more valuable) land as collateral to finance its investment expenditures. See
     Chaney, Thesmar, and Sraer (2011).
  5. Herding. Firms in a particular city may all choose to invest more because they are
     influenced by the same external factors that can affect their moods, e.g., the local
     team wins the Super Bowl or the weather is good. Alternatively, if there is prestige
     associated with a growing business they may increase investment together because of
     a “keeping up with the Jones” effect.


                                              6
    Although these explanations are neither mutually exclusive nor exhaustive, the crucial
common element is that they all require firm-to-firm interactions. In some, the interaction
is very direct (e.g., with knowledge spillovers), whereas in others (e.g., through collateral
values), the interaction is more indirect. As we will discuss later, we have designed empirical
tests that distinguish between the exogenous non-people based explanations and the endoge-
nous people based explanations. However, for the most part, we cannot distinguish between
the various people based explanations.


                 II.     Data and variable construction
    We begin by first identifying all public companies listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, or
AMEX between January 1970 and December 2009. For each of these firms, we obtain
monthly common stock returns from CRSP (which we then annualize), and yearly firm fun-
damental data and industry (SIC) codes from the CRSP/COMPUSTAT Merged Database.
To minimize the influence of outliers, we winsorize all firm fundamental variables at the one
percent level.
    Each firm is classified by industry, i, and headquarter location, a. For industry classifica-
tion, firms are assigned to their relevant Fama-French 12 category: Consumer Non-durables
(1); Consumer Durables (2); Manufacturing (3); Energy – Oil, Gas, and Coal Extraction
and Products (4); Chemicals (5); Business Equipment – Computers, Software, and Elec-
tronic Equipment (6); Telephone and Television Transmission (7); Utilities (8); Wholesale,
Retail, and Some Services (9); Healthcare, Medical Equipment, and Drugs (10); Finance
(11); and Other (12).5
    These industry groupings are intentionally broad. The reason is that we are interested
in measuring the extent to which local effects operate within as well as across different
industries. By segregating businesses based on these relatively coarse designations, we min-
imize the chance that our across-industry comparisons are picking up (at least meaningful)
industry linkages, as they would with finer classifications. This caveat notwithstanding, in
robustness checks, we repeat all of our analysis using alternative definitions for industry,
including Fama-French 48, a recent text-based industry measure developed by Hoberg and
Phillips (2012), and 2-digit SIC codes.
    The second way we need to group firms is by location which, like the industry classifica-
tions described above, requires some subjectivity. We define a firm’s location as the location
of its headquarters. Although a firm’s headquarters is often separated from its operations by
hundreds or even thousands of miles, this separation may help rather than hurt our ability
to identify the types of spillovers that are the focus of this study. For as we will show, local

                                               7
fluctuations around a firm’s headquarters are especially important for: 1) large firms, and/or
2) companies with operations in several states. What this tells us is that regional effects are
primarily transmitted to the firm through its upper management, who are mostly responsible
for laying out the firm’s investment plans. This certainly does not exclude the firm’s rank-
and-file workers from being influenced by local effects,6 but at least in our context, the effect
seems to be driven by how the firm’s top executives perceive and incorporate information
about local business conditions into firm strategy.
    Accordingly, we use the zip code listed on COMPUSTAT (variable ADDZIP) to place
each firm headquarters in one of the 20 largest “Economic Areas,” hereafter EA, as defined by
the United States Bureau of Economic Analysis.7 An economic area (EA) is defined as “the
relevant regional markets surrounding metropolitan or micropolitan statistical areas,” and
are “mainly determined by labor commuting patterns that delineate local labor markets and
that also serve as proxies for local markets where businesses in the areas sell their products.”8
The last sentence in this definition is important, because our concept of location is closely
tied to labor markets. Specifically, we want to identify firms that are sufficiently close that
their respective workers interact, share information and ideas, and potentially even hire one
another. Because the reach of such activities may span city boundaries – think about San
Francisco and San Jose – we focus our analysis on somewhat larger economic areas, rather
than on cities or even metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs).
    Table I gives a sense of the distribution of firms and economic areas in our dataset. In
Panel A, we rank each of the 20 EAs by population, in descending order. Next to this, we
show the yearly distribution of the number of firms headquartered in each economic area. For
example, the average number of firms headquartered in the New York-Newark-Bridgeport
EA each year is 599. However, as indicated by the 10th and 90th percentiles, the number
of firms changes fairly dramatically over the four decade sample period, differing by over a
factor of two (398 vs. 814). Similar variation is observed for the other cities.
    Moving down the table, we see generally that more populous areas host a larger number
of firms. Detroit is a notable outlier, headquartering only 69 firms per year on average
(dropping to 54 in 2009), which is similar to San Diego despite having more than twice the
population. At the other end of the spectrum, Minneapolis and Houston both host somewhat
more firms than their respective population rankings might indicate. The EA just above the
median is Atlanta, home to 98 firms on average over our sample period.
    In the next few columns, we rank EAs by aggregate market capitalizations, rather than
by population. Generally, relative rankings are preserved, although there are some excep-
tions. Regions rich in technology (San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland) and energy (Houston-
Baytown-Hunstville) have somewhat higher rankings based on size, and areas heavy in manu-


                                               8
facturing (Philadelphia-Camden-Vineland) and durables (Detroit-Warren-Flint) are, perhaps
predictably, a bit lower.
    Panel B of Table I breaks down each area into its industry constituents. For example,
Consumer Non-durables (NoDur ) represent, on average, about 10% of the total market
capitalization of the New York EA.9 Note that some cities are characterized by a consistently
dominant industry – e.g., Houston (46% Energy) and Detroit (49% Consumer Durables)–
being prime examples. Generally, heavy industry clustering reflects a common supply of
natural resources (e.g., oil in the Gulf of Mexico) or transportation lanes (e.g., Great Lakes,
Mississippi River).
    In contrast, geographical features play a reduced role in the clustering of software,
telecommunications, or other industries that make intensive use of human capital. Denver
(42% Telephone and Television Transmission), the San Francisco Bay Area (37% Business
Equipment), and Boston (32% Business Equipment) are well known cases. Here, information
spillovers or other agglomeration effects are thought to give rise to industry clusters.10 Of
course, some areas are quite diversified, such as Chicago, where no one industry accounts
for more than 17% of the total market capitalization. New York, Philadelphia, Miami, and
Minnesota are all similarly balanced, with most other areas falling somewhere in between.
    Table II presents summary statistics for the variables we will analyze, both as dependent
and explanatory variables. In Panel A, we tabulate firm-level data. The first row shows that
in the typical year, our regressions include almost 3,000 firms, with a minimum of 914 and
a maximum of 4,522. The following rows characterize the means, standard deviations, and
10 − 50 − 90th percentile cutoffs for Stock Returns, Cashflow, Investment, Secondary Equity
Issuance, Debt Issuance, and q.
    The remaining panels of Table 2 give a sense for the average size of the typical same
industry-different area (137 firms), same area-different industry (174 firms), and same industry-
same area (22 firms) portfolios.11 To give a flavor for the year-to-year variation in the
performances of these portfolios, Figure 2 plots the cross-sectional variation in aggregate
investment for each of our Fama-French 12 industry portfolios (Panel A), and for each of our
diversified area portfolios (Panel B).12 As seen, there is a bit more cross-sectional variation
across industries – as would be expected given that area portfolios are diversified across in-
dustries – but nonetheless, we observe substantial dispersion in the investment rates across
our economic areas.
    Finally, Panel B of Table II presents bivariate correlations between the different area and
industry portfolios. In addition to the expected relationships among similar portfolio types
(e.g., a large negative correlation between same industry-different area Cashf low and same
industry-different area Equity issuance), we also observe similar patterns between portfolio


                                               9
types (e.g., a large negative correlation between same industry-different area Cashf low and
different industry-same area Equity issuance), foreshadowing our multivariate regression
results.


           III.      Local effects in corporate investment
    Our main empirical tests address whether a firm’s investment expenditures are related to
the investment expenditures and investment prospects of firms located nearby. We begin by
looking at regressions of firm investment on the investment of their industry and area peers.
Then, we consider the ability of standard investment determinants like q and Cashf low to
explain investment expenditures in subsection III.B. As we will see, even after controlling for
the investment determinants at the firm and industry level, the cash flows and stock prices
of its local peers still influences how much it invests.


A.    Investment-investment regressions
    Before describing the equations we estimate, it is necessary to define some notation.
Each firm j operates in one of twelve Fama-French-12 industry classifications, indexed by
i ∈ {1, 2, 3, ...., 12}. Headquarter locations are indexed by a, which we describe with city
names like New York or Los Angeles, but keeping in mind that the unit of analysis is an
“economic area.” Time is indexed in years, denoted t.
    A typical observation is defined with a quadruple {i, j, a, t}. For example, suppose that
the unit of observation is Google (firm j) in 1997 (year t). In this case, the area, a, would refer
to the San Francisco Bay Area (Google’s headquarters), and i would correspond to Fama-
French industry #6 (Business Equipment – Computers, software, and electronic equipment).
This taxonomy permits us to partition every other firm (i.e., not firm j) into one of four
mutually exclusive categories: same industry/same area (i, a), same industry/different area
(i, −a), different industry/same area (−i, a), and different industry/different area (−i, −a).
Relative to Google, Yahoo (Bay Area-based Business Equipment) would be an example of
a same industry/same area firm, Blackboard Inc. (Washington D.C.-based Business Equip-
ment) an example of a same industry/different area firm, Genentech (Bay Area-based Health-
care) an example of a different industry/same area firm, and Apache Inc. (Houston-based
Energy) an example of a different industry/different area firm.
    The goal of this partitioning is to isolate local effects from industry effects on a firm’s
investment expenditures or tendency to raise external capital. Specifically, we estimate the




                                                10
following regression:

                                2
                                X                               2
                                                                X
         Investment i,a
                    j,t = δ +         β1,k Investment i,−a
                                                      p,t−k +         β2,k Investment −i,a
                                                                                      p,t−k +    (1)
                                k=0                             k=0
                                      2
                                      X
                                            β3,k Investment i,a                    i,a  i,a
                                                            p,−j,t−k + β4 Controls t + j,t .
                                      k=0


    The dependent variable, Investmenti,a  j,t , is the investment of firm j, operating in industry
i, in area a, during year t, and is defined as capital expenditures in year t divided by
total assets in year t − 1. Proceeding from left to right, the first explanatory variable,
Investmenti,−a
             p,t−k , is simply an industry control for investment in the current (t) and two
previous years (t − 1 and t − 2). It is an equally weighted portfolio (p stands for portfolio) of
firms within firm i’s industry, but located outside its area.13 Here, the goal is to capture year-
to-year fluctuations in the investment expenditures of an entire industry, e.g., whether the
investment rates of software firms increased from 1997 to 1998. The coefficients denoted by
the vector β1 capture the sensitivity of firm i’s year t investment to industry level variation,
in both current (β1,0 ) and previous (β1,1 , β1,2 ) years.
    We have a particular interest in the second vector of coefficients, β2 , which capture the
investment sensitivity of firm i to the investment behavior of nearby firms, but in different
industries. For example, β2 measures Google’s investment sensitivity to that of local biotech
firms like Genentech, both in the current year (t) and in previous years (t − 1 and t − 2).
Because there should be minimal overlap in the products of firms operating in different
industries – note here that using broad industry classifications makes this less worrisome –
the coefficient β2 provides an estimate of the average “pure” local investment effect.
    The final portfolio captures the investment behavior of firms in the same area (a), and
also in the same industry (i) as firm j.14 For example, Yahoo’s investment expenditures
enter as an explanatory variable when explaining Google’s investment expenditures. Given
that we have already accounted for aggregate industry effects through Investmenti,−a      p,t−k , and
                                                     −i,a
non-industry local effects through Investmentp,t−k , β3 can be interpreted as the interaction
between the industry and local effects. Conceivably, the types of local spillovers (e.g., in-
formation diffusion) we envision for neighboring firms in different industries may be even
stronger when they share industry linkages.
    Finally, the Control variables in Equation (2) include firm, year, and area fixed effects.
The inclusion of firm dummy variables essentially demeans both the left- and right-hand
side variables by the average value(s) for each firm, so that the coefficients are identified
from the time-series variation for each firm. Year dummies soak up average fluctuation in


                                                     11
aggregate investment rates, and are akin to a market control. Area fixed effects account for
persistent differences in investment rates between areas – however, because all regressions
include firm fixed effects, these area controls have very little incremental explanatory power,
being relevant only in the few cases when firms change headquarter locations.
    Table III, presents the results. The first column shows the results when we explain a firm’s
investment expenditures (scaled by lagged assets) with the average investment rates of firms
in its industry. Recall that these industry portfolios are constructed from firms outside any
of the 20 EAs, so that the same firm is never simultaneously on the right and left-hand side
of the regression. The point estimate of 0.503 (t = 3.43) indicates that when the industry
average investment-to-assets ratio increases by 1% relative to its long run average – say, from
7% to 8% – the typical firm increases its own investment rate by about 0.5%. Note that
because all regressions include firm fixed effects, the coefficients should be interpreted as the
change from each firm’s panel sample average. Furthermore, because investment rates are
close to being stationary over long horizons, estimates obtained from fixed effects or first
differences regressions generate virtually identical results (not reported).
    The second column shows the estimates when we consider the influence of same area-
different industry portfolios. The coefficient of 0.186 (t = 1.91) indicates that the investment
sensitivity to the average investment of firms in the same area, but outside of its industry,
is about one-third of the industry effect. When both are included simultaneously in the
third column, the magnitude of the coefficient of the area investment portfolio increases to
0.231 (t = 2.66), almost half the magnitude of the coefficient of the industry portfolio (0.508,
t = 3.57).
    In the fourth column, we add the investment rate of the third and final portfolio, which
includes firms both in the firm’s industry, and headquartered nearby. Because the regression
already includes the investment rates of a firm’s industry and area (but different industry)
counterparts, it is convenient to think about this portfolio as an interaction term between
industry and area. Two observations are noteworthy. First, the magnitude on the same
industry-same area portfolio is 0.183 (t = 4.96), slightly smaller economically than the
different industry-same area portfolio (0.211, t = 2.77), but is statistically much stronger.
Second, the magnitude on the pure industry portfolio (row 1) drops somewhat to 0.386
(t = 3.48), virtually identical to the sum of the two local portfolios, 0.183 + 0.211 = 0.397.
    Together, these estimates imply that when predicting changes to a firm’s investment
rate, the investment behavior of a firm’s local peers is, on the margin, as important as the
investment expenditures of the firm’s non-local industry peers. About half of the local effect
comes from firms within its own industry, with the other half coming from firms in very
different industries.


                                               12
    Columns 5 and 6 of Table III add one- and two-year lags, respectively, for each investment
portfolio. Focusing our attention on column 6, the first three rows indicate that for the
non-local industry portfolio, only the contemporaneous value matters (0.354, t = 3.09);
lagged values have negative, small, and insignificant coefficients. In other words, whatever
information about investment opportunities is reflected by the behavior of a firm’s same-
industry, non-local peers is incorporated into its own investment plans very quickly.
    In marked contrast, the effects of a firm’s local peers, both inside and outside its industry,
show up more gradually. The fifth row shows that even after controlling for contemporaneous
investment (fourth row), the lagged investment rates of a firm’s local, non-industry peers
matter, with a point estimate of 0.050 and t-statistic of 2.57. Compared to the contempora-
neous value (0.188, t = 2.62), this means that roughly 20% of the total local, non-industry
effect shows up with a year lag. The delay is even more pronounced for local firms within
the same industry, where the one year lag (0.058, t = 3.60) is about one-third as large as
the contemporaneous coefficient (0.158, t = 4.10). Together, these findings suggest that
although the majority of local effects are immediately reflected in investment plans, the full
effect of regional vibrancy takes longer to emerge.


B.   Investment-q regressions
   The second type of equation we estimate is closely related, but instead of using investment
on both the right and left hand side of the equation, we use standard determinants of
investment as explanatory variables. In this case, we estimate the following equation:


                               1
                               X                         1
                                                         X                         1
                                                                                   X
                                                                     −i,a
      Investment i,a
                 j,t   =φ+                 i,−a
                                     α1,k qp,t−k−1   +         α2,k qp,t−k−1   +               i,a
                                                                                         α3,k qp,−j,t−k−1 +   (2)
                               k=0                       k=0                       k=0
        1
        X                                1
                                         X                               1
                                                                         X
              α4,k Cashflow i,−a
                            p,t−k    +         α5,k Cashflow −i,a
                                                             p,t−k   +         α6,k Cashflow i,a
                                                                                             p,−j,t−k +
        k=0                              k=0                             k=0
                        1
                        X                         1
                                                  X
                                    i,a
                              α7,k qj,t−k−1 +           α8,k Cashflow i,a                 i,a  i,a
                                                                      j,t−k + α9 Controls t + j,t .
                        k=0                       k=0


Although it looks considerably more complicated, we have made only two changes. First,
the explanatory variables are now lagged q and contemporaneous Cashf low, instead of
investment itself. As before, these variables are constructed at the portfolio level (note
the subscript p), and therefore capture the same types of industry, local, or local-industry
effects discussed above. The same industry/different area (i, −a), different industry/same
area (−i, a), and same industry/same area (i, a) portfolio q are shown consecutively in the

                                                          13
first row, and these same quantities for Cashf low in the row beneath. As before, we include
two lags of each variable.
      The second change is that now, because the explanatory variables are determinants of
investment rather than investment itself, we can include firm-specific information. In other
words, in addition to including q and Cashf low for a firm’s industry or local neighbors, we
also include these quantities for the firm itself. These variables are captured by the variables
  i,a
qj,t−k−1   and Cashflow i,a
                        j,t−k , respectively, and their coefficients as α7 and α8 . The j subscript
indicates that these regressors are formed at the firm-level, in contrast to variables formed
at the portfolio (p) level.
      In the first column of Table IV, we include only the firm’s own one-year lagged q and
contemporaneous cash flows, scaled by lagged assets. Consistent with many previous studies,
both q and Cashf low are significant determinants of a firm’s investment rate.15 The second
column adds these same quantities, averaged over a firm’s non-local, industry peers. Both
industry coefficients have positive signs, but are statistically weaker than the firm’s own
values for q and Cashf low. For example, the coefficient on industry q is 0.015 (t = 2.02)
versus 0.012 (t = 8.33) for the firm’s own q. Although the coefficient on industry Cashf low
has a very large point estimate (0.205), it is imprecisely estimated (1.87), making it difficult
to judge the size of the true effect.
      In the third column, we add the average q and Cashf low for the firm’s local peer firms,
but operating outside its industry. Cashf low for the firm’s local, non-industry neighbors is
both economically (0.100) and statistically significant (t = 2.68), and surprisingly, is over
twice as large as the firm’s own cash flows (0.049, t = 2.83). By contrast, the average q
for a firm’s local, but different-industry neighbors has a positive point estimate, but is not
statistically significant (0.006, t = 1.22).
      The regression reported in the fourth column of Table IV includes characteristics of the
firm’s industry peers, both inside and outside its local area. In this regression, both q
variables are significant – the average q for firms in the same industry has a point estimate
of 0.014, similar to the coefficient of the firm’s own q. Likewise, both Cashf low variables
(same area-different industry and same industry-different area) are important determinants
of the firm’s investment rate. The industry variable is still marginally significant (t = 1.88),
but with a large point estimate of 0.192. As for the average Cashf low of a firm’s non-
industry local peers, except for the firm’s own q, this is the most significant determinant of
investment. The point estimate of 0.105 (t = 3.90) means that when the cash flow rates of
neighboring firms increases by 1%, the typical firm increases its investment rate by about
0.1%.
      The last two rows in the fourth column indicate that the average q and Cashf low of a


                                                14
firm’s same industry, same area peers matter somewhat, but less so than the other variables.
The coefficient on one-year lagged q has a positive point estimate, but is not significant.
Cashf low in the same industry is statistically significant (t = 2.54), but the point estimate
is about 51 the size of the area, non-industry analog, and about 18 the size of the industry,
non-area portfolio.
    In the fifth column, we repeat the specification in the fourth column, but allow every
explanatory variable to also enter at a one year lag. In these regressions, two-year lagged q
is never significant, when one-year lagged q is included in the regression. On the other hand,
Cashf low fluctuations appear to influence not only current, but future investment. The third
and fourth columns indicate that this pattern holds for the firm’s own Cashf low, where the
one-year lagged coefficient is about 60% as strong as the contemporaneous one (0.027 ( vs.
0.040 (t = 2.75)). At least in terms of point estimates, this is also true for the non-local
industry portfolio, where the coefficient on one-year lagged Cashf low is 0.078, versus 0.137
for contemporaneous. However, neither are statistically significant at conventional levels.
    The 11th and 12th rows indicate comparable magnitudes for Cashf low among a firm’s
local, non-industry peers in the current year (0.074, t = 2.32) and one year ago (0.058,
t = 2.21). Although the magnitudes are lower for a firm’s same industry, local peers, the
ratios are roughly the same. Contemporaneous average Cashf low has a coefficient of 0.014
(t = 1.91), with a one-year lagged coefficient of (0.010, t = 1.85).
    In addition to highlighting the importance of a firm’s local environment for its investment
plans, the predictive significance of the local Cashf low variable is useful for another reason.
In the investment-q literature, there is a longstanding debate about the reason why a firm’s
own cash flows so strongly predict investment. There are two mainstream explanations. The
first, originally articulated by Fazzari, Hubbard, and Peterson (1988), is based on financial
constraints: when firms face frictions to external finance, they tend to rely on internally
generated cash flows to fund investments. The second is based on cash flows reflecting
investment opportunities, over and above that reflected in the firm’s stock price. For a variety
of reasons, a firm’s stock price may not be a sufficient statistic for its investment prospects,
opening the door for other firm fundamentals (e.g., cash flows) to explain investment.16
    Our results are relevant for this debate. For, although a firm’s cash flows may impact
investment for the two reasons described above, the cash flows of other firms does not
suffer from this ambiguity. More specifically, the financial constraints faced by any one firm
are unlikely to be related to the contemporaneous cash flows of neighboring firms without
strong industry links (columns 2, 4 and 5). Likewise, columns 3 through 5 indicate that
even controlling for the firm’s own cash flows and q, profitability at the industry level is an
important determinant of investment. Because sensitivity to cash flow external to the firm is


                                              15
difficult to square with financial frictions, our results provide support for the interpretation
that cash flows provide information about investment opportunities.


  IV.      Why do firms in the same city invest together?
    Together, the results in Tables III and IV indicate strong cross-industry comovement
in the investment expenditures of neighboring firms. As we show below, we can rule out
exogenous shocks such as weather events as the primary drivers of our results. We are,
however, less able to distinguish between the various types of endogenous local interactions.
In large part, this is the cost of conducting our analysis at a high level of spatial and industry
aggregation. While large sample, aggregate estimates are useful for establishing an empirical
foundation for future work, they are not ideal for identification. This caveat notwithstanding,
in this section we present additional tests designed to be somewhat more specific about the
channel at work.


A.    Exogenous area shocks
    Time-varying area shocks can generate correlations between local firms’ investment ex-
penditures without requiring local, endogenous interactions. Extreme weather like Hurricane
Katrina or disruptions in local politics might be examples of events that can affect the in-
vestment opportunities of all firms in a local area. In this section, we present tests designed
to distinguish between such exogenous events and endogenous interactions.
    We start by identifying select areas where a single, local dominant industry exists. Then,
we will use industry-level fluctuations in these dominant industries as our measures of local
vibrancy. For example, we will use economy-wide fluctuations in the energy sector as a
bellweather for Houston’s vibrancy. The question of interest is whether non-energy firms in
Houston respond disproportionately to fluctuations in the U.S. energy industry, compared
to other non-energy firms located in areas where energy is less important for local business
conditions.
    In addition to Houston, we identify three cities where only one of the Fama-French 12
industries consistently accounts for 15% or more of the area’s total market capitalization.
(Second, to make sure that one or two firms don’t influence our results, we require at least
ten firms in these “locally dominant” portfolios.) These cities and their respective dominant
industries include: Atlanta (Non-durables), Detroit (Durables), Houston (Energy), and the
San Francisco Bay Area (Business Equipment).
    Table V shows the results. In the first four columns of Panel A, we run area-level


                                               16
regressions similar to Equation 2, except that now, only a single, dominant industry is
included as a measure of local vibrancy.17 In each case, we see that even after controlling
for the investment rates in each firm’s industry, our single local, dominant portfolios appear
very important for determining investment rates of local firms. In two of the areas – San
Francisco Bay Area and Detroit – the local portfolio is comparable to the industry effect.
As in Table III, we also show these results for small (column 6) and large (column 7) firms.
While significant for both groups, the local correlations are a bit stronger for large firms.
    This evidence notwithstanding, it is still possible that time-varying location shocks could
impact both an area’s dominant industries, as well as other local firms. Panel B of Table
V rules this out by construction, and thus provides direct evidence of a causal role for
local vibrancy. To do this, we replace each of our local, dominant industry portfolios with
industry portfolios that include firms from outside the region. For example, in column 3, the
auto portfolio contains no Detroit-based firms. Rather, it simply allows firms located in the
Detroit area, but not in the durable (e.g., automotive) industry to exhibit correlation with
a market-wide durables portfolio. The absence of any local variable on the right hand side
of the regression means that time-varying local shocks cannot be driving the results.
    When predicting a firm’s investment in Atlanta (column 1) or the San Francisco Bay
Area (column 2), we see that the overall industry performance of the area’s most important
industry (e.g., a portfolio of computers and software for firms in the Bay Area) is an even more
important determinant of investment than the firm’s industry itself. For Detroit (column 3)
and Houston (column 4) the ability of the locally dominant portfolio to predict investment is
somewhat weaker, but in both cases is statistically significant. When all cities are aggregated
in column 5, the magnitude is about one-third of the pure industry effect, similar to what
we observed in Table 4. In the last pair of columns, we see that these effects are present to
roughly equal degrees for small (column 6) and large (column 7) firms, the latter suggesting
that industry linkages play a minor role at best.


B.   Differential area sensitivities to macro shocks
   In the previous subsection, we present tests that explicitly rule out exogenous area shocks
such as weather events or local politics as potential explanations for the observed regional
correlations in investment expenditures. Another possible channel for generating regional
correlation in investment expenditures, which we consider in this section, is through differ-
ential sensitivities to macro shocks.18 Recall, that our benchmark regressions (the results
shown in Table III) control for macro shocks with year fixed effects, which implicitly as-
sume that macro shocks affect all regions equally. However, in general, firm sensitivities to


                                              17
macro shocks vary across regions, and as a result, the investment rates of otherwise unrelated
neighboring firms may be correlated.
    To illustrate what we have in mind, suppose that there are only two kinds of firms in the
economy: young and old. Young firms tend to be more flexible and have growth opportunities
that are very sensitive to news about future economic growth. Old firms, on the other hand,
have existing relationships with customers and suppliers, and other features that make it
difficult for them to rapidly adjust investment expenditures when the macro environment
changes. Suppose further that cities differ in the age distribution of their firms, e.g., firms
on the West Coast tend to be younger.
    Under these assumptions, the young firms exhibit stronger sensitivity to macro news than
old firms, which means that the the predominately young firms in young-firm cities tend
to invest more (less) when macro growth prospects are favorable (unfavorable). Likewise,
the predominately old firms in old-firm cities will exhibit less sensitivity to macro effects.
Because our benchmark regressions include year fixed effects, which implicitly assume that
firms have the same investment sensitivity to macro news, a firm’s deviation from the average
sensitivity will wash into one or both of its area coefficients (i.e., those on the same area-
different industry or same area-same industry portfolios).
    To get a sense for how important cross-city differences in macro sensitivities are, we first
estimate our benchmark regressions on samples from each of the individual economic regions.
In other words, we run the following regression separately for San Francisco, Cleveland,
Phoenix, etc.:

                                                    −i,a
Investment i,a                   i,−a                                  i,a                 i,a i,a
           j,t = δ+β1 Investment p,t +β2 Investment p,t +β3 Investment p,−j,t +β4 Controls t +j,t ,


and extract 20 estimates for β2 , one for each city. In addition, we run a second set of
regressions that are akin to market model regressions for stock returns, except that we
consider firm-specific and aggregate investment expenditures rather than stock returns:

             Investment i,a                                              i,a  i,a
                        j,t = γ + α1 Market Investment p,t + α2 Controls t + νj,t .


In this exercise, we are estimating each city’s average market sensitivity separately, rather
than forcing the coefficients to be identical, as we did in our benchmark regression.
    Figure 3 shows the results. The first observation to note is the heavy clustering around
one on the x-axis, indicating that the investment rates in about half our cities move one-for-
one with the overall market. Among this set are large, diversified cities such as Chicago, New
York, Los Angeles, Philadelphia Washington D.C., Dallas, and Boston. About two-thirds of
our sample firms reside in cities with macro betas between 0.8 and 1.2.

                                               18
    As mentioned above, we are interested in the extent to which cities with either very
high, or very low, sensitivities to macro factors have the highest estimated area coefficients.
Beginning with the former, Figure 3 indicates the cities with the highest macro-investment
sensitivities are, by and large, the usual suspects: tech-heavy centers such as San Francisco,
Denver, Phoenix, and Seattle, and the entertainment-hub Orlando. However, note also that
the area coefficients for these cities are actually below the sample average, with only Orlando
(home to only 28 firms in the typical year) being above.
    The left part of the figure tells a similar story. Of the four cities with estimated macro
sensitivities less than 0.8, St. Louis and Indianapolis have the second and third lowest,
respectively, estimated coefficients in our sample. The average for these “low-beta” cities is
also below the sample average. Together, the patterns in Figure 3 suggests that area effects
are likely capturing more than cross-city differences in macro sensitivities.
    Perhaps a more direct way to address cross-area differences in macro sensitivities is
to allow the effect of the aggregate market on investment to vary across each of our 20
economic areas. Operationally, this amounts to removing the year fixed effects from our
regressions, and replacing them with 20-1=19 area × market fixed effects, i.e., Chicago ×
market investment, Atlanta × market investment, etc. When we do this, the results in
column 4 of Table III remain essentially the same: the coefficient on the same area, different
industry portfolio changes from 0.211 to 0.209, and the coefficient on the same area, same
industry portfolio changes from 0.183 to 0.182. Combined with the graphical results in
Figure 3, it appears that different sensitivities to macro factors are not the primary driver
of the correlations in local investment we observe.
    Finally, while these tests suggest that different sensitivities to the aggregate U.S. econ-
omy probably do not generate the local investment correlations we observe, the observed
correlation could be generated by different sensitivities to other systematic factors. As an
example, suppose that a few large U.S. cities (e.g., New York, Chicago, or Los Angeles) are
home to firms with a significant foreign presence, with more regional firms being located in
smaller cities. Here, a shock to, say, the Chinese economy could disproportionately impact
the prospects of firms in these large cities, leaving those in smaller cities comparatively unaf-
fected. Likewise, one could imagine firms headquartered near an international border (e.g.,
San Diego or Seattle) being especially sensitive to foreign exchange rates.
    While we acknowledge that neither our benchmark regressions nor Figure 3 rule out
cross-area differences in global sensitivities, we also note that the results in Table V pose a
particular challenge to this explanation. Recall that we found, for example, that Houston-
based firms outside the energy industry are particularly sensitive to fluctuations in the energy
industry, compared to their industry-match peers outside Houston. Although one might still


                                               19
claim that Houston’s non-oil firms have different sensitivities to a global factor, it seems
unlikely that: 1) this sensitivity would vary systematically with fluctuations in the energy
industry (other than through interactions with Houston’s oil-based firms), and that 2) this
relationship would hold independently for the other three city-industry pairs considered in
Table V (San Francisco-software, Detroit-automotive, and Atlanta-nondurables).


C.   Real estate values and the collateral channel
    Real estate price fluctuations are a special type of common area shock, but one that
has particular importance when analyzing investment. The basic idea is that land is used
as collateral for debt financing, so that firms owning land in the same general area may
experience simultaneous fluctuations in their abilities to raise debt financing (Chaney, Sraer,
and Thesmar (2011)). Of course, this begs the question of what ultimately caused the
common shock to land values: was it a natural disaster like Hurricane Katrina or simply one
or more successful firms in any area buying up land? In the first case, there is no firm-to-firm
interaction; however, in the second case, the demand for land by one local firm may ease
financial constraints for neighboring firms. Although not a “people-based” social interaction
such as information or knowledge diffusion, a result here would constitute a firm-to-firm
interaction, and as such, is relevant for thinking about agglomeration economies.
    Because the collateral story is implicitly about debt financing, Table VI reports results of
regressions that substitute Debt issuance (also scaled by lagged assets) for investment as the
dependent variable. The first column indicates that firms in the same industry tend to raise
debt together, with a estimated coefficient of 0.321 (t = 5.38). In the second column, we show
that the average Debt issuance rates of a firm’s local non-industry neighbors influences its
own tendency to raise debt, both by itself (column 2), and with the industry effect (column
3). With an estimated coefficient of 0.127 (t = 3.14), the ratio of the area-to-industry effect
is about 40%.
    Column 4 adds the average scaled debt issuance of the firm’s local, industry peers. Al-
though having a slightly smaller magnitude (0.087) compared to the portfolio of local, non-
industry peers (0.112), the local, same industry portfolio is stronger from a statistical sig-
nificance perspective (t = 3.86 versus 3.15). The next two columns add progressively longer
lags of the explanatory variables to the regression. Including two years of lags (column 6)
reveals that the debt issuance behavior of a firm’s non-industry area peers is important both
this year (0.078, t = 2.20) and next (0.087, t = 2.31). There is also some evidence that a
firm’s local, same-industry peers matter, but only contemporaneously (0.058, t = 2.07).
    At a broad level, the fact that we also find comovement in debt issuance suggests that at


                                              20
least part of the investment effect could be driven by common variation in collateral values.
To test for this possibility, the final four columns of Table 7 split the sample by two common
used proxies for financial constraints: the Kaplan and Zingales Index (Kaplan and Zingales,
1997) in columns 7 and 8, and payout ratios (e.g., Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2011)) in
columns 9 and 10. The fourth row indicates that the contemporaneous area sensitivities are
greatest among the least financially constrained firms; likewise, in the fifth row, the only
statistically significant lagged effect is in the 9th column, which considers only firms above
the median payout rate. In summary, although exposure to increased land values may make
it easier for firms to raise debt capital, our results are more consistent with common debt
issuance reflecting common exposure to growth opportunities.
    Finally, Panel B of Table 7 shows the results when we explain Debt issuance using
portfolios of stock and operating characteristics, rather than Debt issuance itself. Because
local comovement in debt was relatively weak compared to investment, it is perhaps not
surprising that we find virtually nothing here.


          V.       Further considerations and robustness
    While the results in Tables V and VI rule out two specific hypotheses, they do not identify
what may be driving the local comovement we observe in investment expenditures. Here,
we conduct a few additional cross-sectional tests that, although not definitive, provide more
information about the most relevant types of local, endogenous interactions.


A.    Large versus small firms
    We start by splitting the sample into large and small firms in the first two columns of
Table VII, a decomposition relevant for two reasons. First, we expect the collateral channel
(see above) to be weaker for large firms, which are less likely to be financially constrained.
Second, large firms are less likely to have regionally concentrated operations and sales forces.
This therefore provides us the opportunity to test the importance of headquarters per se –
more specifically, the local business environment of the firm’s headquarters.
    The first column shows the results for small firms, defined as those below the previous
year’s sample median across all firms. The analysis for larger firms is shown immediately
adjacent. This comparison reveals that the magnitude of the same area-different industry
portfolio coefficient is roughly 30 percent higher for large firms (0.229, t = 2.25), versus that
observed for small firms (0.175, t = 2.87). For local firms within the firm’s industry, the
effects are also more pronounced for large firms.


                                               21
    The fact that we observe the strongest results for large firms, combined with the quick-
ness of the effect, poses a problem for many potential mechanisms. A plausible explanation,
which is consistent with these observations, is that we are picking up communication be-
tween a city’s top executives. Indeed, CEOs and CFOs of large firms are disproportionately
represented on corporate boards, civic organizations, local charities, and other social orga-
nizations that facilitate interactions with other top managers (Engelberg, Gao, and Parsons
(2013)). Moreover, executives of large firms simply have more opportunity to learn from and
share ideas with other top managers and opinion leaders.
    Second, while a CEO of a small company certainly has private information about his
firm’s own prospects, CEOs of large firms may have information (or valuable opinions about)
events that extend beyond their own firms. The private meeting between Google chairman
CEO Eric Schmidt and French President Francois Hollande in October 2012 comes to mind.
In these and similar situations, CEOs of large, connected companies may have both the
information and visibility to transmit these ideas to others in the area. What we cannot tell,
of course, is the extent to which such effects represent actual information, or rather result
from the perception of information. Regardless, that local effects are strongest for large firms
– whose customer base and operations and the least localized – are strongly suggestive of
communication between upper management of nearby firms.19


B.   Do growing cities host growing firms?
    Throughout our analysis, we have measured the vibrancy of a city’s local economy using
the investment rates of firms headquartered there. In the next five columns of Table VII, we
consider two additional measures of a city’s economy: population growth and per capita wage
growth. In column 3, we simply add these control variables to our investment regressions.
While the estimates and statistical significance of our area portfolios remain similar (t =
2.18), we also find that an area’s population growth is an extremely strong determinant of
investment expenditures (t = 6.54).
    In the next two pairs of columns, we split the sample based on wage and population
growth. Interestingly, only when a city is thriving does the effect of one’s non-industry
peer firms matter for investment decisions. When wage growth is below the sample median
(column 4), the local, non-industry portfolio is not significantly different than zero (t = 0.60).
Likewise, when a city’s population stagnates (column 6), the estimated coefficient on the local
portfolio is actually negative, although far from being statistically significant (t = −0.20).
In contrast, columns 5 and 7 indicate, respectively, that high wage and population growth
amplify the investment effect of a firm’s local, non-industry peers.


                                               22
    Why should a firm’s investment depend on city dynamics? And why should the per-
formance of other firms be more important when a city is growing? These are different
questions, although some of the same economic forces are at work. Thinking about the for-
mer question first, one possibility is that population and/or wage growth is a barometer for
the quality of local human capital. Like a shock to any of the firm’s inputs to production,
access to a cheaper or better pool of workers is likely to make investment more profitable,
providing a potential explanation for why growing cities appear to host growing firms. How-
ever, causation could also go the other way, with thriving firms attracting new workers to
the area. In either case, what is important is that the economic and statistical magnitude of
our area portfolios is preserved in the presence of these controls, which column 5 indicates
is the case.
    A more subtle issue is why growing cities appear to magnify the effect of a firm’s local
peers. One possibility is akin to measurement error. If the performance of local firms is
measured imperfectly (even though we are talking about relatively large portfolios), city-
level information like population growth may nonetheless still contain information about the
health of local companies. This is similar reasoning to what we saw in Table IV, where the
stock prices of a firm’s industry (non-local) peers still predicts its investment, even when its
own stock price is included in the regression. In this case, the interaction between local firm
and city performance may convey a cleaner signal about the prospects of local firms. Another
alternative is that favorable demographic trends like growing population are complementary
with investment prospects. Here, firms in growing areas ramp up investment in part because
the area is growing, and may be expected to do so in the future.


C.   Headquarter changes
    To better establish that our investment comovement results are driven by the economic
conditions surrounding firm headquarter locations, it is informative to examine what happens
to these correlations when firms change headquarters. To this point, we have only used
COMPUSTAT data to define firm location. Subsequently, we have ignored firm headquarter
changes since COMPUSTAT backfills all location data, and therefore records only firms’
current headquarters. To examine headquarter changes we use the historic headquarter
information provided by the Compact Disclosure database20 . This database covers the period
from 1988 - 2006 and identifies 314 firm headquarter relocations corresponding to firms in
our our current CRSP/COMPUSTAT sample. Overall, during this time period our sample
has 8730 unique firms, implying that roughly 3.5% of firms moved headquarters at least once
during this time-period.


                                              23
    To examine the effect of headquarter location changes we interact the same area-different
industry and same area-same industry portfolios with a dummy variable that is zero before
a firm relocates to their current headquarter location, and one forever after their relocation.
We hypothesize that the when firms move to their current area the correlation between their
own investment and the investment of the same area-different industry and same area-same
industry portfolios will increase. Columns 8 and 9 of Table VII report results for investment
regressions including these interactions. Column 8 uses the full sample and column 9 reports
results using only the sample of firms which changed headquarters. Consistent with our
hypothesis we find that the interactions are positive in all cases, but statistically insignificant
likely due to the small number location changes.


D.    Clustering alternatives
    We conclude our analysis with a number of robustness checks. In Table VIII, we present
highlights of our results under various assumptions for the correlation structure of the resid-
uals. For comparison, the first column shows the estimates under our baseline assumptions,
where the residuals are clustered at the industry level. This is a conservative assumption
given that our typical unit of observation is at the firm-year level; industry clustering ac-
counts for autocorrelation within firms, as well as cross-sectional correlations within each
Fama-French 12 grouping.
    In the second column, we remove clustering altogether which, in nearly all cases, con-
siderably reduces the estimated standard errors of the coefficient estimates. The results
for industry-area clustering are shown in the third column. The t-statistics in this column
are almost identical to those shown in the first column, suggesting that within an industry,
allowing for correlations in residuals across areas is not particularly important. Our point
estimates already account for time effects through year dummies, but in the fourth column,
we allow for arbitrary cross-sectional correlation in residuals by clustering by year. This has
an uneven, though modest, impact on inferences. The investment results (Tables 4A and
5) are a bit stronger, compared to only clustering on industry, whereas the capital raising
regressions (Tables 6 and 7) are a bit weaker. The final column accounts only for within-
firm clustering – possible only for Tables 4 through 6 – and indicates little change from the
previous results.
    In addition to the results shown in Table VIII, we have conducted various other untab-
ulated robustness exercises. These include clustering on multiple units simultaneously (e.g.,
clustering on industry, and clustering in time), running year-by-year cross sectional regres-
sions and averaging the coefficients (Fama and McBeth (1973)), and pooling firms within


                                                24
an area-industry unit into a single observation. None of these alternatives has a meaningful
impact on the main results.


E.   Varying industry definitions
    The final table gives a sense for how our results change when we alter the construction
of either our area or industry portfolios. As before, the first column of Table IX presents
our benchmark results, taken selectively from previous tables, where industries are defined
using the Fama and French 12 classification shown in Tables 1 and 3. In the second column,
we form industry portfolios at a slightly finer level, using 17 different industry classifications
rather than 12, and in column 3, match firms to one of 48 different industries. Neither
makes much of a difference, although the results strengthen slightly with the finer industry
classifications.
    Fama and French’s industry classifications are based on SIC codes, and enjoy a rich tra-
dition in the literature. However, recent work by Hoberg and Philipps (2011) form industry
linkages by analyzing text written in annual 10-K reports. Intuitively, the idea is to measure
the tendency of firms to describe their respective products using similar market vocabulary,
and forming a “Hotelling-like product space” from which to form quasi-industry linkages.
    In the fourth column, we present our results using these potentially superior industry des-
ignations, and find that in most cases, the results are substantially strengthened. Particularly
in the investment regressions (row 1 of Table IX), the magnitude on the same area-different
industry portfolio is higher, as is the coefficient on the same industry-different area portfolio
(not shown in the table). The impact on area q on investment (row 4), Equity issuance (row
8), one-year lagged Equity issuance (row 9), and area q on Equity issuance (row 11) are
all stronger with the Hoberg and Philipps (2011) classifications. The main takeaway from
column 4 is that reducing measurement error generally strengthens our results.


                                  VI.       Conclusion
   For well over 100 years, urban economists have studied the connection between location
and economic activity. The earliest studies emphasize physical attributes such as access to
natural resources or transportation, but more recent work explores the influence of location
on human capital. Here, the central idea is that a person’s local environment has a first
order effect on his choices – how much schooling he acquires, where he works and how hard,
which friends he spends time with, how healthy he is, and even how long he lives. 21
   In this paper, the people under consideration are top executives at large, public compa-


                                               25
nies. We consider whether, and to what extent, their local environments – specifically, the
actions of other firm’s headquartered nearby – influence the decisions they make for their
own companies. Why they would might not be obvious. First, most of the firms in our sam-
ple (even the smallest ones) are relatively large, and thus, sell their products outside their
headquarters’ catchment areas. Second, the main comparisons we make are between firms
located near one another, but operating in very different lines of business (e.g., oil refiners
and pharmaceuticals). Yet, our analysis suggests very strong “local effects” in corporate
investment expenditures. Roughly speaking, when deciding how much to invest in a given
year, what a firm’s local neighbors are doing is about half as important as what other firms
in its industry are doing. In other tests not reported here, when we measure the performance
of a firm’s local neighbors in other ways e.g., their profits or stock prices - similar results
obtain.
    Future research will hopefully dig deeper into how these human capital effects generate
co-movements in local investment expenditures. Our analysis suggests that the answers to
these questions may also provide useful insights into why cities grow. Indeed, cities with
growing populations do host firms that invest more, which is consistent with the idea that an
influx of new people, with new skills, facilitates the dissemination of new ideas. For example,
when oil prices rise, Houston oil and gas firms tend to hire new managers, who may bring
with them new ideas. If the knowledge imparted by these newcomers is easily transferrable
across industries – and if local social networks allow these ideas to spread, the investment
opportunities of nearby firms may also improve. While it is hard to gauge the magnitude of
such an effect, evidence such as Glaeser and Mare (2001) suggest that employment in dense
urban areas where such ideas and skills are likely to spread impart long-lived human capital
advantages.
    It is also likely that ideas and views about economic prospects will be transmitted through
these same local social networks. Indeed, investment expenditure co-movement within areas
can arise if managers in the same area talk to the same people, and consequently, reach
similar conclusions about area or macro trends that can influence their view of investment
opportunities. Fracassi’s (2011) findings of similar investment patterns between firms that
share board members is consistent with this idea that communication networks can influence
corporate investment expenditures.
    While local sharing of information about trends is plausible, there are two observations
worth mentioning. First, we expect trends about one’s own industry to be the most relevant,
and we have controlled for a firm’s local, industry peers. Thus, the magnitudes we observe
– about half the pure industry effect — arise because of co-movements of the investment
expenditures of local firms in different industries, where knowledge of trends should be much


                                              26
less relevant. Second, the strong positive relation between area cash flows (which are public
information) and future investment expenditures would be hard to explain based solely on
managers in an area sharing private information.
    We, of course, cannot rule out the possibility that area co-movements arise because of
irrational “herding,” which would be the case if managers put too much weight on the beliefs
of their neighbors. We also cannot rule out what we would characterize as a “keeping up
with the Jones effect,” where CEOs in the same cities tend to increase investment together
as they compete to be important in their communities. In either case, at least some of
the investment co-movement will be inefficient – however, the effect of this inefficiency can
potentially be partly offset by the resulting positive spillovers. More detailed data on the
ex post efficiency of investments – perhaps using plant level data – would help make this
distinction.
    Finally, it would be interesting to consider the possibility of better human capital being
attracted by improvements in a city’s consumption opportunities (a lá Glaeser and Gottlieb’s
(2006) “Consumer City”). While we expect these effects to operate over longer horizons,
much like the migration to good-weather cities documented over the last four decades (Rap-
paport (2007)), it would be interesting to link changes in an area’s investment expenditures
to improvements in local amenities (see, e.g., Duranton and Turner’s (2011) analysis of road
development and local employment growth). Another possibility, worth exploring, is that
the success in one sector influences the work ethic in other sectors, another “keeping up
with the Jones” effect. Each of these potential aspects of vibrancy has been discussed in the
urban economics literature, but we are unaware of any studies that directly link these effects
to corporate performance and growth opportunities.




                                             27
                                  REFERENCES

Almazan, Andres, Adolfo De Motta, and Sheridan Titman, 2007, Firm location and the
  creation and utilization of human capital, Review of Economic Studies 74, 1305–1327.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, The cash flow sensitivity
  of cash, Journal of Finance 59, 17771804.

Alti, Aydŏgan, 2003, How sensitive is investment to cash flow when financing is frictionless?,
  Journal of Finance 58, 707–722.

Audretsch, David B., and Maryann P. Feldman, 2004, Handbook of Regional and Urban
  Economics, volume 4, chapter Chapter 61 - Knowledge spillovers and the geography of
  innovation, 2713–2739 (Elsevier).

Berry, Christopher R., and Edward L. Glaeser, 2005, The divergence of human capital levels
  across cities, Papers in Regional Science 84, 407444.

Bound, John, and Harry Holzer, 2000, Demand shifts, population adjustments, and labor
  market outcomes during the 1980s, Journal of Labor Economics 18, 20–54.

Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2010, The collateral channel: How real
  estate shocks affect corporate investment, American Economic Review Forthcoming.

Ciccone, Antonio, and Robert E. Hall, 1996, Productivity and the density of economic
  activity, American Economic Review 86, 54–70.

Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward L. Glaeser, 2002, Geographic concentration as a
  dynamic process, The Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 193–204.

Duranton, Gilles, and Matthew A. Turner, 2011, The fundamental law of road congestion:
  Evidence from us cities, American Economic Review 101, 2616–52.




                                              28
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser, 1997, Geographic concentration in u.s. manufacturing
  industries: A dartboard approach, Journal of Political Economy 109, 889–927.

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser, 1999, The geographic concentration of industry:
  Does natural advantage explain agglomeration?, American Economic Review 89, 311–316.

Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William R. Kerr, 2010, What causes industry ag-
  glomeration? evidence from coagglomeration patterns, American Economic Review 100,
  1195–1213.

Erickson, Timothy, and Toni M. Whited, 2000, Measurement error and the relationship
  between investment and q, Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027–1057.

Fazzari, Steven, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen, 1988, Financing constraints and
  corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141–206.

Fisher, Jonas D.M., Morris David, and Toni M. Whited, 2009, Macroeconomic implications
  of agglomeration Working paper.

Fracassi, Cesare, 2011, Corporate finance policies and social networks Working paper.

Gan, Jie, 2007, Collateral, debt capacity, and corporate investment: Evidence from a natural
  experiment, Journal of Financial Economics 85, 709–734.

Gao, Pengjie, Joseph Engelberg, and Christopher A. Parsons, 2012, The price of a ceo’s
  rolodex, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming .

Glaeser, Edward L., 2012, Triumph of the City: How Our Greatest Invention Makes Us
  Richer, Smarter, Greener, Healthier, and Happier (Penguin Books).

Glaeser, Edward L., and Joshua D. Gottlieb, 2006, Urban resurgence and the consumer city,
  Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Discussion Paper Number 2109 .




                                            29
Glaeser, Edward L., Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, 1992, Growth
  in cities, Journal of Political Economy 100, 1126–1152.

Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz, 2001, Consumer city, Journal of Economic
  Geography 1, 27–50.

Glaeser, Edward L., and David Mare, 2001, Cities and skills, Journal of Labor Economics
  19, 316–342.

Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew G. Resseger, 2009, The complementarity between cities
  and skills Working paper.

Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jos A. Scheinkman, 1996, Crime and social inter-
  actions, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, 507–548.

Gomes, Joao F., 2001, Financing investment, American Economic Review 91, 1263–1285.

Henderson, J.V., 1974, The sizes and types of cities, American Economic Review 64, 640–56.

Henderson, J.V., 2003, Marshall’s scale economies, Journal of Urban Economics 53, 1–28.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010a, Product market synergies and competition in
  mergers and acquisitions: A text-based analysis, Review of Financial Studies 23, 3773–
  3811.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2010b, Text-based network industries and endogenous
  product differentiation Working Paper.

Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, 1993, Geographic localization
  of knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations, Quarterly Journal of Economics
  108, 577–598.

Kaplan, Steve, and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide useful
  measures of financing constraints?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169–215.

                                             30
Kaplan, Steve, and Luigi Zingales, 2000, Investment-cash flow sensitivities are not valid
  measures of financing constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 707–12.

Korniotis, George, and Alok Kumar, 2011, State-level business cycles and local return pre-
  dictability Working paper.

Lucas, Robert, 1988, On the mechanics of economic development, Journal of Monetary
  Economics 22, 3–42.

Manski, Charles, 1993, Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem,
  Review of Economic Studies 60, 531–542.

Marshall, Alfred, 1920, Principles of Economics (MacMillan and Co., London, U.K.).

Moretti, Enrico, 2003, Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, chapter Chapter 8 -
  Human Capital Externalities in Cities (North Holland-Elsevier).

Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 2000, Collateral damage: Effects of the japanese bank
  crisis on real activity in the united states, American Economic Review 20, 30–45.

Pirinsky, Christo, and Qinghai Wang, 206, Does corporate headquarters location matter for
  stock returns?, Journal of Finance 61, 1991–2015.

Poterba, James, 1988, Are consumers forward looking? evidence from fiscal experiments,
  American Economic Review 78, 413–18.

Rappaport, Jordan, 2007, Moving to nice weather, Regional Science and Urban Economics
  37, 375–398.

Rauch, James, 1993, Productivity gains from geographic concentration of human capital:
  Evidence from cities, Journal of Urban Economics 34, 380–400.

Rauh, Joshua, 2006, Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of
  corporate pension plans, Journal of Finance 71, 34–72.

                                            31
Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, 2001, The determinants of agglomeration, Journal
  of Urban Economics 50, 191–229.

Saxenian, AnnaLee, 1994, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley
  and Route 128 (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts).

Shapiro, Jesse M., 2006, Smart cities: Quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of
  human capital, Review of Economics and Statistics 88, 324–335.

Simon, Curtis, Clark, and Nardinelli, 2002, Human capital and the rise of american cities:
  1900-1990, Regional Science and Urban Economics 32, 59–96.

Topel, Robert, 1986, Local labor markets, Journal of Political Economy 94, S111–S143.

Tuzel, Salale, 2012, Corporate real estate holdings and the cross-section of stock returns,
  Review of Financial Studies 25, 278–313.

Wheaton, William, and Mark Lewis, 2002, Urban wages and labor market agglomeration,
  Journal of Urban Economics 51, 542–562.




                                              32
                                             Notes
   1
       According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Detroit’s population declined from 1.51 million
in 1970 to 713,000 in 2010. Austin’s population more than tripled over the same period.
   2
       For discussion of each type of spillover, respectively, see Moretti (2003), Jaffe, Trajten-
berg, and Henderson (1993), and Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2001).
   3
       See Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), Kaplan and Zingales (1997, 1999), Erickson
and Whited (2000), Gomes (2001), Altı(2003), and Almeida, Campello, Weisbach (2004).
   4
       Of course, if land prices increase primarily because of the success of some local firms,
which then allows other firms in the area to invest, this would qualify as a spillover.
   5
       For more details about how these industry designations are defined, see http://mba.
tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library/det_12_ind_port.html.
   6
       See Moretti (2009) for an excellent review about local labor markets.
   7
       Firms outside these 20 areas are used to construct the same industry/different area
portfolios, but are otherwise ignored.
   8
       See http://www.bea.gov/regional/docs/econlist.cfm.
   9
       For a given area, the market capitalization for each industry relative to the area’s total
market capitalization is averaged by year. This number is then normalized, so that rows
sum to 100 percent for ease of interpretation.
  10
       For instance, Saxenian (1994) describes how meeting places, such as the Wagon Wheel
Bar located only a block from Intel, Raytheon, and Fairchild Semiconductor, “served as
informal recruiting centers as well as listening posts; job information flowed freely along
with shop talk.” More formally, Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson (1993) find that new
patents are five to 10 times more likely to cite patents from the same metropolitan area
relative to a control group, even after eliminating patent citations from the same firm. They
interpret their findings as evidence of knowledge spillovers in metropolitan areas.
  11
       To ensure that portfolios are reasonably diversified, for the remainder of our analysis we
require that all portfolios used in our analysis consist of more than five firms.

                                                 33
  12
       For this figure, all industries in a given area are included. In the regressions, we typically
break out a firm’s local neighbors into those that share its industry, and those that do not.
  13
       We construct industry portfolios using only firms located outside any of the 20 economic
areas examined. This ensures that at any point in the time t, industry portfolios are identical
for all firms in industry i. In other words, the composition of each industry portfolio does
not change across areas.
  14
       The −j subscript indicates that the current observation is excluded from the same
industry/same area portfolio.
  15
       See for example, Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) and Kaplan and Zingales (1997).
  16
       Reasons why stock prices may not capture all relevant information about investment
opportunities includes stock prices reflecting average rather than marginal q (Erickson and
Whited (2000)), technical reasons related to the firm’s production technology or adjustment
costs (e.g., Hayashi (1982)), and mispricing. See Alti (2003) for a discussion of the important
issues in this literature.
  17
       This means that we must exclude each area’s dominant industries from the left hand
sides in the appropriate column. Moreover, year fixed effects are not permitted because they
are perfectly collinear with each area’s dominant industry portfolio.
  18
       We thank the referee for raising this possibility.
  19
       We have also examined the impact of firm entry and exit on our findings. In unreported
results, we find that excluding new firms and less successful firms from the sample increases
the coefficient on the same-area/different-industry investment portfolio and decreases the
different-area/same-industry investment coefficient, suggesting that for large, successful firms
area dynamics matter as much as, and in some instances perhaps slightly more than, industry
dynamics.
  20
       We’d like to thank Joseph Engelberg for sharing this data.
  21
       There is an extensive urban economics literature which examines the effects of city-living.
For example, cities make workers more productive (Glaeser and Mare 2001); cities with high


                                                  34
initial schooling levels have faster growth in their share of adults with college degrees than
initially less educated cities (Berry and Glaesar 2005); and social interactions within cities
play an important role in explaining the high cross-city variance of crime rates (Glaeser,
Sacerdote, and Scheinkman 1996). See also Glaeser (2012).




                                             35
Panel A: Investment/assets




                                                           .2
                  Avg. investment/assets
                   .05      .1      .15                    0




                                                                  1970         1980              1990               2000            2010
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                         (Highest) Minneapolis, Phoenix, Dallas, Houston, Denver
                                                                         Detroit, Los Angeles, Seattle, Orlando, Atlanta
                                                                         St. Louis, Philadelphia, Chicago, Miami, San Francisco
                                                                         (Lowest) New York, Indianapolis, D.C., Boston, Cleveland




Panel B: Fama-French 12 Industry adjusted investment/assets
                                                           .02
                  Avg. investment/assets (Industry adj.)
                                                           .01
                                                           0
                                                           −.01
                                                           −.02
                                                           −.03




                                                                  1970         1980              1990               2000            2010
                                                                                                 Year

                                                                         (Highest) Minneapolis, Phoenix, Dallas, Houston, Denver
                                                                         Detroit, Los Angeles, Seattle, Orlando, Atlanta
                                                                         St. Louis, Philadelphia, Chicago, Miami, San Francisco
                                                                         (Lowest) New York, Indianapolis, D.C., Boston, Cleveland




Figure 1. Average area investment rates across time. Panel A of this figure shows
the average annual investment rate (capital expenditures divided by last year’s assets) for 4
sets of areas grouped according to their investment levels over the entire sample period. The
first group contains the five areas with the highest investment over the sample period (i.e.,
Minneapolis, Phoenix, Dallas, Houston, Denver), while the last group contains the five areas
with the lowest investment rates (i.e., New York, Indianapolis, Dallas, Boston, Cleveland).
Panel B shows the same figure using Fama-French 12 industry-adjusted investment rates.


                                                                                               36
Panel A: Industry investment

                 .3
         Capex/Total assets
           .1    0     .2




                              1970   1980               1990           2000       2010
                                                        Year

                                            Market investment   Area investment
Panel B: Area investment
                 .3
         Capex/Total assets
           .1    0     .2




                              1970   1980               1990           2000       2010
                                                        Year

                                            Market investment   Area investment
Figure 2. Area and industry investment Panel A of this figure illustrates the average
yearly investment (capital expenditures divided by last year’s assets) for the entire market
over the sample time period (line) and the average yearly investment for each Fama-french
12 industry (x’s). Panel B plots the average yearly investment (o’s) for each of the twenty
areas considered in our sample.




                                                     37
                                                                                    Chicago                                             Orlando

                                    .6                                Cleveland
                                                                               Detroit          Minneapolis
                                                                                   New YorkPhiladelphiaHouston
                                                                                        Los Angeles
                                                                                         Miami
      Area investment coefficient




                                                                                               D.C.
                                    .4                                                          Boston              Atlanta
                                                                                          Dallas                        Phoenix
                                                                                                                        San Francisco
                                                                                                                        Seattle

                                    .2          Indianapolis



                                                                              St. Louis
                                     0

                                                                                                           Denver

                                    -.2
                                          -.2    0         .2   .4       .6         .8         1     1.2         1.4          1.6       1.8       2
                                                                     Market investment coefficient

Figure 3.      Area versus market sensitivities This figure plots coefficient esti-
mates for Market Investment p,t (Market investment) and Investment −i,ap,t (Area investment)
from the following two regression estimated individually for each area: Investment i,a   j,t =
                  i,−a                −i,a                i,a                  i,a   i,a
δ + β1 Investment p,t + β2 Investment p,t + β3 Investment p,−j,t + β4 Controls t + j,t , and
Investment i,a                                              i,a    i,a
           j,t = γ + α1 Market Investment p,t + α2 Controls t + νj,t . That is, we estimate
the same regression as Table 4, column 4 by area excluding year fixed effects, and we es-
timate a regression of firm investment on the equal-weighted market investment average
(Market Investment p,t ).




                                                                                 38
                                                                         Table I
                                                                      Area statistics
     This table shows summary statistics for each of the 20 economic areas (EA’s) considered in our study. Listed in Panel A are each area’s population
     in 2004; and annual summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, minimum, 10th , 50th , and 90th percentiles, and maximum) for the number of
     firms per area and the market capitalization of all firms in each area. Market capitalization is in billions of dollars. Panel B reports the average
     percentage of market capitalization for each industry relative to the total market capitalization in a given area. Industry title abbreviations used as
     column headers are as follows: Consumer Non-durables (NoDur ); Consumer Durables (Durbl ); Manufacturing (Manuf ); Energy – Oil, Gas, and Coal
     Extraction and Products (Enrgy); Chemicals (Chems); Business Equipment – Computers, Software, and Electronic Equipment (BusEq); Telephone
     and Television Transmission (Telcm); Utilities (Utils); Wholesale, Retail, and Some Services (Shops); Healthcare, Medical Equipment, and Drugs
     (Hlth); Finance (Fin); and Other (Other ). Panel A: Area summary statistics

                                                                                         Number of firms                     Market capitalization

            BEA                                                   Population     Mean    Sd    10th   50th   90th    Mean     Sd     10th   50th     90th
            New York-Newark-Bridgeport, NY-NJ-CT-PA                22,874,458      599   170   398    584    814       561    419    120     430     1,160
            Los Angeles-Long Beach-Riverside, CA                   19,055,411      271   106   133    292    399       133    107     15      96       285




39
            Chicago-Naperville-Michigan City, IL-IN-WI             10,256,144      180    43   143    175    254       226    151     41     222       427
            San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland, CA                      9,338,048      235   140    58    231    427       310    324     18     131       793
            Washington-Baltimore-Northern Virginia, DC-MD-VA-WV     8,830,103      133    60    51    158    205       119    120      7      53       310
            Boston-Worcester-Manchester, MA-NH                      8,193,115      219    96    96    232    341       143    135     12      74       340
            Dallas-Fort Worth, TX                                   7,252,173      155    55    88    159    229       147     95     39     130       291
            Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI                                7,048,815       69    15    52     65     88        46     31     10      42        88
            Philadelphia-Camden-Vineland, PA-NJ-DE-MD               6,874,604      139    46    83    147    195        84     70     14      55       194
            Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Gainesville, GA-AL                6,818,366       98    48    44    104    164       116     95     15      92       248
            Houston-Baytown-Huntsville, TX                          6,088,680      137    49    69    149    202       152    146     22      78       419
            Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Miami Beach, FL                   6,013,949      105    46    48    108    167        32     31      3      14        78
            Minneapolis-St. Paul-St. Cloud, MN-WI                   5,068,485      123    54    55    128    199        94     91      7      44       231
            Cleveland-Akron-Elyria, OH                              4,662,474       77    16    60     73    102        56     47      8      34       126
            Seattle-Tacoma-Olympia, WA                              4,358,890       48    25    19     48     81        57     64      1      29       160
            Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ                             4,256,343       46    19    22     52     73        28     34      2       7        88
            Orlando-The Villages, FL                                4,047,955       28    12    15     27     43         6      6    0.3       2        15
            Denver-Aurora-Boulder, CO                               3,762,991       96    43    37    111    142        61     62      3      46       156
            St. Louis-St. Charles-Farmington, MO-IL                 3,317,985       45    13    31     46     64        54     42      8      44       104
            Indianapolis-Anderson-Columbus, IN                      3,254,963       28    11    16     28     44        14     16      1       5        37
                                                                       Table I
                                                                Area statistics - cont’d
     Panel B: Percent market capitalization by industry


        BEA\Industry                                          NoDur   Durbl   Manuf   Enrgy   Chems   BusEq   Telcm   Utils   Shops   Hlth   Fin   Other
        New York-Newark-Bridgeport, NY-NJ-CT-PA                  10      1        7       1       6      13      14      5        4    18    15        5
        Los Angeles-Long Beach-Riverside, CA                      3      5        6      28     <.5      11       2      6        6     9    16        9
        Chicago-Naperville-Michigan City, IL-IN-WI               13      2       17      10       2       4       3      9       10    11    14        7
        San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland, CA                        3    <.5        4      14       2      37       5      6        8     4    14        4
        Washington-Baltimore-Northern Virginia, DC-MD-VA-WV       3    <.5       22     <.5       7       6      11      6        6     3    27       10
        Boston-Worcester-Manchester, MA-NH                        5      1       20       1       1      32       4      4        7     9    10        5
        Dallas-Fort Worth, TX                                     2      3        4      27       2       8      13      7       11     3     7       14




40
        Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI                                <.5     49       13     <.5     <.5       3     <.5     17        3   <.5     5        9
        Philadelphia-Camden-Vineland, PA-NJ-DE-MD                 9      1       12       9       7      15       7      5        8     7    15        4
        Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Gainesville, GA-AL                 25      1        3     <.5     <.5      10      14     10       10     1    10       15
        Houston-Baytown-Huntsville, TX                            1    <.5        8      46       6       4       1     14        6   <.5     7        7
        Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Miami Beach, FL                     3      1        6       1     <.5       7       6     25       13     5    11       23
        Minneapolis-St. Paul-St. Cloud, MN-WI                    19      1        9       1       5      12       1      5       16     9    19        5
        Cleveland-Akron-Elyria, OH                                3     16       20       1      12       2     <.5     13        6     1    23        5
        Seattle-Tacoma-Olympia, WA                              <.5      9        4     <.5     <.5      22      10      9       15     6    21        4
        Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ                               1    <.5       25     <.5       2      15     <.5     15        5     2     4       32
        Orlando-The Villages, FL                                 20      4        6       1       4       6      14    <.5       18     3    15        9
        Denver-Aurora-Boulder, CO                                 5    <.5        8      17       1       3      42      6        2     2     3       12
        St. Louis-St. Charles-Farmington, MO-IL                  27      1       29       4       6       3       2      8       12     5     4        1
        Indianapolis-Anderson-Columbus, IN                        9      1        8     <.5      13       2       2     30        3    19    10        2
                                                  Table II
                                             Portfolio statistics
Panel A of this table reports annual summary statistics (mean, standard deviation, minimum, 10th , 50th ,
and 90th percentiles, and maximum) for the following firm-level and portfolio-level variables: total number
of firms in our sample per year (Obs. per year), number of firms per portfolio (# of firms), excess returns
(Returns), Cashflow which is equal to income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization
normalized by last years assets (Cashflow (t)=[IB(t)+DP(t)]/AT(t-1)), Investment which is equal to capital
expenditures normalized by last years assets (Investment(t)=CAPX(t)/AT(t-1)), Debt issuance which is
equal to the change in total long-term debt plus the change in long-term debt due in one year plus notes
payable divided by last years assets (Debt issuance(t)=[d.DLTT(t)+d.DD1(t)+NP(t)]/AT(t-1)), and Tobin’s
q which is equal to long-term debt plus debt in current liabilites plus market equity all divided by current
assets (q(t)=[DLTT(t)+DLC(t)+CSHO(t)*PRCC F(t)]/AT(t)). Results are shown for all firms; for same
industry, different area portfolios – equal-weighted portfolios of firms in the same industry, but outside our
set of 20 EAs; for different industry, same area portfolios – equal-weighted portfolios of firms that belong to
the same industry and that are headquartered in the same area; and same area, same industry portfolios –
equal-weighted portfolios of firms in the same area and industry. Panel B reports the correlation matrix for
the different area, industry, and industry-area portfolios. Panel A: Portfolio statistics

                                        Mean        Sd        Min     10th    50th    90th   Max


                      Panel A: Firms
                      Obs. per year    2885.34    986.05        914   1626    3065    4118    4522
                      Returns             0.07      0.59      -0.79   -0.60   -0.02   0.80    1.93
                      Cashflow            0.02      0.22      -0.99   -0.20    0.07   0.20    0.43
                      Investment          0.07      0.09       0.00    0.01    0.05   0.17    0.56
                      Debt iss.           0.08      0.19      -0.27   -0.05    0.01   0.27    1.07
                      q                   1.62      1.79       0.12    0.43    1.02   3.39   10.97

                      Panel B: Same industry, different area portfolios
                      # of firms        137.33     89.95          6      35    130     241     416
                      Returns             0.08      0.26      -0.61   -0.25   0.07    0.43    1.02
                      Cashflow            0.05      0.05      -0.14   -0.01   0.06    0.11    0.23
                      Investment          0.08      0.04          0    0.04   0.08    0.14    0.35
                      Debt iss.           0.08      0.04      -0.05    0.03   0.07    0.13    0.30
                      q                   1.41      0.65       0.34     0.6   1.34    2.29    3.99

                      Panel C: Different industry, same area portfolios
                      # of firms         174.4    155.67          9      47    131     372     843
                      Returns             0.07      0.25      -0.53   -0.26   0.09    0.39    0.85
                      Cashflow            0.04      0.05      -0.17   -0.03   0.04    0.11    0.18
                      Investment          0.08      0.03       0.02    0.04   0.08    0.11    0.29
                      Debt iss.           0.08      0.04      -0.04    0.03   0.08    0.12    0.25
                      q                   1.52      0.46       0.61    0.91   1.52    2.06    4.75

                      Panel D: Same industry, same area portfolios
                      # of firms         21.97     23.14          6       7     15      47     266
                      Returns             0.07       0.3       -0.7   -0.31   0.06    0.46    1.42
                      Cashflow            0.04      0.09      -0.53   -0.07   0.06    0.12    0.27
                      Investment          0.08      0.05          0    0.03   0.07    0.13    0.56
                      Debt iss.           0.08      0.08      -0.11    0.01   0.07    0.16    1.07
                      q                   1.51      0.82       0.15    0.65   1.35    2.62    6.25
                      t statistics in parentheses
                      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                           41
                                                                             Table II
                                                                   Portfolio statistics - cont’d
     Panel B: Portfolio correlations

                                              Same industry/different area         Different industry/same area          Same industry/same area

                                            Ret    Cash    Inv    Debt       q   Ret    Cash    Inv    Debt       q   Ret    Cash    Inv   Debt    q
                     Same ind./diff. area

                     Return                  1.0
                     Cashflow                0.1     1.0
                     Investment             -0.1     0.4   1.0
                     Debt iss.              -0.2     0.1   0.5     1.0
                     q                      -0.2    -0.5   0.2     0.1    1.0




42
                     Diff. ind./same area

                     Return                  0.7     0.0   -0.1    -0.2   -0.2    1.0
                     Cashflow                0.0     0.4    0.2     0.1   -0.2    0.1     1.0
                     Investment             -0.1     0.2    0.3     0.3   -0.1   -0.1     0.4   1.0
                     Debt iss.              -0.2     0.1    0.3     0.4    0.1   -0.3     0.1   0.5     1.0
                     q                      -0.2    -0.3   -0.2     0.0    0.2   -0.3    -0.7   0.0     0.1    1.0

                     Same ind./same area

                     Return                  0.8     0.1   -0.1    -0.2   -0.2    0.7     0.1   -0.1    -0.2   -0.2    1.0
                     Cashflow                0.1     0.7    0.2     0.0   -0.4    0.1     0.4    0.1     0.0   -0.3    0.1     1.0
                     Investment             -0.1     0.3    0.7     0.3    0.2   -0.1     0.2    0.3     0.2   -0.1   -0.1     0.2   1.0
                     Debt iss.              -0.1     0.1    0.2     0.4    0.0   -0.1     0.0    0.2     0.3    0.0   -0.1     0.0   0.3    1.0
                     q                      -0.2    -0.4    0.1     0.1    0.8   -0.2    -0.3    0.0     0.1    0.3   -0.2    -0.5   0.1    0.0    1.0
                                                       Table III
                                               Investment on investment
This table shows estimates of the following regression:

                       2                               2                                2
Investment i,a               β1,k Investment i,−a            β2,k Investment −i,a            β3,k Investment i,a                    i,a  i,a
                       X                               X                                X
           j,t = δ +                         p,t−k +                         p,t−k +                         p,−j,t−k + β4 Controls t + j,t .
                       k=0                             k=0                             k=0


where the dependent variable is investment (capital expenditures divided by last years assets) at year t for firm j which is
headquartered in economic area (EA) a and belongs to industry i. The key independent variables are the equal-weighted
average investment for a portfolio of firms in the same industry as the dependent variable, but outside our set of 20 economic
areas, Investment i,−a
                  p,t ; the equal-weighted investment for a portfolio of firms in the same area as the dependent variable, but
outside of industry i, Investment −i,a
                                  p,t ; and the equal-weighted investment for a portfolio of firms in the same area and industry
as the dependent variable (excluding the independent variable itself), Investment i,a  p,t . In addition to the contemporaneous
values of these regressors, lagged values are also included as specified. Additional regressors include year and area fixed effects
(Controls i,a
          j,t ). In every regression, standard errors are clustered by industry.



                                              (1)                (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)
                                          Investment         Investment      Investment       Investment     Investment     Investment
      Same industry/different area

      Investment (contemp.)                0.503∗∗∗                           0.508∗∗∗         0.386∗∗∗        0.353∗∗        0.354∗∗
                                            (3.43)                             (3.57)           (3.48)          (3.09)         (3.09)
      Investment (1 year lag)                                                                                  -0.011         -0.036
                                                                                                               (-0.29)        (-0.79)
      Investment (2 year lag)                                                                                                 -0.011
                                                                                                                              (-1.16)
      Different industry/same area

      Investment (contemp.)                                    0.186∗         0.231∗∗           0.211∗∗       0.190∗∗∗        0.188∗∗
                                                               (1.91)          (2.66)            (2.77)        (3.16)          (2.62)
      Investment (1 year lag)                                                                                   0.046         0.050∗∗
                                                                                                                (1.45)         (2.57)
      Investment (2 year lag)                                                                                                 -0.006
                                                                                                                              (-0.14)
      Same industry/same area

      Investment (contemp.)                                                                    0.183∗∗∗       0.167∗∗∗       0.158∗∗∗
                                                                                                (4.96)         (4.89)         (4.10)
      Investment (1 year lag)                                                                                  0.034∗        0.058∗∗∗
                                                                                                               (1.92)         (3.60)
      Investment (2 year lag)                                                                                                 -0.007
                                                                                                                              (-0.40)
      Constant                              -0.017             0.003          -0.022            -0.021          0.001        0.055∗∗∗
                                            (-0.80)            (0.16)         (-1.05)           (-1.05)         (0.08)        (6.44)
      Firm fixed effects                       X                  X              X                 X              X              X
      Area fixed effects                       X                  X              X                 X              X              X
      Year fixed effects                       X                  X              X                 X              X              X
      Industry clustering                      X                  X              X                 X              X              X
      Observations                           88673              88673          88673             88656          77871          68511
      R2                                     0.525              0.515          0.526             0.527          0.531          0.535
      t statistics in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                                        43
                                                       Table IV
                                                Investment-q regressions
This table shows estimates of the following regression:

                                          1                       1                       1
                                                                              −i,a
                   Investment i,a                     i,−a                                            i,a
                                          X                       X                       X
                              j,t = φ +         α1,k qp,t−k−1 +         α2,k qp,t−k−1 +         α3,k qp,−j,t−k−1 +
                                          k=0                     k=0                     k=0
                       1                             1                             1
                             α4,k Cashflow i,−a            α5,k Cashflow −i,a            α6,k Cashflow i,a
                       X                             X                             X
                                           p,t−k +                       p,t−k +                       p,−j,t−k +
                       k=0                           k=0                           k=0
                                       1                       1
                                                  i,a
                                                                     α8,k Cashflow i,a                 i,a  i,a
                                       X                       X
                                            α7,k qj,t−k−1 +                        j,t−k + α9 Controls t + j,t .
                                      k=0                      k=0


where the dependent variable is investment (capital expenditures divided by last years assets) at year t for firm j which is
                                                                                                      i,a
headquartered in economic area (EA) a and belongs to industry i. Regressors include firm i’s own q, qj,t−1 , defined as long-
term debt plus debt in current liabilities plus market equity all divided by current assets, and own cashflow, Cashflow i,a
                                                                                                                        j,t ,
defined as income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization normalized by last years assets. Other key
independent variables are the equal-weighted average lagged q and cashflow for a portfolio of firms in the same industry as
                                                                    i,−a
the dependent variable, but outside our set of 20 economic areas, qp,t−1 and Cashflow i,−a
                                                                                      p,t ; the equal-weighted lagged q and
                                                                                                          −i,a
cashflow for a portfolio of firms in the same area as the dependent variable, but outside of industry i, qp,t−1 and Cashflow −i,a
                                                                                                                             p,t ;
and the equal-weighted lagged q and cashflow for a portfolio of firms in the same area and industry as the dependent variable
                                               i,a
(excluding the independent variable itself), qp,−j,t−1  and Cashflow i,a
                                                                     p,−j,t . In addition to the contemporaneous values of these
regressors, lagged values are also included as specified. Additional regressors include year and area fixed effects (Controls i,a
                                                                                                                              j,t ).
All standard errors are clustered by industry.




                                                                      44
                                        Table IV
                                 Investment-q regressions


                                    (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)
                                Investment   Investment   Investment   Investment   Investment
Own firm

q (1 year lag)                   0.013∗∗∗     0.012∗∗∗     0.013∗∗∗     0.012∗∗∗     0.011∗∗∗
                                  (7.37)       (8.33)       (7.53)       (8.63)       (10.25)
     2 year lag                                                                       0.001
                                                                                      (1.17)
Cashflow                          0.050∗∗     0.048∗∗      0.049∗∗      0.047∗∗      0.040∗∗
                                   (2.83)      (3.00)       (2.83)       (3.00)       (2.75)
     1 year lag                                                                      0.027∗∗∗
                                                                                      (3.65)
Same industry/different area

q (1 year lag)                                 0.015∗                    0.014∗      0.010∗∗
                                               (2.02)                    (2.11)       (2.23)
     2 year lag                                                                       0.001
                                                                                      (0.67)
Cashflow (contemp.)                            0.205∗                    0.192∗       0.137∗
                                               (1.87)                    (1.88)       (1.94)
     1 year lag                                                                       0.078
                                                                                      (1.64)
Different industry/same area

q (1 year lag)                                              0.006        0.008∗       0.008∗
                                                            (1.22)       (1.83)       (1.92)
     2 year lag                                                                       0.001
                                                                                      (0.97)
Cashflow (contemp.)                                        0.100∗∗      0.105∗∗∗     0.074∗∗
                                                            (2.68)       (3.90)       (2.32)
     1 year lag                                                                      0.058∗∗
                                                                                      (2.21)
Same industry/same area

q (1 year lag)                                                           0.002        0.001
                                                                         (0.99)       (1.06)
     2 year lag                                                                       0.002
                                                                                      (1.55)
Cashflow                                                                0.022∗∗       0.014∗
                                                                         (2.54)       (1.91)
     1 year lag                                                                       0.010∗
                                                                                      (1.85)
Constant                          -0.012      -0.035∗      -0.017       -0.040∗       0.027
                                  (-0.88)     (-1.98)      (-1.05)      (-1.84)       (1.35)
Firm fixed effects                   X           X            X            X            X
Area fixed effects                   X           X            X            X            X
Year fixed effects                   X           X            X            X            X
Industry clustering                  X           X            X            X            X
Observations                       86676       86676        86676        86676        76360
R2                                 0.547       0.551        0.548        0.552        0.555
t statistics in parentheses
∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                              45
                                                                                 Table V
                                                                       Ruling out exogenous shocks
     Column 1 of panel A reports results where the dependent variable is the investment level for firms outside of the Consumer Non-durables industry (Fama-French 12 industry
     #1) in the Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Gainesville, GA-AL area and the independent variables are an industry control for the dependent variable, i.e., the equal-weighted average
     investment for a portfolio of firms in the same industry as the dependent variable, but outside our set of 20 economic areas, and a control for the areas dominant industry, i.e.,
     the equal-weighted average investment for a portfolio of firms in the Atlanta area non-durables industry. Similar regressions are reported in columns 2, 3, and 4 for the following
     area/industry pairings respectively: San Jose-San Francisco-Oakland, CA and Business Equipment (Fama-French 12 industry #6), Detroit-Warren-Flint, MI and Consumer
     Durables (Fama-French 12 industry #2), and Houston-Baytown-Huntsville, TX and Energy (Fama-French 12 industry #4). Column 5 includes pools the observations of columns
     1 through 4 and estimates a local dominant industry average effect including year fixed effects. Columns 6 and 7 rank firms each year by last years assets and then report
     results for firms with lagged assets less than last-year’s median assets (Small firms) and results for firms with lagged assets greater than the median (Big firms). All regressions
     exclude each area’s dominant industries from the left hand sides in the appropriate column. Panel B reports regressions similar to panel A, except instead of using the areas
     dominant industry as the area portfolio, in its place is used the “marketwide” dominant industry. For example, in column 1 instead of using the average value of the Atlanta
     area non-durables industry as a regressor we replace that with the equal-weighted average investment for a portfolio of firms in the non-durables industry, but outside our set
     of 20 economic areas.
     Panel A: Dominant industry investment by area


                                                                              (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)
                                                                            Atlanta       San Jose       Detroit       Houston       All 4 areas   Small firms     Big firms
                                                                          Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment
               Investment - Same industry/different area                   0.687∗∗∗       0.410∗∗∗       0.429∗∗       0.572∗∗∗       0.387∗∗∗       0.296∗∗        0.382∗∗∗
                                                                            (5.52)         (3.81)         (3.13)        (4.21)         (5.18)         (3.06)         (6.65)




46
               Investment - ATL dom. industry (Non-durables)               0.420∗∗∗
                                                                            (4.16)
               Investment - SF dom. industry (Business Equipment)                         0.327∗∗∗
                                                                                           (3.55)
               Investment - DET dom. industry (Durables)                                                 0.351∗∗∗
                                                                                                          (3.95)
               Investment - HOU dom. industry (Energy)                                                                 0.197∗∗∗
                                                                                                                        (4.84)
               Investment - Local dom. industry, avg. effect                                                                          0.177∗∗∗       0.153∗∗        0.162∗∗∗
                                                                                                                                       (3.92)         (2.57)         (3.21)
               Constant                                                     -0.003         0.016          0.006         -0.008        0.050∗∗∗        0.009         0.045∗∗∗
                                                                            (-0.29)        (1.76)         (0.61)        (-1.23)        (6.13)         (1.51)         (4.81)
               Firm fixed effects                                              X              X             X              X             X              X              X
               Year fixed effects                                                                                                        X              X              X
               Industry clustering                                             X              X             X              X             X              X              X
               Observations                                                  3033           4023          1973           3247          11757          6223           5534
               R2                                                            0.551          0.502         0.384          0.425         0.497          0.514          0.584
               t statistics in parentheses
               ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                                         Table V
                                                           Ruling out exogenous shocks - Cont’d
     Panel B: Dominant industry investment


                                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
                                                                          Atlanta     San Jose      Detroit     Houston     All 4 areas   Small firms    Big firms
                                                                        Investment   Investment   Investment   Investment   Investment    Investment    Investment
           Investment - Same industry/different area                     0.655∗∗∗     0.408∗∗∗     0.492∗∗∗     0.661∗∗∗     0.385∗∗∗      0.311∗∗∗      0.365∗∗∗
                                                                          (5.96)       (3.71)       (3.49)       (5.64)       (5.29)        (3.14)        (6.53)
           Investment - Non-durables (marketwide)                        0.743∗∗∗
                                                                          (3.59)
           Investment - Business Equipment (marketwide)                               0.497∗∗
                                                                                       (2.75)
           Investment - Durables (marketwide)                                                      0.296∗∗




47
                                                                                                    (2.31)
           Investment - Energy (marketwide)                                                                     0.139∗∗∗
                                                                                                                 (4.75)
           Investment - Local dom. industry, avg. effect (marketwide)                                                        0.120∗∗∗       0.118∗       0.118∗∗
                                                                                                                              (3.23)        (1.96)        (2.56)
           Constant                                                      -0.020        0.008        0.011       -0.003        0.006         0.008∗        0.012
                                                                         (-1.65)       (0.65)       (1.40)      (-0.36)       (0.94)        (1.99)        (1.19)
           Firm fixed effects                                               X            X            X            X            X             X             X
           Year fixed effects                                                                                                   X             X             X
           Industry clustering                                              X            X            X            X            X             X             X
           Observations                                                   3078         4023         2018         3247         12366         6543          5823
           R2                                                             0.550        0.501        0.383        0.420        0.493         0.512         0.581
           t statistics in parentheses
           ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                  Table VI
                                   Debt issuance and the collateral channel
Panel A of this table shows estimates of the following regression:

                      2                             2                             2
 Debt iss.i,a               λ1,k Debt iss.i,−a            λ2,k Debt iss.−i,a            λ3,k Debt iss.i,a                    i,a  i,a
                      X                             X                             X
          j,t = ι +                       p,t−k +                       p,t−k +                       p,−j,t−k + λ4 Controls t + j,t .
                      k=0                           k=0                           k=0


where the dependent variable is debt issuance (the change in total long-term debt plus the change in long-term debt due in one
year plus notes payable divided by last years assets) at year t for firm j which is headquartered in economic area (EA) a and
belongs to industry i. The key independent variables are the equal-weighted average debt issuance for a portfolio of firms in
the same industry as the dependent variable, but outside our set of 20 economic areas, Debt Iss.i,−a
                                                                                                  p,t ; the equal-weighted debt
issuance for a portfolio of firms in the same area as the dependent variable, but outside of industry i, Debt Iss.−i,a
                                                                                                                    p,t ; and the
equal-weighted debt issuance for a portfolio of firms in the same area and industry as the dependent variable (excluding the
independent variable itself), Debt Iss.i,a
                                        p,−j,t . In addition to the contemporaneous values of these regressors, lagged values are
also included as specified. Additional regressors include year and area fixed effects (Controls i,a
                                                                                                j,t ) In columns 7 through 10 firms
are sorted by the degree to which they are financially constrained. In columns 7 and 8 firms are sorted on the Kaplan-Zingales
(KZ) Index (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997). Firms with higher than median KZ rating, i.e. constrained firms, are included in
the column 7 sample, while firms with lower than median KZ rating, i.e. unconstrained firms, are included in the sample used
in column 8. In columns 9 and 10 firms are sorted by their payout ratio. Firms with lower than median payout ratios, i.e.
constrained firms, are included in the column 9 sample, while firms with higher than median payout ratios, i.e. unconstrained
firms, are included in the sample used in column 10.
Panel B reports estimates for

                                     −i,a                                                 −i,a
  Debt iss.i,a           i,−a                    i,a                    i,−a                                i,a
           j,t = υ + κ1 qp,t−1 + κ2 qp,t−1 + κ3 qp,−j,t−1 + κ4 Cashflow p,t + κ5 Cashflow p,t + κ6 Cashflow p,−j,t +
                                  −i,a
        κ7 Return i,−a                            i,a           i,a                  i,a              i,a              i,a  i,a
                  p,t + κ8 Return p,t + κ9 Return p,−j,t + κ10 qj,t−1 + κ11 Cashflow j,t + κ12 Return t,j κ13 Controls t + j,t .


where the dependent variable is debt issuance at year t for firm j. Columns 1 through 4 use total debt issuance as the dependent
variable and columns 5 and 6 use short-term and long-term debt issuance as the dependent variable, respectively. Regressors
                            i,a
include firm i’s own q, qj,t−1  , defined as the change in total long-term debt plus the change in long-term debt due in one year
plus notes payable long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities plus market equity all divided by current assets, own cashflow,
Cashflow i,a
          j,t , defined as income before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization normalized by last years assets,
and own excess return, Return i,a j,t . Other key independent variables are the equal-weighted average lagged q, cashflow, and
excess return for a portfolio of firms in the same industry as the dependent variable, but outside our set of 20 economic areas,
 i,−a
qp,t−1 , Cashflow i,−a                i,−a
                  p,t , and Return p,t ; the equal-weighted lagged q, cashflow, and excess return for a portfolio of firms in the
                                                                     −i,a
same area as the dependent variable, but outside of industry i, qp,t−1    , Cashflow −i,a              −i,a
                                                                                      p,t , and Return p,t ; and the equal-weighted
lagged q, cashflow, and excess return for a portfolio of firms in the same area and industry as the dependent variable (excluding
                                   i,a
the independent variable itself), qp,−j,t−1 , Cashflow i,a                  i,a
                                                       p,−j,t , and Return p,−j,t . Similar to Panel A, columns 5 through 8 report
results for sub-samples of firms sorted by degree of financial constraint as indicated by the KZ Index (columns 5 and 6) and
the payout ratio (columns 7 and 8). Additional regressors include year and area fixed effects (Controls i,a j,t ). All standard errors
are clustered by industry.




                                                                      48
                                                                          Table VI
                                                           Debt issuance and the collateral channel
     Panel A: Debt issuance on debt issuance

                                                  (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                         Kaplan-Zingales         Payout ratio
                                                                                                                       Uncons.     Cons.      Uncons.     Cons.
                                               Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.  Debt iss.   Debt iss. Debt iss.
               Same industry/different area

               Debt iss. (contemp.)            0.321∗∗∗                0.321∗∗∗    0.285∗∗∗    0.270∗∗∗    0.284∗∗∗    0.286∗∗∗    0.205∗∗∗   0.296∗∗∗    0.185∗∗∗
                                                (5.38)                  (5.45)      (6.13)      (8.47)      (7.84)      (4.86)      (3.96)     (6.55)      (3.14)
                    1 year lag                                                                  0.032       0.045       0.064      0.063∗      0.079       0.027
                                                                                                (1.14)      (1.66)      (0.99)     (1.84)      (1.14)      (0.78)
                    2 year lag                                                                             -0.091∗      -0.052     -0.084∗∗    -0.112     -0.039
                                                                                                           (-1.98)      (-0.61)     (-2.25)    (-1.53)    (-0.91)
               Different industry/same area

               Debt iss. (contemp.)                         0.125∗∗    0.127∗∗∗    0.112∗∗∗     0.063∗     0.078∗∗      0.095       0.048      0.119∗      0.033
                                                             (2.90)     (3.14)      (3.15)      (1.84)      (2.20)      (1.63)      (1.12)     (1.94)      (0.70)
                    1 year lag                                                                  0.060∗     0.087∗∗      0.083       0.091      0.134∗      0.071




49
                                                                                                (1.81)      (2.31)      (1.20)      (1.58)     (2.08)      (0.92)
                    2 year lag                                                                              -0.032      -0.004     -0.076      -0.058     -0.017
                                                                                                            (-1.02)     (-0.07)    (-1.16)     (-0.78)    (-0.33)
               Same industry/same area

               Debt iss. (contemp.)                                                0.087∗∗∗    0.062∗∗      0.058∗      0.028       0.070      0.039      0.038∗
                                                                                    (3.86)      (2.34)      (2.07)      (0.71)      (1.63)     (0.91)     (1.84)
                    1 year lag                                                                  0.022       0.020       -0.015     0.053∗      -0.011     0.031∗
                                                                                                (1.04)      (0.94)      (-0.29)    (2.10)      (-0.22)    (2.01)
                    2 year lag                                                                              0.029∗      0.026       0.028      0.047∗      0.017
                                                                                                            (2.02)      (1.67)      (1.76)     (1.93)      (0.68)
               Constant                        -0.138∗∗     -0.133∗∗   -0.137∗∗    -0.139∗∗    0.430∗∗∗    0.047∗∗∗    -0.402∗∗∗   0.036∗∗∗   -0.040∗∗∗    0.009
                                                (-2.55)      (-2.44)    (-2.55)     (-2.64)     (7.40)      (5.51)      (-39.96)    (5.67)     (-3.30)     (1.42)
               Firm fixed effects                  X           X          X           X           X           X           X           X          X           X
               Area fixed effects                  X           X          X           X           X           X           X           X          X           X
               Year fixed effects                  X           X          X           X           X           X           X           X          X           X
               Industry clustering                 X           X          X           X           X           X           X           X          X           X
               Observations                      88107       88107      88107       88083       77000       67473       34681       31905      32134       29656
               R2                                0.281       0.279      0.281       0.281       0.282       0.274       0.332       0.388      0.316       0.367
               t statistics in parentheses
               ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                          Table VI
                       Debt issuance and the collateral channel - Cont’d
Panel B: Debt issuance on determinants

                                    (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                                                   Kaplan-Zingales         Payout ratio
                                                                                 Uncons.     Cons.      Uncons.     Cons.
                                 Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.   Debt iss.  Debt iss.   Debt iss. Debt iss.
 Own firm

 q (1 year lag)                  0.016∗∗∗    0.015∗∗∗    0.016∗∗∗    0.016∗∗∗    0.014∗∗∗    0.015∗∗∗   0.017∗∗∗    0.008∗∗
                                  (6.83)      (7.14)      (6.86)      (7.31)      (7.06)      (6.52)     (5.96)      (2.76)
 Cashflow (contemp.)             -0.054∗∗    -0.054∗∗    -0.054∗∗    -0.055∗∗    -0.088∗∗∗   -0.018     -0.079∗∗∗    0.115
                                  (-2.66)     (-2.75)     (-2.66)     (-2.76)     (-4.96)    (-0.56)     (-4.51)     (1.65)
 Stock return (contemp.)          0.003∗      0.004∗      0.003∗      0.004∗      0.003       0.005     0.007∗∗     -0.008∗∗
                                  (1.85)      (1.89)      (1.87)      (1.89)      (1.21)      (1.45)     (2.53)      (-2.35)
 Same industry/different area

 q (1 year lag)                               0.001                   0.001       0.001       0.001      0.003       0.005
                                              (0.12)                  (0.16)      (0.15)      (0.22)     (0.54)      (0.81)
 Cashflow (contemp.)                          0.086                   0.073       0.029       0.098      -0.013      0.082
                                              (1.04)                  (0.86)      (0.38)      (1.31)     (-0.12)     (1.45)
 Stock return (contemp.)                      -0.005                  -0.006      -0.019∗    -0.003      0.005      -0.009
                                              (-0.55)                 (-0.67)     (-2.18)    (-0.26)     (0.49)     (-0.93)
 Different industry/same area

 q (1 year lag)                                           -0.002      -0.002      0.000      -0.004      -0.004      0.003
                                                          (-0.32)     (-0.30)     (0.02)     (-0.42)     (-0.45)     (0.73)
 Cashflow (contemp.)                                      0.006       0.008       -0.011      0.053      0.018       0.025
                                                          (0.10)      (0.14)      (-0.11)     (0.76)     (0.19)      (0.53)
 Stock return (contemp.)                                 -0.012∗     -0.013∗∗     -0.007     -0.026∗∗    -0.007     -0.029∗∗
                                                         (-2.18)      (-2.32)     (-0.57)     (-2.61)    (-0.87)     (-2.88)
 Same industry/same area

 q (1 year lag)                                                       0.000       0.000       0.003      -0.005∗     0.002
                                                                      (0.09)      (0.03)      (0.70)     (-1.89)     (0.48)
 Cashflow (contemp.)                                                  0.018      0.041∗∗     -0.008      0.016      -0.014
                                                                      (1.27)      (2.45)     (-0.34)     (0.66)     (-0.44)
 Stock return (contemp.)                                              0.000       0.005      -0.003      -0.005      0.004
                                                                      (0.09)      (0.79)     (-0.75)     (-1.13)     (0.49)
 Constant                          0.045      0.050       0.053       0.056      -0.248∗∗    0.309∗∗∗    0.107      0.028∗∗
                                   (0.27)     (0.30)      (0.32)      (0.33)      (-2.63)     (8.95)     (1.60)      (2.91)
 Firm fixed effects                  X          X           X           X           X           X          X           X
 Area fixed effects                  X          X           X           X           X           X          X           X
 Year fixed effects                  X          X           X           X           X           X          X           X
 Industry clustering                 X          X           X           X           X           X          X           X
 Observations                      86696      86696       86696       86686       46940       39412      43945       34420
 R2                                0.288      0.288       0.288       0.288       0.348       0.430      0.336       0.401
 t statistics in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                            50
                                                                           Table VII
                                                         Additional city controls and other robustness
     This table shows estimates of the following regression

                                                                         i,−a                −i,a                i,a                  i,a  i,a
                                      Investment i,a
                                                 j,t = δ + β1 Investment p,t + β2 Investment p,t + β3 Investment p,−j,t + β4 Controls t + j,t .


     , i.e., the same regression as in column 4 of Table 4 with the following changes: Columns 1 and 2 rank firms each year by last years total assets and then report results for firms
     with lagged total assets less than last-year’s median total assets (Small firms) and results for firms with lagged total assets greater than the median (Big firms). Column 3
     results are reported for this regression with the addition of the area wage per employee growth rate and population growth rate as regressors. Columns 4 and 5 report regression
     results conditional on low area wage per employee growth (i.e., area wage per employee growth rates less than the U.S. median), and high growth (i.e., growth higher than
     the U.S. median value). Columns 6 and 7 report similar results sorting on high and low area population growth rates. Columns 8 and 9 examine the effect of headquarter
     relocations. Both columns add to our basic investment equation interactions of the same area-different industry and same area-same industry portfolios with a dummy variable
     that is zero before a firm relocates to their current headquarter location, and one forever after their relocation. Column 8 reports results using the full sample and column 9
     reports results restricting the sample to only those firms which eventually change location. In every regression, standard errors are clustered by industry.


                                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)               (7)           (8)           (9)
                                                                                                    Low             High             Low              High
                                                     Small firms    Big firms                    wage growth     wage growth     pop. growth       pop. growth
                                                     Investment    Investment     Investment     Investment      Investment      Investment        Investment    Investment    Investment
      Investment - Same industry/different area        0.471∗∗       0.320∗∗∗      0.373∗∗∗        0.270∗∗         0.367∗∗∗        0.135∗∗          0.459∗∗∗      0.385∗∗∗       0.492∗∗∗
                                                        (2.76)        (4.07)        (3.51)          (2.32)          (3.49)          (2.23)           (4.61)        (3.52)         (6.06)
      Investment - Different industry/same area        0.175∗∗       0.229∗∗        0.132∗          0.046          0.200∗∗          -0.020           0.169∗∗       0.211∗∗        0.268
                                                        (2.87)        (2.25)        (2.18)          (0.60)          (2.31)          (-0.20)           (2.48)        (2.79)        (0.96)




51
      Investment - Same industry/same area             0.130∗        0.213∗∗∗      0.170∗∗∗        0.156∗∗∗        0.149∗∗∗         0.131∗          0.143∗∗∗      0.182∗∗∗        0.142
                                                       (2.10)         (4.71)        (4.75)          (3.12)          (4.29)          (2.16)           (4.20)        (5.05)         (1.21)
      Wage per employee growth rate                                                  0.078
                                                                                     (1.79)
      Population growth rate                                                       0.392∗∗∗
                                                                                    (6.54)
      Interaction - Different industry/same area                                                                                                                   0.023          0.066
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.21)         (0.65)
      Interaction - Same industry/same area                                                                                                                        0.017          0.013
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.33)         (0.09)
      Constant                                         0.015          -0.002        -0.022         0.025∗∗         0.042∗∗         0.058∗∗∗          -0.003        -0.021         -0.006
                                                       (0.28)         (-0.19)       (-1.14)         (2.28)          (2.56)          (5.34)           (-0.13)       (-1.05)        (-0.62)
      Firm fixed effects                                 X              X              X              X               X               X                X             X              X
      Area fixed effects                                 X              X              X              X               X               X                X             X              X
      Year fixed effects                                 X              X              X              X               X               X                X             X              X
      Industry clustering                                X              X              X              X               X               X                X             X              X
      Observations                                     47384          41369          87986          34186           53730           40090            47729         88656          3947
      R2                                               0.511          0.635          0.526          0.609           0.568           0.559            0.550         0.527          0.521
      t statistics in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                                     Table VIII
                                               Clustering alternatives
This table reports different industry/same area coefficient estimates for regression specifications used in previous tables varying
the level at which standard errors are clustered. Column 1 reports results clustering standard errors by industry – i.e., it reports
the same results as in Table 4A, column 8; Table 6, column 5; and Table 7A, column 6. Column 2 reports results using robust
standard errors, but no clustering. Columns 3 to 7 cluster standard errors by industry-area, year, firm, area, and area-year
respectively.


                                 (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
                             Clustering:    Clustering:   Clustering:    Clustering:    Clustering:    Clustering:    Clustering:
                              Industry        None        Ind.-Area         Year           Firm           Area        Area-Year
  Table 4A, column 6         Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment     Investment     Investment     Investment

  Investment (contemp.)        0.188**       0.188***       0.188***      0.188***       0.188***        0.188**       0.188***
                                (2.62)        (5.13)         (2.88)        (4.25)         (4.41)          (2.28)        (4.66)
       1 year lag              0.050**         0.050         0.050*         0.050          0.050          0.050          0.050
                                (2.57)        (1.22)         (1.78)        (1.08)         (1.27)          (1.47)        (1.19)
       2 year lag               -0.006        -0.006         -0.006        -0.006         -0.006          -0.006        -0.006
                               (-0.14)        (-0.18)        (-0.18)       (-0.16)        (-0.16)        (-0.16)        (-0.15)
  Table 6, column 5          Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment     Investment     Investment     Investment

  q (1 year lag)                0.008*       0.008***       0.008**       0.008***       0.008***         0.008        0.008***
                                (1.92)        (4.39)         (2.30)         (3.27)        (3.84)          (1.65)         (3.04)
       2 year lag               0.001          0.001         0.001          0.001          0.001           0.001         0.001
                                (0.97)        (0.65)         (0.50)         (0.49)        (0.58)          (0.53)         (0.57)
  Cashflow (contemp.)          0.074**       0.074***       0.074**       0.074***       0.074***        0.074**       0.074***
                                (2.32)        (4.00)         (2.49)         (3.22)        (3.49)          (2.41)         (3.25)
       1 year lag              0.058**       0.058***       0.058**        0.058**       0.058***         0.058*        0.058**
                                (2.21)        (3.28)         (2.12)         (2.02)        (2.99)          (1.94)         (2.41)
  Table 7A, column 6          Debt iss.      Debt iss.      Debt iss.     Debt iss.      Debt iss.      Debt iss.      Debt iss.

  Debt iss. (contemp.)         0.078**       0.078**        0.078**         0.078*         0.078*        0.078**        0.078*
                                (2.20)        (2.00)         (2.03)         (1.79)         (1.85)         (2.19)         (1.80)
       1 year lag              0.087**       0.087**        0.087**        0.087**        0.087**        0.087**        0.087**
                                (2.31)        (2.18)         (2.09)         (2.36)         (2.04)         (2.24)         (2.36)
       2 year lag               -0.032        -0.032         -0.032         -0.032         -0.032         -0.032         -0.032
                               (-1.02)       (-0.84)        (-0.88)        (-0.74)        (-0.78)        (-0.95)        (-0.96)
  t statistics in parentheses
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                                52
                                                   Table IX
                                          Varying industry definitions
This table reports different industry/same area coefficient estimates for regression specifications used in previous tables varying
samples. Column 1 reports the same results as in Tables 4 – 8 for comparison. Column 2 reports results using the Fama-French
17 industry classification to construct portfolios rather than the Fama-French 12 industry classification used previously, column
3 uses the Fama-French 48 industry classification to construct portfolios, column 4 uses the Hoberg-Phillips FIC 100 industry
classification to construct portfolios – this is a much smaller sample running from 1996 to 2008., and column 5 uses 2-digit SIC
codes to construct portfolios.


                                               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)
                                              FF12           FF17           FF48           HP         SIC-2 digit
                Table 4A, column 6         Investment     Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment

                Investment (contemp.)        0.188**        0.171*        0.281***       0.605***       0.283**
                                              (2.62)        (1.93)         (2.85)         (2.68)         (2.44)
                      1 year lag             0.050**         0.037         0.108*         -0.081         0.031
                                              (2.57)        (0.62)         (1.88)         (-0.56)        (0.84)
                      2 year lag              -0.006        0.031           0.087          0.256        0.088*
                                             (-0.14)        (0.96)         (1.29)         (1.37)         (1.70)
                Table 6, column 5          Investment     Investment     Investment    Investment     Investment

                q (1 year lag)                0.008*        0.007*         0.008*        0.012**         0.008
                                              (1.92)         (1.77)        (1.83)         (2.00)        (1.53)
                      2 year lag              0.001          0.000          0.001         -0.003        -0.002
                                              (0.97)         (0.10)        (0.61)        (-0.80)        (-0.78)
                Cashflow (contemp.)          0.074**        0.082**       0.152***        0.044        0.151***
                                              (2.32)         (2.22)        (3.75)         (0.64)        (3.02)
                      1 year lag             0.058**         0.014          0.020         -0.071         0.012
                                              (2.21)         (0.69)        (0.69)        (-0.79)        (0.42)
                Table 7A, column 6          Debt iss.      Debt iss.      Debt iss.      Debt iss.     Debt iss.

                Debt iss. (contemp.)         0.078**         0.047          0.112        0.236**         0.106
                                              (2.20)         (1.08)         (1.33)        (2.21)         (1.48)
                      1 year lag             0.087**         0.085         0.137**       0.242**        0.101**
                                              (2.31)         (1.51)         (2.11)        (2.45)         (2.14)
                      2 year lag              -0.032         0.035          0.086         0.047          0.062
                                             (-1.02)         (0.96)         (1.44)        (0.39)         (0.97)
                t statistics in parentheses
                ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                               53
