NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAUSAL EFFECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CATASTROPHE ON LONG-RUN ECONOMIC GROWTH:
EVIDENCE FROM 6,700 CYCLONES
Solomon M. Hsiang
Amir S. Jina
Working Paper 20352
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20352

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

We thank Jesse Anttila-Hughes, Scott Barrett, Chris Blattman, Marshall Burke, Christopher Costello,
Anthony Fisher, Joshua Graff Zivin, Michael Greenstone, Michael Hanemann, Hilary Hoynes, Meha
Jain, Benjamin Jones, David Kanter, Gordon McCord, Kyle Meng, Edward Miguel, Daiju Narita,
Matthew Neidell, Suresh Naidu, Serena Ng, Michael Oppenheimer, Billy Pizer, Valerie Ramey, Ricardo
Reis, Jeffrey Sachs, Wolfram Schlenker, Glenn Sheriff, Thomas Sterner, Jan von der Goltz, Gernot
Wagner, Reed Walker, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Environmental Defense Fund,
EPA, IBM Research, IZA, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, NBER, Princeton University, UC Berkeley,
UC San Diego, the University of San Francisco, the University of Lausanne, and the University of
Zurich for discussions and suggestions. This work was funded in part by a grant from the Center for
International Business Education and Research at Columbia University and a Postdoctoral Fellowship
in Science, Technology and Environmental Policy at Princeton University. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Solomon M. Hsiang and Amir S. Jina. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence
From 6,700 Cyclones
Solomon M. Hsiang and Amir S. Jina
NBER Working Paper No. 20352
July 2014
JEL No. H87,O11,O44,Q51,Q54,R11
ABSTRACT
Does the environment have a causal effect on economic development? Using meteorological data,
we reconstruct every country's exposure to the universe of tropical cyclones during 1950-2008. We
exploit random within-country year-to-year variation in cyclone strikes to identify the causal effect
of environmental disasters on long-run growth. We compare each country's growth rate to itself in
the years immediately before and after exposure, accounting for the distribution of cyclones in preceding
years. The data reject hypotheses that disasters stimulate growth or that short-run losses disappear
following migrations or transfers of wealth. Instead, we find robust evidence that national incomes
decline, relative to their pre-disaster trend, and do not recover within twenty years. Both rich and
poor countries exhibit this response, with losses magnified in countries with less historical cyclone
experience. Income losses arise from a small but persistent suppression of annual growth rates spread
across the fifteen years following disaster, generating large and significant cumulative effects: a 90th
percentile event reduces per capita incomes by 7.4% two decades later, effectively undoing 3.7 years
of average development. The gradual nature of these losses render them inconspicuous to a casual
observer, however simulations indicate that they have dramatic influence over the long-run development
of countries that are endowed with regular or continuous exposure to disaster. Linking these results
to projections of future cyclone activity, we estimate that under conservative discounting assumptions
the present discounted cost of "business as usual" climate change is roughly $9.7 trillion larger than
previously thought.

Solomon M. Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu
Amir S. Jina
School of International and Public Affairs,
Columbia University in the City of New York,
New York, NY 10027
asj2122@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The influence of environmental conditions on global patterns of economic development is the subject of
continuing debate, primarily because identifying these causal effects is challenging. We examine how
a specific type of environmental disaster, tropical cyclones, affect countries’ growth in the long-run.
We construct a novel data set of all countries’ exposure to all cyclones on the planet using ground-,
ship-, aerial-, and satellite-based meteorological observations combined with information on cyclone
physics. We exploit natural random variation in the formation, path, and intensity of each storm as
a source of exogenous within-country variation in disaster exposure, allowing us to identify cyclones’
long-run impact on economic growth. Applying a difference-in-differences approach, we compare each
country’s growth rate to itself in the years immediately before and after exposure while accounting for
the distribution of lagged effects imposed by cyclones strikes in preceding years. We obtain estimates
that are both economically large and statistically precise: each additional meter per second1 of annual
nationally-averaged wind exposure lowers per capita economic output 0.37% twenty years later. When
we explore the generalizability of this result, we find that it is “globally valid” in the sense that it
holds around the world, appearing in each region independently and for countries of different income
and geographic size.
The structure and impact of short-run macroeconomic disasters has been carefully studied (e.g.
Barro (2006); Jones and Olken (2008); Gabaix (2012)) and recent empirical work has begun to identifying the long-run growth effects of specific shocks, such as currency crises, banking crises, political
crises and civil wars (Cerra and Saxena (2008)), financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)), tax
increases (Romer and Romer (2010)), and changes in temperature (Dell, Jones and Olken (2012)).
By assembling the first objective and comprehensive history of cyclone exposure, we build on these
earlier results to provide the first global estimates of the effect of large-scale environmental disaster
on long-run growth. The economic response to environmental disaster shares many features with the
response to these previously studied shocks, in particular all of these shocks have negative long-run
effects on income. In Table 1 we compare the magnitude and duration of these effects on income,
including cyclone impacts from this study. The national income loss associated with a one standard
deviation cyclone event is comparable in magnitude to loss associated with a tax increase equal to
1% of GDP, a currency crisis, or a political crises in which executive constraints are weakened. The
income loss associated with a 90th-percentile cyclone event is comparable to losses from a banking
crisis. The top percentile of cyclone events have losses that are larger and endure longer than any of
these previously studied shocks. These results suggest that in addition to human-caused political and
financial crises, large-scale natural environmental disasters play a important role in shaping patterns
of global economic activity.
A key feature of the macroeconomic response to cyclones is that incomes do not recover in the
long-run, defined here as the twenty years after a storm. This fact has profound implications. Unlike
relatively rare financial crises, political crises, and civil wars, cyclones occur regularly and repeatedly,
often striking the same population as prior events because the location of storms are determined by
geophysical constraints. Because incomes do not recover after a cyclone, repeatedly exposing the same
population to frequent storms results in an accumulation of income losses over time, effectively lowering
11

m/s = 3.6 km per hour ≈ 2.24 miles per hour.

2

Table 1: Effects of cyclones and other shocks to income per capita
Event Type
Temperature increase (+1◦ C)*1
Civil war2
Tax increase (+1% GDP)**3
1 standard deviation cyclone
Currency crisis2
Weakening executive constraints 2
90th percentile cyclone
Banking crisis2
Financial crisis4
99th percentile cyclone
*Poor countries only. **USA only.

†

Effect on
Income

Observed
After

In-Sample
Probability

−1.0%
−3.0%
−3.1%
−3.6%
−4.0%
−4.0%
−7.4%
−7.5%
−9.0%
−14.9%

10 yrs
10 yrs
4 yrs
20 yrs
10 yrs
10 yrs
20 yrs
10 yrs
2 yrs
20 yrs

6.4%
6.3%
†
16.8%
14.4%
34.7%
3.7%
5.8%
15.7%
<0.1%
0.6%

Number of quarters with any tax change.

1

Dell, Jones & Olken (AEJ: Macro, 2012), 2 Cerra & Saxena (AER, 2008), 3 Romer & Romer
(AER, 2010), 4 Reinhart & Rogoff (AER, 2009)

that population’s average growth rate relative to a cyclone-free counterfactual. Mathematically, the
effect of increasing the average exposure to cyclones is very similar to increasing the rate of capital
depreciation in standard growth models. Quantitatively, the in-sample probability of cyclones is most
similar to that of banking crises (Table 1), which also slow growth when they occur repeatedly in the
same country.
This result informs two important literatures. First, the role of geography in economic growth has
been widely debated, with some authors suggesting that geographic condition may matter because
they determine the “initial conditions” of an economy by affecting its institutions (Acemoglu, Johnson
and Robinson (2002), Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2004)) while other authors suggest that
geographic conditions determine the “boundary conditions” of an economy throughout its development,
perhaps by affecting the health of a population (Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999); Kremer and
Miguel (2004)) or the costs of trade (Frankel and Romer (1999)). Our results do not reject any
of these theories, but they do provide empirical evidence that repeated exposure to cyclones is a
specific boundary condition to development that, alongside institutional and capital factors, may be
quantitatively important in certain contexts.
Second, the economic impact and optimal management of global climate change is heavily researched with strong theoretical foundations (Nordhaus (1996); Stern (2008); Weitzman (2009); Tol
(2009); Heal (2009)) but less satisfying empirical grounding (Pindyck (2013)). Prior work has focused
on temperature’s effect on agriculture (e.g. Schlenker and Roberts (2009)), health (e.g. Deschênes,
Greenstone, and Guryan (2009)), labor (e.g. Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)), energy (e.g. Deschênes
and Greenstone (2011)), social conflict (e.g. Hsiang, Burke, and Miguel (2013)), and growth generally (e.g. Dell, Jones and Olken (2012)). Yet, the growth impact of tropical cyclones has not been
considered in previous assessments of climate change. It is expected that the frequency and intensity
of cyclones will change in response to climate change (Knutson et al. (2010); Camargo and Hsiang
(2014)), which our results indicate may have important economic consequences.

3

To identify the growth effect of tropical cyclones, we exploit random, within-country, year-to-year
variation in the formation, path, and intensity of cyclones that is driven by stochastic ocean and
atmospheric conditions. We apply the difference-in-differences approach developed by Deschênes and
Greenstone (2007) whereby we identify the effect of storms using the residual variations in both cyclone
exposure and growth that remain after country fixed effects, country-specific trends, and year fixed
effects have absorbed average cross-sectional correlations and trends in both variables.
By including our physical measures of cyclone exposure in a flexible and robust model of growth,
we are able to recover the within-country long-run effect of cyclones with precision. We find that GDP
growth rates are depressed for the fifteen years that follow a cyclone strike, causing the trajectory of
long-run income to diverge significantly from its pre-disaster trend. Within the twenty years following
a cyclone there is no rebound in growth, so affected national incomes remain permanently lower than
their disaster-free counterfactual. Our conclusion that no recovery occurs is robust, passing numerous
specification and data checks. Furthermore, this result is strikingly general since we obtain similar
estimates for marginal effects independently in each major cyclone region, in response to both large
and small cyclone events, in countries of high and low income, and in countries of all different sizes.
Our interpretation that these effects are causal is strengthened by a series of randomization procedures
where we demonstrate that assigning the exact timing of specific cyclone events to correct countries
is essential for obtaining our result—it is extremely unlikely that these findings could be a spurious
artifact of global cross-sectional correlations or trends in growth. Furthermore, the long-run response
of alternative macroeconomic measures corroborate this central finding. Interestingly, we find evidence
that the effects of cyclones are largest in countries with less historical cyclone experience and smaller in
more experienced countries. We interpret this finding as evidence that frequently exposed populations
adapt to their local cyclone-climate by undertaking costly investments that partially insulate their
economies from cyclones (Hsiang and Narita (2012)).
The effect of cyclones on growth is both large and persistent, causing it to exert substantial influence
over global patterns of economic development. A one standard deviation in a year’s cyclone exposure
lowers GDP by 3.6 percentage points twenty years later, setting an average country back by almost
two years of growth. For countries that are infrequently exposed to cyclones, this effect has only minor
long-run implications as an average country’s GDP is likely to grow by 50 percentage points during that
period. However, tropical cyclone climates are a geographic feature of countries that are determined
by oceanic and atmospheric patterns, so some countries are endowed with substantially higher levels of
exposure than others. Because the effects of cyclone strikes do not fade with time, those countries that
are repeatedly exposed to cyclones suffer from an income penalty that grows with each event. Thus,
a cyclone-prone climate lowers a country’s long-term growth rate substantially; however, because the
onset of cyclone-induced losses is gradual, there is no obvious feature in its GDP series that a casual
observer would be likely to notice.
To develop a sense of how important cyclones might be for determining global patterns of long-run
growth, we simulate “counterfactual” GDP series where the effect of each country’s cyclone history
is artificially removed. While this approach generates only a coarse partial-equilibrium estimate for a
cyclone-climate’s total long-run effect, our simulations indicate that regular disaster exposure plays a
major role in determining national income growth in regions where these storms are frequent since the

4

cyclone-climate of many countries cost them several percentage points in their average annual growth
rate. Within heavily exposed regions, we find that these simulated losses to cyclones explain roughly
a quarter of the cross-country variation in long-run growth. For example, our results predict that
the cyclone climates of China and the Philippines (neighbors separated by only 380 miles) generate a
6.2 percentage point difference in their average annual growth rates, when the observed difference in
actual growth is 5.6 percentage points. Aggregating these simulation results globally, we estimate that
the 4,174 cyclone-by-country events that occurred between 1950-2008 had the total effect of slowing
the annual growth rate of World GDP by roughly 1.27% during the period 1970-2008. All of these
simulation results should be interpreted with caution, as it is of course impossible to directly test if these
estimated effects would manifest should all cyclones disappear from the planet—but they nonetheless
force us to carefully consider the potential centrality of environmental disasters in determining both
the distribution and quantity of global wealth.
We conclude by evaluating how these results alter our understanding of the social cost of anthropogenic climate change. We first develop a theoretical framework for computing the present discounted
value of growth trajectories that are permanently altered by a changing cyclone climate. We then apply
our estimates to this framework, combining them with future projections from the scientific literature,
to compute the cost of future changes in the global tropical cyclone climate. We find that accounting for the long-run growth effects of a changing cyclone climate substantially alters the global cost
of climate change under “business as usual.” For example, we estimate that the present discounted
value2 (PDV) of losses rise by 6% of current GDP for the United States, 17% of GDP for Mexico, and
83% of GDP for the Philippines. Globally, accounting for this novel pathway raises the PDV of future
losses by roughly $9.7 trillion (13.8% of current World GDP). For comparison, we note that Nordhaus
(2008) estimates that the total PDV of optimal global climate policy is $5 trillion (in comparison to
“no regulation”, using a similar discount rate) which costs $2 trillion to implement, for a net gain of
$3 trillion – with $17 trillion in residual damages.
The remainder of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we provide background on tropical cyclones
and the economic impact of natural disasters. In Section 3, we describe our construction of a global data
file describing cyclone exposure for each 1◦ × 1◦ pixel of the planet and how these data are collapsed to
match macro-economic data. In Section 4 we explain and evaluate our econometric model. In Section 5
we present our main results for growth, numerous robustness checks, tests for spatial spillovers, results
for non-growth outcomes, and evidence of adaptation. We then consider the implications of these
result through simulations of cyclone-free growth (for comparison to recent history) and calculations
for the expected cost of climate change incurred by altering the global cyclone distribution. In Section
6 we conclude with a discussion of policy implications.

2

Background

Economics of natural disasters
The notion that environmental disasters might have permanent long-run effects on income is not obvious, in part because it is frequently suggested that these events elicit economic responses fundamentally
2 We

use a 5% discount rate.

5

disaster

GDP per capita

“Creative destruction”
“Build back better”

“Recovery to trend”
baseline
trend
“No recovery”

Time
Figure 1: Four hypotheses, proposed in the literature, that describe the long-term evolution of GDPpc
following a natural disaster.
different from human-caused macroeconomic disasters (e.g. banking crises). In the absence of clear
empirical evidence, prior literature has converged on four competing hypotheses that describe how
economic output might respond to environmental catastrophes in the long-run, however no study has
credibly falsified any of the four and the actual behavior of economies is widely disputed (Field et al.
(2012)). Figure 1 schematically illustrates these four hypotheses:
1. The “creative destruction” hypothesis argues that disasters may temporarily stimulate
economies to grow faster because demand for goods and services increase as populations replace
lost capital, because inflowing international aid and attention following disaster may promote
growth, or because environmental disruption stimulates innovation (Skidmore & Toya (2002)).
This notion is partially motivated by the observation that construction industries often exhibit
short-lived (1-2 year) increases in output after catastrophes (Belasen and Polachek (2008); Hsiang
(2010); Deryugina (2011)), but it is unknown if this transient sector-specific response has enduring impact on the broader economy.
2. The “build back better” hypothesis argues that growth may suffer initially, since lives may
be lost and productive capital destroyed, however the gradual replacement of lost assets with
modern units has a positive net effect on long-run growth since the capital that is destroyed in
a disaster may be older and outdated (Cuaresma, Hlouskova and Obersteiner (2008); Hallegatte
and Dumas (2009)). This hypothesis might be true if firms do not upgrade their capital efficiently
in the absence of disasters and if the productivity benefits of post-disaster capital upgrading
exceed the productivity losses imposed by the disaster in the long run.
3. The “recovery to trend” hypothesis argues that growth should suffer for a finite period, but
that it should eventually rebound to abnormally high levels, causing income levels to converge
back to their pre-disaster trend. It is argued that this rebound should occur because the marginal

6

product of capital will rise when capital and labor become relatively scarce after a disaster (due to
destruction and mortality), causing individuals and wealth to migrate into devastated locations
until output recovers to the regional trend (Yang (2008); Strobl (2011)). The underlying logic
of this hypothesis has mixed empirical support: disasters do tend to trigger transfers of wealth
into the affected region (Strömberg (2007); Yang (2008); Deryugina (2011)), however population
inflows occur roughly as often as outflow or no migration (Smith et al. (2006); Vigdor (2008);
Belasen and Polachek (2009); Hornbeck (2012); Strobl (2011); Boustan, Kahn and Rhode (2012);
Bohra-Mishra, Oppenheimer, and Hsiang (2014)). The net effect of these wealth and population
reallocations on long-run growth is unknown.
4. Finally, the “no recovery” hypothesis argues that disasters slow growth by either destroying
productive capital directly or by destroying durable consumption goods (e.g. homes) that are replaced using funds that would otherwise be allocated to productive investments—but no rebound
occurs because the various recovery mechanisms above fail to outweigh the direct negative effect
of losing capital3 (Field et al. (2012)). The latter effect may be particularly important if, in
the wake of disaster, consumption falls so that the marginal utility of consumption rises enough
that post-catastrophe consumption becomes preferable relative to investment (Anttila-Hughes
and Hsiang (2011)). According to this hypothesis, post-disaster output may continue to grow in
the long run, however it remains permanently lower than its pre-disaster trajectory.
Recent reviews of the literature argue that the long-run effects of disasters remain a critical open
question because recent attempts have not convincingly demonstrated whether any of the four hypotheses above can be rejected or hold generally (Cavallo and Noy (2011); Kellenberg and Mobarak
(2011); Field et al. (2012)). This failure to eliminate hypotheses is theoretically unsatisfying, however
we resolve this indeterminacy by using better data. The quality of prior estimates are affected by
the endogenous nature of their independent variables: self-reported disaster counts and losses that
are usually from the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT). The quality and completeness of these
self-reported measures are known to depend heavily on the economic and political conditions in a
country (Kahn (2005), Strömberg (2007), Kellenberg and Mobarak (2008), Noy (2009), Hsiang and
Narita (2012)), factors which also affect growth and thus might confound these results.
We overcome the challenges of omitted variables bias and endogenous disaster reporting by developing a novel data file describing year-to-year variation in each country’s physical exposure to disaster.
To do this, we focus on tropical cyclones, the class of natural disaster that includes hurricanes, typhoons, cyclones and tropical storms4 , and reconstruct every storm observed on the planet during
1950-2008. Unlike the self-reported statistics contained in EM-DAT, our objective measures of wind
speed exposure and energy dissipation are fully exogenous, constructed using physical parameters and
meteorological observations, so they are unlikely to be influenced by economic behavior or political
3 In addition to the impact of capital losses, it is also thought that disasters may generate enduring economic impacts by
permanently altering the preferences of affected individuals (e.g. Cameron and Shah (2013)), by motivating populations
to irreversibly disinvest in durable human or physical capital (e.g. Maccini and Yang (2009)) or by triggering political
actions that have lasting economic consequences (e.g. Healy and Malhotra (2009)).
4 Tropical cyclones are known as “tropical storms” or “hurricanes” in the Atlantic Ocean, “typhoons” in the Pacific
Ocean, and “cyclones” in the Indian Ocean. Here, we refer to them as “tropical cyclones” or simply “cyclones.”

7

actions within each country5 .

Tropical cyclones
Constructing a physical index of disaster exposure is essential to obtaining reliable inferences for their
causal effect. However, because building a physical model to produce these indices is difficult, we
focus on only a single type of disaster: tropical cyclones. We estimate that roughly 35% of the global
population is seriously affected by tropical cyclones, making them one of the most broadly relevant
forms of disaster, in addition to being one of the most costly (Bevere, Rogers and Grollimund (2011)).
Tropical cyclones are large, violent and fast-moving storms that form over the oceans and cause
physical damage and loss of life via intense winds, heavy rainfall, and ocean surges. We focus on tropical
cyclones both because they are common and because variation in their timing, strength and location
allow us to identify their effects using quasi-experimental techniques (Holland (1986), Freedman (1991),
Angrist and Pischke (2008)). Tropical cyclones are considered “rapid onset” events6 , usually arriving,
affecting and passing a given location within one or two days. They are unambiguously recognizable
by meteorologists and are well defined in space, with an intense core roughly 100-200 kilometers
across. Tropical cyclones’ formation, over warm oceans, and trajectory, which may extend thousands
of kilometers, are stochastic and difficult to predict more than a few days in advance. Thus, cyclone
exposure at a specific location varies exogenously in its timing, intensity and duration. This randomness
is essential to our analysis, since our ability to identify the causal effect of cyclones relies on the
unpredictable year-to-year variation in the intensity of each country’s cyclone exposure (Deschênes
and Greenstone (2007)).

3

Data

Our central innovation is our construction of a novel data file describing the physical exposure of all
countries to all known cyclones during 1950-2008, which we link to standard macroeconomic datasets.
Because macroeconomic data are available at the country-by-year level but we initially compute cyclone
data at a 0.1◦ × 0.1◦ global grid, a secondary contribution is developing a formal framework for
aggregating spatially granular environmental exposure data to coarser country-by-year units that can
be matched to macroeconomic data.
Summary statistics for both geophysical and economic data, aggregated to the country-by-year
level, are presented in Table 2.
5 Our approach is identical to the desirable method outlined (but not implemented) by Noy (2009), who used EM-DAT
data as an independent variable and assumed that it was not determined endogenously:

“Without the exogeneity assumption, the only way to infer causality from our specifications would entail
finding an appropriate instrument for the initial disaster impact (i.e., an index of disaster magnitude that is
completely uncorrelated with any economic indicator). Regrettably, we did not find such an instrument....
The exogeneity issue can potentially be fully overcome by producing an index of disaster intensity that
depends only on the physical characteristics of the disaster (e.g., area affected, wave height, or storm
circumference). The collection of such data from primary sources and the construction of a comprehensive
index for the all the different disaster types are beyond the scope of this paper but may be worth pursing
in future research.” - p. 224
6 In

contrast to “slow onset” hazards, such as drought.

8

Table 2: Summary statistics for key variables in cyclone-exposed countries
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min.

Max.

Economic Characteristics
Log GDPpc (Penn World Tables)
Log GDPpc (World Development Indicators)
Population (thousands)
Small Island Developing State dummy
Below median income (1970) dummy

8.093
7.366
32864
0.306
0.643

1.235
1.462
124191
0.461
0.479

4.913
4.084
7
0
0

11.637
10.876
1317066
1
1

4914
4248
6017
7905
5508

Physical Characteristics
Tropical cyclones
Wind speed (meters per second)
Energy (standard deviations)
Log(land area)
Latitude (degrees north of Equator)

5.869
0.386
9.606
8.319

9.379
1.271
3.984
19.598

0
0
-1.386
-41.577

78.344
19.41
16.101
59.388

7905
7905
7905
7905

†

N

† The

standard deviation of standardized energy is not equal to one because these summary statistics are computed
for exposed countries only.

Tropical cyclone data
We expand on the approach of Hsiang (2010) and Hsiang and Narita (2012) to measure each location’s
history of cyclone exposure. We combine a database of ground, ship, aerial, and satellite-based observations with estimates for the distribution of winds within each cyclone at each moment in time to
reconstruct what individuals on the ground would have experienced as each cyclone passed over them.
We then use the micro-economic findings of Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) to provide insight into
how we may collapse this spatially explicit data over countries of various sizes into scale-invariant
measures that are appropriate for econometric analysis of economic growth, another scale-invariant
measure.
Reconstructing a global history of tropical cyclone exposure
We generate measures of tropical cyclone incidence by reconstructing the wind field for every cyclone
in the International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS) database (Knapp et
al. (2009)), the most complete global database of tropical cyclone observations7 . IBTrACS merges
tropical cyclone data collected from weather monitoring agencies and scientists around the world, who
in turn have collected information on the intensity and position of tropical cyclones from ground, ship,
aerial, and satellite based observations. For this analysis, we use IBTrACS records for 6,712 storms
observed during 1950–2008. The completeness of this record is considered strongest since the late
1970’s when satellite surveillance provided reliable monitoring of storms because changing patterns of
human activity on the surface have raised concerns that earlier portions of the record are incomplete.
For example, the opening of the Panama Canal in 1915 and World War II both substantially altered
the spatial distribution of trans-Atlantic boat traffic, which in turn changed the likelihood that midocean cyclones would be encountered and reported by ships (Vecchi and Knutson (2008)). However,
7 These

data are publicly available through the National Climate Data Center at http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/ibtracs/
index.php where they are described in detail.

9

Total wind speed at surface
(meters per second)

Maximum azimuthal wind speed = 37.9 m/s
Eastward translational velocity = 1 m/s
Northward translational velocity = 5 m/s

50
40
30
20
10
0
300
200
100

300
200

0
kilometers North

100
100

0
100

200
200
300

kilometers East

300

Figure 2: An example of the wind model used in the LICRICE model to reconstruct surface-level
exposure to tropical cyclone winds. This particular example is a Category 1 storm traveling northnortheast.
we do not think these changes substantially bias the portions of the record that we utilize, since we
are primarily concerned with economic activity over land and land-based observations of these storms
are very likely more reliable prior to the satellite era.
IBTrACS provides only limited information regarding the state of each storm, which we transform
into economically meaningful measures of exposure using an improved version of the Limited Information Cyclone Reconstruction and Integration for Climate and Economics (LICRICE) model first
applied in Hsiang (2010) for the more limited Caribbean Basin context. IBTrACS reports the location
of a cyclone’s center, its minimum central surface air pressure, and its maximum sustained surface
winds every six hours. Taken alone, this sequence of point-wise observations allows researchers to plot
the trajectory of a storm’s center and it’s core intensity on a map, but it is difficult to infer the exposure
of national economies to these events using only this single line. For example, the recorded trajectory
of Hurricane Allen in 1980 completely missed the national boundaries of Haiti (i.e. Allen never made
“landfall” in Haiti) but it would be a mistake to conclude that Haiti was not exposed to the storm:
Hurricane Allen passed along the southern coast of Haiti, side-swiping Port-au-Prince, causing $400
million (1980 USD) in damage, destroying 60% of the nation’s coffee crop and leaving 835,000 people
homeless (Longshore (2009)). Thus, to accurately capture the exposure of economies to cyclones, we
reconstruct the winds that individuals and assets on the surface would have been exposed to rather
than simply tracking each storm’s center. LICRICE does this by estimating the instantaneous wind
field within the storm at each moment in time based on interpolations of the 6-hourly observations
recorded in IBTrACS (see Figure 2 for an example). The structure of the wind field within each storm
is based on (1) a statistical prediction for the size of the storm’s inner core (known as the “eye”) where
the statistical model is fitted to detailed observations from aircraft reconnaissance missions that fly
through a storm’s center; (2) a structural model of the surface winds within a cyclone vortex that is

10

70
Hour: 60

Hour: 72

Hour: 84

Hour: 96

Hour: 108

60

40

30
Hour: 120

Hour: 132

Hour: 144

Hour: 156

Hour: 168

meters per second

50

20

10

0

Figure 3: An example LICRICE reconstruction of location-specific tropical cyclone maximum wind
speed exposure throughout the evolution of Super Typhoon Joan as it made landfall over the Philippines in October of 1970.
scaled to the size estimate in (1) and the intensity measures from IBTrACS; and (3) the speed that
the storm is translating over the surface. Using these reconstructed estimates for the wind field at
each moment in time, LICRICE then integrates the exposure that pixels on the surface would have
experienced during the life of the storm (see Figure 3 for an example).
We reconstruct wind exposure indices at each 0.1◦ × 0.1◦ pixel between 48◦ N–48◦ S latitude for
all 6,712 storms in the IBTrACS database during 1950–2008. This involves interpolating among the
191,822 points that represent storm-specific observations. Figure 4 displays this new data set of wind
exposure for all points on Earth for every year in the sample.
To provide a useful point-wise summary statistic of this new data, we average pixel-level exposure
across all 59 years of data for each pixel. This recovers the expected experience at each pixel, which
we term the “cyclone-climate” of that pixel and display in Figure 5. Cyclone exposure is not uniformly
distributed around the planet, but instead it is concentrated in coastal countries in the tropics and
middle latitudes. Countries very near the equator, such as Singapore, are not exposed to cyclones
because the storms curve away from the equator as they conserve angular moment. Also, countries on
the eastern coast of continents (eg. Madagascar) are generally more exposed than countries on western
coasts (eg. Nigeria) because tropical cyclones are driven towards land by the westward blowing winds
that dominate atmospheric circulations over regions where these storms form.
In principle, it is possible to develop numerous measures of wind exposure. Here we utilize two
wind indices, based on climate physics, that summarize cumulative cyclone wind exposure in different
ways. Each index has its own strengths and weaknesses.
The first measure is a power dissipation density index (hereafter “energy”), first developed in
Hsiang (2010), which describes the total quantity of energy that a storm dissipates at the surface
11

Figure 4: Global tropical cyclone exposure displayed as maximum wind speed for each pixel, for each
year in the dataset.
as it passes over a location8 . Storms with more intense winds dissipate more energy, as do storms
that move more slowly over a location. The power dissipation density index is an intuitive measure
for aggregating exposure across storm events or across pixels within a country because energy is a
conserved physical quantity, making it a sensible value to sum across events. However, the units are
the relatively unintuitive meters-cubed per seconds-squared (m3 /s2 ), so we standardize its units for
expositional and notational convenience.
The second index of cyclone exposure is the maximum wind speed (hereafter “wind speed”) experienced over the course of all storms in a given year, which was first introduced in Hsiang and Narita
(2012). Measuring incidence with maximal wind exposure is appealing because most rigid materials
used to construct durable capital fail catastrophically at a critical level of stress, so only the maximum
wind speed is essential for predicting whether capital will be heavily degraded9 . Wind speed has the
8 This measure is related to “accumulated cyclone energy” (ACE) and the “power dissipation index” (PDI) which are
commonly used in the field of meteorology (Emanuel (2005)).
9 This idea was first discussed in the economics literature by Nordhaus (2010).

12

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

36

38

meters per second

Figure 5: Global tropical cyclone exposure climatology derived from LICRICE. Colors denote the
average (across years) maximum wind speed for all tropical cyclone events during 1950-2008. See
Figure 4 for year-by-year data.
additional benefit that it is measured in the physically intuitive units of meters per second (m/s),
so we leave wind speed unstandardized. Notably, unlike energy, a pixel’s measure of wind speed is
unchanged if a second weak storm strikes that pixel after a stronger event has already passed.
Wind speed and energy are correlated with one another, but we focus our attention on results that
use wind speed as an independent variable because its units are intuitive, it produces more conservative
estimates in this study, and it produced more robust estimates in Hsiang and Narita (2012), probably
because its distribution is less skewed than energy. For related reasons but in different contexts, Hsiang
and Narita (2012) and Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) also focus on wind speed, a fact that proves
useful when we compare our results to those of these other studies. Nonethelsss, we also present results
using energy as an independent variable to check the robustness of our findings.
We do not explicitly model other dimensions of tropical cyclones that are known to be economically
meaningful, such as excess rainfall, storm surges, and landslides. We do not characterize countries’
exposure to these other processes because they are more heavily influenced by idiosyncratic geographic
features, making them computationally difficult to model, however the impact of these measures will
be captured by our estimates to the extent that they are correlated with these wind field indices. For
physical reasons, all three factors will be correlated with overall wind exposure. Thus our wind indices
can be considered proxy measures for all dimensions of cyclone exposure.
Matching cyclone data to economic units of observation
The data file of reconstructed storm exposure can be resolved with high spatial and temporal resolution,
since each 0.1◦ × 0.1◦ pixel of the Earth’s surface takes different values every hour. Yet the unit of
observation for macroeconomic data that we match with cyclone exposure is the country-by-year.
Linking these two data sets requires that we collapse the cyclone exposure data in an economically
sensible way. Economic growth is a scale-free measure that does not depend on the size of an economy.
Ideally, we may construct an appropriate measure of cyclone exposure at the country-year level that
is similarly scale-free and does not depend on the physical or economic size of a country, so that

13

Angola

Mauritania
France

Singapore

Panama
United States
China
India
Trinidad & Tobago
Thailand
Mexico
Bangladesh
Madagascar
Haiti
Vietnam
Cayman Islands
South Korea
Philippines
Japan

0

20

40

60

Wind speed (m/s)

Figure 6: Boxplot of within-country distributions of country-by-year wind speeds during 1950-2008
for exposed countries. Boxes are interquartile ranges, white stripe is the median, circles are outliers.
Countries are ordered according to their mean exposure across years. Countries with no positive
exposure observations are not shown.
we recover a scale-invariant relationship between economic growth and cyclone exposure. Such a
relationship would describe the average pixel-level relationship between pixel-level growth and pixellevel exposure10 .
Prior micro-econometric work by Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) indicates that the probability
of destruction of assets, loss of total income, and increase in infant mortality change approximately
linearly with local wind exposure. Because of this, we can collapse pixel-level wind exposure to the
country-by-year unit using a spatially-weighted average over all pixels in a country11 . For pixels
indexed by p each of area ap exposed to wind speeds (or energy) Sp , contained in country i which has
n pixels in total, this is simply
P
p∈i Sp ap
(1)
S̄i = P
p∈i ap

This measure can be thought of intuitively in one of two ways: it is the expected exposure of a unit
of land that is selected at random from a country or it is the exposure all units of land would have if
10 Using scale-free variables to link geophysical measurements of cyclones to economic measurements has been successfully replicated at the national level in regional (Hsiang (2010)) and global data sets (Hsiang and Narita (2012))
and at the level of both provinces and larger administrative regions using Filipino household data (Anttila-Hughes and
Hsiang (2011)). As one might expect when using scale-free variables, in all of these cases the estimated effect-sizes were
approximately invariant in the geographic size of the observational units.
11 For the United States, Alaska is omitted from the average.

14

wind exposure could be “spread out” evenly across all locations in a country. Because many pixels in
a country may experience low wind exposure in a year and these values are averaged along with high
exposure pixels, spatially averaged country-by-year wind speed measures will tend to be substantially
lower than the maximum wind speeds reported at the center of intense storms. Figure 6 displays the
distribution of country-by-year average wind speed exposure across years for all countries that ever
have a non-zero value in the sample (hereafter “exposed countries”). Notably, there is substantial
year-to-year variation in exposure within most countries and there is substantial overlap in exposure
levels across countries. Japan and the Philippines experience the highest average exposure while India
and Trindad & Tobago have median levels of average exposure (among exposed countries).
Constructing the scale-free measure S̄i requires that the weighted sum of all pixel-level exposures is
divided by the area of a country. This normalization is analogous to normalizing GDP by population
to recover per capita GDP or normalizing new income by previous income to recover income growth
in percentage terms. As with all normalizations, a larger denominator will result in a smaller measure
of S̄i if the numerator is held fixed. Thus a physically identical cyclone event that affects exactly
one pixel will result in a larger value for S̄ in a small country relative to a large country. This is the
desired effect of using a scale-free measure, since ceteris paribus the single pixel affected by the storm
will be more economically important in percentage terms in the smaller country because it is a larger
fraction of the entire country. This approach follows the spirit of Nordhaus (2006) and aims to recover
the average effect of cyclone exposure on an average pixel—it is agnostic about how land in a pixel is
used12 . One may think of this approach as trying to capture cyclone activity as one dimension of a
pixel’s endowment. We are essentially asking whether cyclone activity affects growth similar to how
one might ask whether good soils or freezing temperatures affects growth in a pixel.
Two important questions invariably arise when cyclone exposure is collapsed using Equation 1.
First, does area-weighting somehow bias response functions in favor of small countries, since their
denominator is small? Our approach scales exposure to the pixel level, but it is possible that pixels
within a small country will have a fundamentally different response from pixels within a large country,
so one might be concerned that our results over-represent the unique response of small country pixels.
This issue, however, is a question about heterogenous responses to cyclones and not a question of
scaling, so it is best addressed by stratifying samples according to country size—an exercise we conduct
in our results section (we find that countries exhibit remarkably similar responses at the pixel level
across all sizes, except for the very smallest and largest countries). Second, will our estimates be
biased because some cyclones strike heavily populated or economically critical locations while other
cyclones strike empty regions? This is not a concern, so long as there is not correlation between
the overall intensity of a storm (as measured by the average across pixels) and the likelihood that
the most intense regions within that storm strike the most economically active (or vulnerable) pixels
within a country. The condition for unbiased estimation restricts the spatial correlation of exposure
12

It may be possible to reduce our measurement error by using population-weights, following Dell, Jones and Olken
(2012) and Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011), or capital-weights, following Nordhaus (2010), when aggregating our exposure
measure. However, we fear that if populations strategically locate themselves or capital in response to cyclone risk, this
may bias our estimated coefficients in some unknown way since some populations may be more or less likely to relocate
based on other factors that are unrelated to cyclones but might also affect growth. Thus, we use area-weights because
populations cannot manipulate this parameter, giving us confidence that our independent variable is fully exogenous.
This conservative approach may mean that our estimation is inefficient, in the sense that it does not take advantage of
all available data, but this should only make our inferences more conservative.

15

and economic activity within a storm to be unrelated to the intensity across storms.13 . So long as
relatively more intense storms do not differentially strike centers of economic activity within a country,
it is unnecessary to account for the spatial distribution of economic activity in our measure of storm
exposure in order to obtain an unbiased estimate for the effect of storms on growth.
13 Suppose pixels have heterogenous pre-storm capital K (capital could be physical, human, social, political, etc.)
p
which has a long run production f (Kp ). Damage to this capital from a storm suffered at p is D(Sp , Kp ), a function of
storm intensity Sp experienced at pixel p. Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) find D(Sp , Kp ) = αKp Sp , where α is a
constant describing the marginal fraction of capital that is destroyed by each additional unit of Sp . Thus, αSp ∈ [0, 1]
for observed values of Sp . We assume a similar linear form holds generally.
Long-run output lost to a storm is the difference between output with baseline capital when no storm occurs (our
simple counterfactual here, but a trend could be accounted for) and output with storm-damaged capital, both summed
over all pixels in country i:
X
X
f (Kp ) −
f (Kp − αKp Sp ).
lost incomei =
| {z }
p∈i
p∈i
D(Sp ,Kp )

If changes to the total capital stock from a single storm are modest relative to the curvature of f (.), by Taylor’s theorem
we can linearize f (Kp − αKp Sp ) ≈ f (Kp ) − f ′ (Kp )αKp Sp at each pixel. Letting g(Kp ) = f ′ (Kp )αKp , we write
X
X

f (Kp ) −
f (Kp ) − f ′ (Kp )αKp Sp
lost incomei ≈
p∈i

=

X

p∈i

g(Kp )Sp

p∈i

Thus losses are roughly the inner product of storm intensity in each pixel and the marginal effect of storm intensity on
production in each pixel, where the latter depends on both the capital density at p and the shape of the production
function. Because we do not have observations of g(Kp ) for each pixel, we must find some way to estimate aggregate
lost growth asPa functionPof wind exposure. As in Equation 1 we denote area averages with a bar such that x̄i =
P
p∈i (xp ap )/
p∈i ap ≈
p xp /ni . The approximation holds if pixel areas do not vary substantially within a country,
which is a reasonable approximation for almost all countries since pixel area is proportional to cosine of latitude and few
countries exposed to tropical cyclones span large ranges of latitudes at high latitudes (where the derivative of cosine is
large). Because there are many pixels in each country, we rewrite the sum of pixel impacts, i.e. the total lost income, in
terms the average over pixels:
lost incomei ≈ ni (g(Kp )Sp )i
= ni g(Kp )i S̄i + ni Covp (g(Kp ), Sp )
where the second term is the covariance across pixels between g(Kp ) and storm intensity for a specific cyclone event.
Because the size of these terms scale with the size of a country ni , we normalize by the initial size of the economy
ni f (Kp )i so lost income is in terms of lost growth, a scale-invariant economic measure
!
#
g(Kp )i
lost incomei
Covp (g(Kp ), Sp )
lost growthi =
≈
(ℵ)
S̄i +
initial incomei
f (Kp )i
f (Kp )i
|
{z
}
|
{z
}
β̂

ε

where the coefficient of interest, labeled β̂, does not scale with the size of the country ni . The form of Equation
ℵ is useful because it links a national summary statistic describing area-averaged cyclone exposure S̄p to a national
summary statistic describing economic growth. The factor denoted β̂ is the coefficient that we will attempt to measure
empirically—it is the average marginal effect of cyclone exposure on long-run output in percentage terms. The form
of Equation ℵ is what motivates us to use the spatial average of cyclone exposure across pixels to aggregate pixel-level
cyclone exposure to the country-year level to match the units of observation in macro-economic data.
The term denoted ε is a residual that is likely mean zero—it is the covariance across pixels of cyclone exposure in a
single storm and the marginal effect of cyclone exposure across pixels, normalized by total output of i. Importantly, it is
a country-by-storm specific residual. The intuition behind this term is that sometimes a cyclone will cause unexpectedly
large damages because the most intense part of the storm will pass directly over a location that has either a high capital
density or a large sensitivity to cyclones (e.g. Hurricane Katrina), this will cause covariance between Sp and g(Kp )
to be positive and the lost growth from this event to be abnormally large relative to what we expect based on the
average intensity of exposure S̄p . In other cases, the most intense part of a storm may pass over an uninhabited region,
in which case this covariance will be negative and the lost growth will be abnormally low relative to expectation. On
average across years, we assume ε is approximately zero because cyclone exposure within each storm is unlikely to be
systematically correlated with economic activity on the ground.
Importantly, holding other factors constant, we will obtain an unbiased estimate of β̂ if we estimate the expected value
of Equation ℵ using observed values of S̄i so long as ε is not correlated with S̄i . Thus ordinary least squares will be

16

Economic data
We obtain gross domestic product (GDP) data for 1970-2008 from the Penn World Tables14 (PWT)
(Summers and Heston (1991)) as well as the World Development Indicators (WDI) file (World Bank
(2008)). GDP is inflation adjusted and measured in per capita units. For robustness, we separately
examine and compare results using both PWT and WDI which, in combination with our two cyclone
measures, provides us with four pairs of independent and dependent variables that we evaluate separately. In robustness checks, we also utilize other macroeconomic measures from the WDI file, such as
international aid.

Additional climate data
Because recent evidence suggests that temperature and precipitation both influence economic growth
(Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004); Barrios, Bertinelli and Strobl (2010); Hsiang (2010); Dell,
Jones and Olken (2012)) and these variables may be correlated with patterns of tropical cyclone
exposure over time (Auffhammer, Hsiang, Schlenker and Sobel (2013)), we construct spatially averaged
measures of annual mean temperature and precipitation using data files from the Center for Climatic
Research at the University of Delaware (Legates and Willmot (1990a), Legates and Willmot (1990b)).
However, because the University of Delaware (UDEL) data relies on spatial interpolation of weather
station observations, it does not provide coverage for many island countries around the world. To
overcome this issue, we also utilize “reanalysis” output from the Climate Data Assimilation System
produced by the National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) and the National Center for
Atmospheric research (Kalnay et al. (1996)). Reanalysis techniques use a physical model (similar to a
weather model) to assimilate data sources, allowing all missing data points to be estimated based on
observed data and known physical relationships (see Auffhammer, Hsiang, Schlenker and Sobel (2013)
for a complete discussion), enabling us to retain our entire sample of interest while also accounting for
historical temperature variations.

4

Empirical approach

To estimate the causal effect of cyclones on long run growth we adopt a differences-in-differences
approach, modeling first differences of the logarithm of GDP (economic growth) as an impulse-response
function that is linear in contemporaneous and historical area-averaged tropical cyclone exposure S̄
out to a maximum lag length k. Our approach follows the general framework for identifying the effect
of random weather events laid out in Deschênes and Greenstone (2007). We account for unobservable
differences in average growth rates between countries using a country fixed effect γ, which might
arise, for example, because of countries’ different geographies (Gallup, Sachs and Mellinger (1999)),
unbiased if
Covt

!

Covp (g(Kp ), Sp )
f (Kp )

, S̄i

#

=0

where the outer covariance is across years (i.e. different storms). The intuition behind this condition is that Equation ℵ
is unbiased if there is no correlation between the average intensity of a storm (S̄i ) and the likelihood that the most intense
regions within that storm strike the most economically active (or vulnerable) pixels within a country (Cov p (g(Kp ), Sp )).
14 We use version 7.0 of the PWT (from 2011), however our results also hold if we use version 6.2 and 6.3.

17

cultures (Sala-i-Martin (1997)) or institutions (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002)). We flexibly
account for common nonlinear trends and year-specific common shocks using a year fixed effect δ,
and we account for country-specific trends in growth rates θ, which may account for country-specific
changes in economic policies as well as long-run conditional convergence (Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(2003)). Because growth is the first derivative of income levels, including both country fixed effects
and country-specific trends in a growth regression allows the trajectory of income levels in each country
to exhibit an independent intercept, an independent slope and an independent curvature. In extensions
of our main model, we also control for various time-varying controls X, such as trade openness (Sachs,
Warner, Aslund and Fischer (1995)) or rainfall (Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004)). Indexing
countries by i and years by t, this approach leads us to the flexible and parsimonious model:
ln(GDPi,t ) − ln(GDPi,t−1 ) =

k
X


L=0


βL × S̄i,t−L + γi + δt + θi × t + η × Xi,t + ǫi,t

(2)

where the parameters of interest are the coefficients β. We estimate Equation 2 using ordinary least
squares (OLS) and follow the approach in Hsiang (2010) by assuming that the disturbance ǫ may be
heteroscedastic and serially correlated within a country for up to 10 years (Newey and West (1987))
and spatially correlated across contemporaneous countries up to a distance of 1000 km15 (Conley
(1999)). The timing, location and intensity of cyclone exposure is unpredictable and stochastic across
years, conditional on each country’s average climate and trends in climate, whose effects are absorbed
by country fixed effects, year effects and county specific trends. This allows us to assume that S̄ is
exogenous and uncorrelated with other unobserved factors ǫ that influence growth, permitting the
causal effect of cyclones β to be identified. We note that it is unlikely that social, political or economic
events within a country systematically influence our measurement of cyclone exposure because the
LICRICE reconstruction of S̄ primarily relies on satellite or other scientific observations.
The reduced form of Equation 2 does well at capturing a variety of behaviors for the slow moving
changes in income that have been observed since 1970, as demonstrated in Figure 7A where predicted
values from Equation 2 are integrated to estimate log income. Idiosyncratic and temporary disturbances in growth are not captured well with this model, however these high-frequency variations are
not the focus of this analysis since we are interested in long-run growth; and the overall performance
of the model is strong despite this shortcoming. Figure 7B plots predicted income against observed
income and we note that the overall correlation is 0.9916 .
We estimate Equation 2 in first differences of ln(GDP ) because year-to-year GDP growth is approximately trend-stationary. However, for a tropical cyclone that occurs in year t, we are interested
in long-run GDP growth out to the period t + j, which is the sum of year-to-year growth effects for
the years t to t + j inclusive. Thus, after we estimate Equation 2, we construct the cumulative effect
15 1000 km was chosen because it is roughly twice the diameter of a storm and it also roughly describes the approximate
average distance inland that storms may travel after landfall.
16 This value refers to the correlation between the full set of model predicted values and observations, not the R2 value
of the model.

18

B

Japan
10.4

6.6

9.6
2000

6.8
1970

Philippines
8.0

2000

2000

2000

Bangaldesh
7.2

10.0
1970

1970

USA
10.8

7.4

Comoros
7.8

5.8
1970

Log GDP per capita

Ethiopia

6.4
1970

Observed

2000

12

N = 5,950
Observed log GDP per capita (PWT)

Log GDP per capita

A

Correlation = 0.99
10

8

6

4

1970

2000

4

6

8

10

12

Model-predicted log GDP per capita (PWT)

Model-predicted

Figure 7: (A) Model predictions compared to observed income trajectories for six example countries.
Model predictions are estimated using Equation 2 and then integrated from observed initial incomes
in 1970. (B) Model predictions vs observed income for the full sample.
of a cyclone j years after exposure via the summation
Ωj =

j
X

βL .

(3)

L=0

For brevity and clarity, we only present the long-run growth effects Ωj and omit estimates of βL ,
however it is straightforward to difference our estimates for Ω to recover the OLS coefficients β.
Previous studies have estimated variations on Equation 2 with fewer lags and focusing only on the
years during and just following disaster exposure, often measured as a binary variable. However, previous studies could not or did not try to identify whether the long-run growth effect Ω was measurable
or economically important. Thus, in addition to our novel data, another innovation in our analysis is
to examine a model that spans two full decades (k = 20), the longest lag length for which our estimates
seem reliable (our panel is only 39 years long) and for which we do not have to drop any observations
(our cyclone data reconstruction begins in 1950). In our results section we experiment with alternative
lag lengths and observe no appreciable change in our results.
Our main specification (Equation 2) is a distributed lag model, where the lags of interest describe
current and historical cyclone exposure. This simple approach has been successfully employed by other
studies of growth where the regressors of interest are temporary events that are plausibly exogenous
(Miguel, Satyanath and Sergenti (2004); Romer and Romer (2010); Barrios, Bertinelli and Strobl
(2010); Dell, Jones and Olken (2012)) since it is unbiased (Greene, (2003)). Yet growth in the short
run tends to be auto-regressive, leading many researchers to estimate auto-regressive distributed lag
models in these settings (Cerra and Saxena (2008); Romer and Romer (2010); Hsiang (2010)). We
employ this latter approach in a robustness check to our main result where we follow Cerra and Saxena
(2008) and Romer and Romer (2010) by introducing up to four years of lagged growth as regressors
in Equation 2.
19

Comoros

AR(0) model
with no time trend

log GDP per capita

Bangladesh

log GDP per capita

6.4
1970

AR(4) model
with no time trend

log GDP per capita
log GDP per capita

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

6.8
1970

1980

1990

2000

6.8
1970

1980

1990

2000

1990

year

2000

6.8
1970

9.6
1980

1990

2000

5.8
1970

1980

1990

2000

5.8
1970

1990

2000

year
Observed ln(GDP) per capita

5.8
1970

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1990

2000

9.6
1980

1990

2000

1970
10.4

9.6
1980

1990

2000

6.6

1980

1970
10.4

6.6

7.4

1980

5.8
1970

Japan
10.4

6.6

7.4

7.2

6.4
1970

6.8
1970

Ethiopia
6.6

7.4

7.2

6.4
1970

AR(4) model
with time trend

1980

7.2

6.4
1970

AR(0) model
with time trend

7.4

7.2

1970
10.4

9.6
1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

year

year

Model-predicted ln(GDP) per capita

Figure 8: Model predictions compared to observed income trajectories for example countries (as in
Figure 7). Model specifications differ by row, varying whether zero or four auto-regressive terms are
included as regressors and whether country specific trends in growth θi are included.
One feature of our specification that is not always present in regressions of this form is the countryspecific linear trend in growth θi 17 . This term describes how each country’s growth rate may drift over
time relative to global trends in growth. Because growth is the first derivative of income, allowing
a trend in growth rates is equivalent to allowing countries’ income trajectories to have a non-zero
second derivative, i.e. each 40-year income trajectory may be curved differently. Inspection of Figure
7A suggests that this component of the model is likely important, since different countries within
the sample have income trajectories that are convex and concave, as well as some with almost zerocurvature18 . Inclusion of four years of auto-regressive terms in the model does not correct for this issue,
as we demonstrate in Figure 8 where we show comparisons of model predictions with and without θi
and auto-regressive terms for four important example countries. Auto-regressive terms help the model
capture high-frequency but small amplitude business cycles while inclusion of θi is often important
17 See

Hsiang, Burke and Miguel (2013) for a discussion.
to include country-specific values for θi in our model is equivalent to assuming that the income trajectories
of all countries are curved equally, a hypothesis that we easily reject with a joint F-test for the restriction θi = 0 ∀ i
(Hsiang and Meng (2014)).
18 Failing

20

for accurately modeling long-rung income growth. Nonetheless, for completeness we also estimate a
version of Equation 2 that omits θi as a robustness check.

5

Results

We first establish that tropical cyclones have a large and robust negative effect on long-run GDP per
capita. We then demonstrate that other macroeconomic variables exhibit similar behavior and we
provide evidence that populations adapt to their geographically determined cyclone-climate. We next
use simple simulations to understand the extent to which these effects might influence global patterns
of economic development and compare our results, quantitatively, to related findings in the literature.
Finally, we conclude by computing how these results influence estimates for the social cost of climate
change.

Main result: the long-run effect of disaster on GDP growth
The first panel of Figure 9 presents our main result: the long-run effect of tropical cyclones on GDP
relative to a country’s pre-disaster baseline trend19 . The plot depicts Ωt∈[−5,20] after Equation 2 is
estimated. Following a cyclone event, GDP declines steadily for roughly fifteen years relative to a
counterfactual trajectory that would have been observed had the event never occurred. Fifteen years
after a strike, GDP is 0.38 percentage points lower for every additional 1 m/s of wind speed exposure
and exhibits no sign of recovery after twenty years.
The magnitude of the observed effect is large. Within the set of countries (58%) that are ever hit
by cyclones, a one standard deviation increase in wind speed is equal to 9.4 m/s of wind exposure,
generating a loss of 9.4 × 0.38 = 3.57 percentage points two decades later. A “one-in-ten” countryyear event20 reduces long-run GDP by 7.4% and a “one-in-one-hundred” country-year event depresses
it 14.9%. The largest event in our sample (78.3 m/s) is estimated to have reduced long-run GDP
by 29.8%. To succinctly summarize the size of our main result and the frequency of these storms,
Figure 10 displays the distribution of country-by-year cyclone observations and the long-run GDP loss
associated with 5, 10, 20 and 40 m/s events.
The structure of this result allows us to decisively reject the hypotheses that per capita national
incomes benefit from tropical cyclone incidence (“creative destruction” ) (p < 1 × 10−4 ) or recover
to their pre-disaster trajectory (“build back better” or “recovery to trend”) within twenty years (p <
0.001). Following a cyclone disaster, the instantaneous growth rate of GDP stabilizes near the predisaster growth rate after 15 years, however income levels remain permanently lower than the predisaster trend line. The “no recovery” hypothesis (Figure 1) describes the true behavior of GDP
following a cyclone disaster.
19 As discussed above, the “baseline trend” is depicted as a straight line, however we allow the baseline trend in our
models to have intercepts, slopes and curvatures that vary by country as well as common year-specific shocks.
20 The 90th percentile in wind speed is 19.5 m/s and the 99th percentile 39.2 m/s.

21

World Development Indicators vs wind speed

0.2

% GDPpc per meter per second

% GDPpc per meter per second

Penn World Tables vs wind speed

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-5

0

5

10

15

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

20

-5

10

15

Penn World Tables vs energy

World Development Indicators vs energy

20

1

% GDPpc per s.d. energy

% GDPpc per s.d. energy

5

Years since storm

1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

-5

0

Years since storm

0

5

10

15

0
-1
-2
-3
-4

-5

20

Years since storm

0

5

10

15

20

Years since storm

Figure 9: The marginal cumulative effect of tropical cyclone exposure on long-run GDPpc growth.
A zero-effect would indicate that a country follows its baseline trajectory after it was exposed to a
cyclone. Each panel uses a different pairing of dependent variable data source and a different measure
of cyclone exposure. 95% confidence intervals (robust to spatial and serial correlation) are shaded.
Appendix Table A.1 reports exact estimates.
Robustness of the main result
We check the robustness of this result by using alternative data sets, alternative specifications, randomization tests, subsampling of our data, and spatial lag models.
Data selection We replicate our main finding using the WDI, our alternative measure of GDP, and
energy, our alternative measure of cyclone exposure. The remaining panels of Figure 9 presents these
alternative estimates. Under all four pair-wise combinations of the data, we obtain essentially the same
result, although estimates using WDI as the dependent variable tend to have smaller standard errors.
We present exact parameter estimates for several lags in Appendix Table A.121 using all four pairs
of data, noting that if the effect sizes are standardized, wind speed produces estimates that are 33%
larger than those using energy, although they are not statistically different from one another and both
are statistically different from zero. We also note that the estimated effect one year after exposure is
30–50% smaller if the WDI data file is used instead of the PWT data file, however the point estimates
21 Table

A.1 presents values from models without forward lags.

22

$OOFRXQWU\ï\HDUREVLQH[SRVHGFRXQWULHV
5000

4000

Frequency

Predicted long-run GDP loss (%)
 

3000





2000

1000

0

0

20

40

60

80

Wind speed (m/s)

Figure 10: Pooled distribution of country-year tropical cyclone exposure. The expected long-run
GDPpc loss associated with 5, 10, 20 and 40 m/s storm events are indicated.
converge in the following year.
Nonparametric time controls In order to produce reliable inferences, it is essential that we account for basic cross-sectional patterns and trends using country and year fixed effects. However, we
continue to obtain our main result if we omit country-specific trends θi or if we introduce region-byyear fixed effects, as shown in columns 1 and 3 of Table 3. Allowing countries to exhibit independent
trends in growth causes the long-run growth effects to be slightly larger than if country-level trends are
omitted, however we easily reject the hypothesis that country-specific trends in growth are common
across countries. Further, we find additional evidence that a model omitting country-specific trends is
misspecified when we conduct a test of forward lags (leads) and find that forward lags are statistically
significant (they should not be). Thus, for the remainder of the paper we rely on the model with both
common year effects and country-specific trends (column 2 of Table 3) since it is the most parsimonious
model that passes this forward lag test. Notably, all estimates of Ω are significantly different from
zero when the statistically irrelevant forward lags are dropped, explaining why the tabulated standard
error estimates appear different from those presented in Figure 9.
Randomization tests To check whether our model is mis-specified, a fact that might generate
spurious or biased findings, we randomize our sample to generate false data that we then use to
re-estimate the model in Equation 2. As an ancillary benefit, these placebo tests also allow us to
check whether the asymptotic confidence intervals we use for inference are properly sized. Holding
observations of GDP fixed, we randomize observations of cyclone exposure (either wind speed or

23

Table 3: Long-run growth vs. wind speed with alterations to time controls
(1)
Dependent variable

(2)

(3)

Growth (%) from PWT

Independent variable

Wind speed

Marginal cumulative effects of 1 additional m/s exposure
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years

-0.0944∗∗
(0.0392)
-0.211∗∗∗
(0.0605)
-0.306∗∗∗
(0.0734)
-0.247∗∗∗
(0.0854)

-0.0895∗∗
(0.0427)
-0.223∗∗∗
(0.0711)
-0.378∗∗∗
(0.0938)
-0.374∗∗∗
(0.113)

-0.0938∗∗
(0.0456)
-0.215∗∗∗
(0.0731)
-0.376∗∗∗
(0.0986)
-0.383∗∗∗
(0.122)

Y
Y

Y
Y

Y

Country FE
Year FE
Region × year FE
Country-specific linear trend†
Observations
Adjusted R2

6415
0.122

Y

Y
Y

6415
0.144

6415
0.157

Standard errors in parentheses are robust to spatial (1000km) and serial (10year) correlation. Lagged cumulative effects of wind speed every 5 years are
displayed, but effects of all years are estimated. † A country-specific linear
trend with country fixed effects in the growth regression translates into a
country-specific quadratic trend in cumulative growth (i.e. income). ∗ p <
0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

energy) without replacement 10,000 times, each time re-estimating Equations 2-3. We conduct this
randomization in three different ways22 :
1. Entire sample – Randomly re-assign each cyclone observation.
2. Between countries – Randomly re-assign each country’s complete history of cyclone exposure to
another country while preserving the ordering of years. This preserves the time structure within
the data, thereby testing whether global or regional trends might generate spurious correlations.
3. Within country – Randomly re-order each country’s time-series of cyclone exposure while keeping
it assigned to the original country. This alters only the time structure of the data, thereby
testing whether time invariant cross-sectional patterns across countries might generate spurious
correlations.
22 A Stata function to implement these three randomization procedures in a generalized panel context is available at
http://blogs.cuit.columbia.edu/asj2122/code/randomization-code.

24

PWT vs wind speed

PWT vs energy

WDI vs energy

p-value = 0.0001

p-value = 0.0019

p-value = 0.0002

Entire sample

p-value = 0.0001

WDI vs wind speed

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

-2

2

4

-0.4

p-value = 0.0031

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

p-value = 0.0011

-2

0

2

4

p-value = 0.0003

Between countries

p-value = 0.0006

0

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

-2

p-value = 0.0018

0

2

4

-0.4

p-value = 0.0098

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

-2

0

2

4

p-value = 0.0064

Within country

p-value = 0.0083

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

-2

0

2

4

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-4

-2

0

2

4

Figure 11: Distribution of point estimates for 15-year lag determined by re-estimating Equations 2-3 on
randomized placebo datasets. Each distribution corresponds to the different dependent-independent
variable pairing (columns) for one of three different randomization schemes (rows). Each distribution
is constructed by repeating the randomization and estimation procedure 10,000 times. Coefficients
from the estimate using real data are shown as vertical lines with exact p-values. In all 12 cases, exact
p-values <0.01.
Figure 11 displays the the distribution of point estimates for the fifteenth year (Ωt=15 ) under each of
these randomization schemes using each of the four pair-wise combinations of data – the figure depicts
the result of 120,000 randomizations in total. Under all three procedures and all four sets of data, the
distribution of point estimates are properly centered at zero, indicating that the model in Equation 2
is unlikely to produce biased results. Furthermore, the point estimate we obtained when we used the
true data is plotted as a vertical line, accompanied by an exact p-value that we compute by using the
outcomes from these randomizations. In each of the twelve cases, these p-values remain below 0.01 –
suggesting that our result is extraordinarily unlikely to occur by chance.
Testing for non-linearity Work by Nordhaus (2010) and Mendelsohn, Emanuel, Chonobayashi
and Bakkensen (2012) indicated that direct damages from cyclones in the United States are a highly
nonlinear power function of maximum wind speed at landfall, reporting “super elasticities” of 9 and
5, respectively. Hsiang and Narita (2012) use output from LICRICE at the country-by-year level to

25

% per meter per second

0

-0.2

-0.4
< 10 meters per second
10-20 meters per second

-0.6

> 20 meters per second

0

5

10

15

20

Years since storm

Figure 12: Long-run marginal cumulative effects of cyclone exposure for small (<10 m/s), medium
(10-20 m/s), and large (>20 m/s) exposure levels.
examine whether this super-elastic relationship holds generally, but instead obtain an elasticity of unity.
This suggests that once the over-land trajectory of storms is accounted for, the relation is at most an
exponential function. Hsiang (2014) reconciles this difference by demonstrating that the previously
reported super elasticities were an artifact of assuming a power-function relationship when wind speeds
are so high that their logarithm is essentially a linear function, and that parameter estimates similar to
Hsiang and Narita (2012) are obtained with Nordhaus’ original data if a power function is not assumed
ex ante. Yet, when Antilla-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) use LICRICE to examine capital and income
losses at the household level, they find that both are linear in wind speed. As it remains unexplained
why aggregate damage estimates should be nonlinear when local loss is linear23 , it is important that
we examine whether our linear model of long-run growth is justified, especially since the assumption
of local linear loss was used to inform the area-averaging used to collapse pixel-level cyclone data. To
test the linearity of the long-run growth effect, we separately estimate the marginal effect of cyclone
exposure within three different exposure levels of wind speed: 0–10, 10–20 and > 20 m/s. Figure 12
displays the long-run marginal effect of cyclone exposure for all three types of events. These estimates
are somewhat noisier than earlier estimates, since the number of storm events is a subsample of the
original sample and the variance in the independent variable is smaller, however the point estimates
similar and we see no significant or systematic changes in these marginal effects as storm intensity
grows. The long-run growth effect of cyclone exposure appears to be approximately linear in cyclone
intensity.
Lag length We examine whether the maximum lag length k we select alters our result by estimating
the model using 10 and 15 lags instead of 20. The results are shown in Figure 13A. Estimates using only
10 lags do not diverge from zero for the first five years and then are negative but smaller in magnitude.
Estimates using 15 lags are essentially identical. In general, there is greater risk of including too few
lags in a distributed lag model rather than too many, since unnecessary distant lags will simply appear
23 Perhaps it is because estimates of direct damages contain systematic biases, since they require on-the-ground tabulation of losses which are subject to observational errors.

26

A

B
0

%GDP per meter per second

%GDP per meter per second

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

10 lags, AR(0)
15 lags, AR(0)

-0.1

-0.2
AR(0), 20 lags
AR(1), 20 lags

-0.3

AR(2), 20 lags
AR(3), 20 lags

20 lags, AR(0)

AR(4), 20 lags

-0.4

-0.4

0

5

10

15

20

0

Years since storm

5

10

15

20

Years since storm

Figure 13: A) Long-run marginal cumulative effects estimated with 10 and 15 lags, compared to the
main effect estimated with 20 lags. B) Long-run marginal cumulative effects for AR(1)-AR(4) models.
as noise and will not bias a model but too few lags may generate bias if omitted lags important and are
correlated with included lags (Greene, 2003). We thus consider the longer lag models more reliable,
but note that negative—albeit smaller—effects are observable using only ten lags.
Auto-regressive controls We examine whether accounting for auto-regressive behavior in growth
affects our results by including 1-4 auto-regressive controls in the model, following Cerra and Saxena
(2008) and Romer and Romer (2010). Results for AR(1)-AR(4) models are shown in Figure 13B,
plotting only the direct effects captured in β and not the indirect effects through the auto-regressive
process. Auto-regressive models recover results that are indistinguishable from our benchmark model,
which is AR(0).
Climatological controls We examine whether time-varying climatic conditions affect our results.
We are particularly concerned about climatological confounders (Auffhammer, Hsiang, Schlenker and
Sobel (2013)), since the intensity and distribution of tropical cyclones are influenced by global climatic
patterns that also may affect economic outcomes24 . In column 2 of Table 4 we account for countrylevel exposure to changes in temperature, a variable that affects annual growth rates (Dell, Jones
and Olken (2012)), using NCEP reanalysis data that allows us to retain all countries in the original
sample. Our point estimates are unchanged relative to our benchmark model in column 1. In column
3 we control for temperature using UDEL data, a different data source, and we find that our point
estimates are roughly 30% smaller and less significant, although this change is not itself statistically
significant. The change in point estimates and standard errors is primarily due to our dropping 600+
country-year observations for small islands that are missing from the UDEL data25 , but we opt to
24 For example, the El Niño-Southern Oscillation inhibits storm formation in some regions while promoting it in others
(Tartaglione, Carissa, Smith and O’Brian (2003); Camargo and Sobel (2005); Hoyos, Agudelo, Webster and Curry
(2006)) while it also influences economic outcomes around the world by altering global rainfall and temperature patterns
(Brunner (2002); Hsiang, Meng and Cane (2011)).
25 The UDEL data is interpolated from land-based weather stations, so many islands that do not have their own
weather stations are dropped from the reconstruction.

27

Table 4: Controlling for climatic variables
(1)

(2)

Dependent variable

(3)

(4)

(5)

Growth (%) from PWT
Missing small islands†

Sample restrictions

Pooled exposed and unexposed countries

Exposed only‡

Marginal cumulative effect of 1 additional m/s wind speed
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years

-0.0895∗∗
(0.0427)
-0.223∗∗∗
(0.0711)
-0.378∗∗∗
(0.0938)
-0.374∗∗∗
(0.113)

Temp. (NCEP data)
Temp. (UDEL data)
Precip. (UDEL data)
Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.0882∗∗
(0.0436)
-0.220∗∗∗
(0.0730)
-0.370∗∗∗
(0.0964)
-0.363∗∗∗
(0.117)

-0.0166
(0.0511)
-0.163∗
(0.0918)
-0.265∗∗
(0.125)
-0.236
(0.147)

0.00482
(0.0519)
-0.127
(0.0895)
-0.207∗
(0.123)
-0.181
(0.145)

-0.0152
(0.0526)
-0.182∗∗
(0.0898)
-0.302∗∗
(0.122)
-0.299∗∗
(0.142)

Y

Y
Y

Y
Y

5737
0.137

5737
0.136

3232
0.157

Y

6415
0.144

6376
0.142

All models contain country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends. Temperature and precipitation are spatially averaged over each country-year in the sample and are each
allowed to influence growth linearly. NCEP reanalysis temperature data is fully global in coverage.
UDEL temperature and precipitation data come from a gridded reconstruction based on interpolated
station data. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to spatial (1000km) and serial (10-year) correlation. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01 † Because UDEL data is interpolated, data for many
small islands that are strongly affected by cyclones are missing, causing them to be dropped from
the sample. ‡ Dropping countries that are never exposed to tropical cyclones in the sample.

use the UDEL data because it allows us to also account for precipitation26 . Accounting for both
temperature and precipitation in column 4 appears to to reduce the magnitude and significance of
cyclones further, however this change in estimates is mostly driven by countries that are never exposed
to tropical cyclones. When we remove countries that are never exposed to cyclones (e.g. Bolivia) but
continue to account for temperature and precipitation using the UDEL data, shown in column 5, we
obtain estimates that are similar in both magnitude and significance to our baseline result using the
full sample.
Endogenous controls We examine whether the inclusion of some time-varying control variables
that a population determines endogenously, but are traditionally included in growth regressions27 ,
affect our result. Including these endogenous controls is likely to be a case of “bad control” (Angrist
26 Rainfall

data from NCEP is less reliable because it is driven by a model simulation.
examples, see Sachs, Warner, Aslund and Fischer (1995), Barro (1998), Sala-i-Martin (1997) and Barrios,
Bertinelli and Strobl (2010).
27 For

28

Table 5: Controlling for endogenous economic factors
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Dependent variable

Growth (%) from PWT

Sample restrictions

Pooled exposed and unexposed countries

(6)

Exposed only‡

Marginal cumulative effect of 1 additional m/s exposure
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years

-0.0895∗∗
(0.0427)
-0.223∗∗∗
(0.0711)
-0.378∗∗∗
(0.0938)
-0.374∗∗∗
(0.113)

ln(GDP pc)t−1 †

-0.0766∗
(0.0430)
-0.225∗∗∗
(0.0689)
-0.439∗∗∗
(0.0930)
-0.512∗∗∗
(0.113)

-0.0896∗∗
(0.0427)
-0.223∗∗∗
(0.0711)
-0.377∗∗∗
(0.0939)
-0.373∗∗∗
(0.113)

-0.0689
(0.0420)
-0.202∗∗∗
(0.0681)
-0.402∗∗∗
(0.0920)
-0.453∗∗∗
(0.112)

-0.0577
(0.0412)
-0.182∗∗∗
(0.0681)
-0.376∗∗∗
(0.0916)
-0.411∗∗∗
(0.111)

0.0321∗∗∗
(0.0110)

-14.64∗∗∗
(1.543)
-9.101
(10.74)
0.0357∗∗∗
(0.0101)

-13.99∗∗∗
(1.506)
0.803
(13.97)
0.0307∗∗∗
(0.00982)

6415
0.148

6415
0.211

3834
0.226

-14.52∗∗∗
(1.541)

P op.Growtht−1

-8.508
(11.30)

Opennesst−1

Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.0826∗∗
(0.0417)
-0.202∗∗∗
(0.0702)
-0.346∗∗∗
(0.0930)
-0.322∗∗∗
(0.112)

6415
0.144

6415
0.206

6415
0.144

All models contain country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific linear trends. “Exposed” countries
are those countries that are ever exposed to tropical cyclones in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses are
robust to spatial (1000km) and serial (10-year) correlation. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. † The coefficient on
lagged income is larger in magnitude than standard estimates because standard models do no account for countryspecific linear trends in growth rates – to verify that standard estimates are obtained when these trends are dropped,
see Appendix Table A.2. ‡ Dropping countries that are never exposed to tropical cyclones in the sample.

and Pischke (2008)), since unobservables may influence these controls as well as how populations
respond to cyclones28 . Thus, we only present these results as a robustness check and do not think that
they should be interpreted causally. In Table 5 we account for lagged income29 , population growth
and trade openness, both for the full sample and the restricted sample of exposed countries (column
6). We find that our estimates are similar to our baseline result using the full sample.
Subsamples of the data In Figure 14 we check whether specific subgroups of countries are driving
our result and find that our estimates are globally generalizable. As discussed above, we measure
cyclone exposure using scale-free intensive variables, a fact that should make the physical size of
28 See

Hsiang, Burke and Miguel (2013) for a discussion of this issue.
readers may notice that the coefficient on lagged income is larger in magnitude than traditional estimates
for convergence rates (Barro and Sala-i-Martin (2003)). This is because we flexibly allow for countries to have trending
growth rates, which is not the standard approach in traditional models. In Appendix Table A.2, we demonstrate that if
we remove these country-specific trends from the model then we obtain more familiar estimates for convergence rates.
29 Careful

29

A

B
0. 1

0. 1

% GDP per meter per second

% GDP per meter per second

0. 2

0
-0. 1
-0. 2
-0. 3

Small countries
Medium countries
Large countries

-0. 4
-0. 5

0

5

10

15

0
-0. 1
-0. 2
-0. 3
-0. 4

20

0

GDPpc < median
GDPpc > median
5

15

20

15

20

D

C

0. 2

% GDP per meter per second

0. 1

% GDP per meter per second

10

Years since storm

Years since storm

0
-0. 1
-0. 2
-0. 3
-0. 4
Small Island
Developing States
Other

-0. 5
-0. 6

0

5

10

15

0
-0. 2
-0. 4

-0. 8

20

Years since storm

Oceania
North America
Asia

-0. 6

0

5

10

Years since storm

Figure 14: The estimated effect of cyclones on GDPpc for subsamples stratified by A) country size,
B) income in 1970, C) Small Island Developing State (SIDS) status, and D) region.
countries irrelevant. We explicitly check this assumption in the first panel where we divide countries
into terciles based on their surface area (km2 ) and observe that their long-run growth responses are all
similar to the average response (the largest countries exhibit a positive point estimate for intermediate
lag lengths, although it is difficult to interpret because it is not statistically significant). In the second
panel we stratifying the sample according to whether they are above and below the median income in
1970, however we find that the two groups respond almost identically. In the third panel we isolate
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and find that their response is similar to that of other countries.
Finally, we examine Asia, North America and Oceania separately and find, consistent with Hsiang and
Narita (2012), that the response to cyclones in these three geographic regions are similar.
We further explore the effect of country size in the long run. We reestimate our model but include
flexible interactions for log of country size with cyclone exposure for every year. We plot the 15-year
cumulative effect of 1 m/s wind speed exposure for five equally sized bins of log country size in Figure
15 as well as this cumulative effect as quadratic, cubic, and quintic polynomials of log country size.
Overlaying the pooled estimate, we see that the long run effect for most county sizes falls within
the confidence interval of the pooled estimate and is always negative. There is some indication that
cumulative effects shrink in magnitude slightly as countries become larger, but this pattern is not
significant and reverses for the highest country size bin. There are more extreme negative effects
for the very smallest countries and the very largest countries in the quintic polynomial model, but
30

A

B
0

0

original 95% conifidence interval

-0.5

original estimate
-1.0
-0.5

quadratic
-1.5

cubic

mean country size

5th-order

-2.0

-1.0

-2.5

0

5

10

5

15

ln(Country Size)

10

15

ln(Country Size)

Figure 15: Non-linear interactions with country size. A) Effect of the 15-year lag term on growth
estimated as an interaction with log country size in 5 discrete bins. Original estimate and 95%
confidence interval are shaded. B) 15-year lag term on growth with country size interacted as quadratic,
cubic, and 5th-order polynomials. Original estimate and 95% confidence interval are shaded.
the most extreme effects do not show up in the binned model as they are driven by outlier cases.
The marginal effects estimated at any location in the size distribution are not significantly different
from the pooled estimate. This is a weak test because the sample is thin (these point-wise effects are
also not statistically different form zero), but the structure of the point estimates indicate that the
pooled sample estimate is a good approximation for the behavior of the sample in general and that
our scale-free collapse of cyclone exposure is a reasonable approach for comparing countries of different
sizes30 .
Spatial lag models We examine whether cross-country spillovers within a region drive our result.
It might not be the case that cyclones are bad for growth but instead being nearby a cyclone is good for
long-run growth, e.g. additional moderate rainfall might be beneficial (Barrios, Bertinelli and Strobl
(2010)) or tourists may change their behavior if a cyclone strikes a potential destination31 (Hsiang
(2010)). We account for these spatial spillovers using a spatial lag model (Cressie and Wikle (2011))
where i’s growth is affected by i’s cyclone exposure plus all temporal lags in the average exposure of
neighbors j whose centroids fall within concentric annuli (around i’s centroid) with 400km widths32 out
to a maximum distance of 2000km. Figure 16A displays an example of these annuli around Haiti. This
spatio-temporal distributed lag model is extremely flexible and has 120 lags estimated simultaneously:
20 temporal lags for each of 5 annuli plus each country’s own set of 20 lags (the zero radius annulus).
Coefficients describing how cyclone exposure 15 years prior at various distances affect a country’s
growth are plotted in Figure 16B, where the effect at “0 km” is the effect on i of i’s own cyclone
exposure. We find that there is essentially no effect of cyclones at distances greater than 400 km and
30 We

thank Benjamin Jones for this suggestion.
thank Wolfram Schlenker for this suggestion.
32 This distance was chosen based on the average size of a single storm, which is on the order of 200km.
31 We

31

A

B
15 year lag effect over distance
0.6

1200-1600km

0.4

% per meter per second

1600-2000km

800-1200km
400-800km
0-400km

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
0

0-400

400-800

800-1200 1200-1600 1600-2000

Distance from country centroid (km)

Figure 16: Spatial lag model illustrating the potential spillover effects of tropical cyclones. A) Example
of the annuli used to construct spatial lags used in the model. B) Estimates of the 15-year lag term
for the growth effect of tropical cyclone exposure for all spatial lags, i.e. the effect on i’s growth when
j at a distance dij is exposed to cyclones. dij is binned using annuli as in (A) and plotted on the
horizontal axis. 95% confidence intervals are shaded.
there is suggestive but insignificant evidence of a modest positive spillover among immediate neighbors.
Importantly, the estimated effect of a country’s own exposure remains essentially unchanged from the
baseline model.

Other long-run macroeconomic impacts of disaster
Having demonstrated that the long-run GDP response to cyclones is economically large, robust and
generalizable, we check whether other macroeconomic variables exhibit similar behavior. To do this,
we estimate analogs to Equations 2-3 replacing GDP with other microeconomic variables. We plot the
long-run effects Ω in the panels of Figure 17. Overall, the behavior of these alternative macroeconomic
measures broadly corroborate our main finding that cyclones adversely affect long-run income growth.
Sources of income In Figure 17A, we decompose GDP into income from agriculture, industry and
services to examine how each responds to tropical cyclone exposure. All three types of income decline
gradually, exhibiting long-run effects that are not statistically different from the long-run effect of total
GDP (dashed line). Long-run declines in agriculture and services are similar to total GDP, however
the long-run losses in industry are roughly half the size (in percentage points) of total GDP losses.
Industry might suffers less because it requires a high spatial-density of capital, and thus firms face a
stronger incentive to invest in capital protection (Hsiang and Narita (2012)), but we lack the data to
test this hypothesis.

32

B
0.1

0.1

0

0

−0.1

−0.1

% per meter per second

% per meter per second

A

−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5

0

5

−0.3
−0.4
−0.5

Industry GDP
Agricultural GDP
Services GDP
Total GDP

−0.6

−0.2

Household consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
Total GDP

−0.6

10

15

20

0

Years since storm

5

10

15

20

Years since storm

Figure 17: A) The estimated effect of cyclones on different components of GDP and B) on consumption
and capital formation. Dashed line is the effect on total GDP for comparison.
Consumption and Investment If populations insure themselves, they may smooth their consumption to insulate themselves from transient income losses33 (Udry (1994); Townsend (1995); Kunreuther
and Michel-Kerjan (2009)). However, long-run income losses to cyclones are persistent and exhibit no
recovery, so insurance and savings mechanisms aimed at long-run income will be unsustainable, giving
populations no choice but to lower their consumption to match their long-run income. In Figure 17B,
we observe this pattern: the magnitude and dynamics of the consumption response closely matches
that of the income response. Figure 17 also shows that long-run gross capital formation (investment)
declines in the wake of cyclones, again matching the response of income.
Trade Cyclone incidence and the resulting long-run loss of GDP does not generate an obvious prediction for trade patterns – for example, a disaster might increase imports of capital used in rebuilding
efforts, but the observed decline in GDP might also reduce the demand for costly imported goods.
The latter probably explains the true response better, since as we show in Figure 18, long-run imports
fall at roughly the same rate as income. In contrast, we find no long-run effect on exports. Such
an asymmetric trade response is consistent with demand-driven models of trade, since cyclone events
should have no effect on distant economies that consume exported goods34 .
Government reserves Government reserves decline in the long-run (Figure 18); however, the magnitude of this decline is much larger than the long-run income loss: for each addition 1 m/s in cyclone
exposure, government reserves decline by more than 1% in the long run. The long run effect on
reserves is only marginally significant, but a differentially rapid depletion of government reserves is
33 It is worth noting that recent evidence from the Philippines indicates that households struggle to smooth consumption
across the transient component of cyclones-induced income losses (Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011)). Anttila-Hughes
and Hsiang hypothesize that this is due to the spatially-coherent nature of these income shocks, which makes them more
difficult to insure than spatially-uncorrelated, idiosyncratic events (Townsend (1995)).
34 It is worth noting that an economically small, temporary and statistically insignificant decline in exports does
occur just following a cyclone strike. Perhaps this occurs because export infrastructure is damaged or because domestic
production of exports temporarily declines, similar to the temperature-related findings of Jones and Olken (2010).

33

Imports

Exports
0.8
% per meter per second

% per meter per second

0.8
0.4
0
-0.4
-0.8
-1.2

0.4
0
-0.4
-0.8
-1.2

0

5

10

15

0

20

5

Years since storm

Government reserves

15

20

15

20

International aid
16
% per meter per second

1
% per meter per second

10
Years since storm

0

-1

-2

12
8
4
0

-3
0

5

10

15

-4

20

0

5

10
Years since storm

Years since storm

Figure 18: The estimated effect of cyclones on long-run growth of imports, exports, government reserves
and international aid. 95% confidence intervals are shaded.
unsurprising since governments provide disaster relief and absorb many uninsured losses, generally
without expanding their revenue (Kunreuther and Michel-Kerjan (2009), Deryugina (2011)).
International Aid A substantial literature has examined the size, structure and political economy
of domestic and international relief aid immediately following disasters (Garrett and Sobel (2003),
Achen and Bartels (2004), Eisensee and Stromberg (2007), Stromberg (2007), Yang (2008), Healy and
Malhotra (2009), Deryugina (2011)). However, to the best of our knowledge, no study has examined
whether disasters generate long-run impacts on international non-relief aid payments. If international
donors redistribute wealth based on international differences in income, then a gradual reduction of
income should have the secondary impact of gradually increasing international transfers to the affected
country. In Figure 18, we display that this intuition is consistent with the data, further supporting
our main results: in the decades following a cyclone, international non-relief transfers gradually but
permanently rise relative to their counterfactual trajectory35 . Understanding this phenomenon will be
pursued in future work.
35 Deryugina (2011) described an analogous phenomena for non-disaster domestic transfers to counties within in the
United States, where unemployment payments increase for ten years after a cyclone strikes. Here we document the
appearance of a similar phenomena that lasts two decades in the “international social safety net.”

34

% per meter per second

0

-1

-2

th

5 lag
th
10 lag

-3

th

15 lag
95% CI for 15 lag in main estimate
th
20 lag
th

-4

0-20%

20-40%

40-60%

60-80%

80-100%

Quintiles of average annual wind exposure

Figure 19: The cumulative GDPpc response to TC exposure, stratified by countries’ cyclone climate
(defined as average exposure over all years). For each quintile, four lagged effects are shown (5-, 10-,
15-, and 20-year effects). Vertical lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. The grey horizontal
bar shows the confidence interval of the 15th-lag in our main (pooled) estimate.

Evidence of adaptation to disaster-prone environments
As illustrated in Figure 5, the risk of tropical cyclone exposure varies dramatically. Theory predicts
that in countries where the cyclone climate is intense, populations will find it beneficial to invest
in protective measures (Hsiang and Narita (2012)). Thus, to further support our main result that
cyclones reduce long-run growth, we examine whether our estimated long-run GDP response exhibits
patterns of adaptation that are consistent with economic theory.
Optimal Adaptation in Theory Assume that countries can exert costly adaptive effort e to reduce
their long-run losses in the event that a cyclone strikes36 . If the cost function for e is convex, then
populations will exert adaptive effort until the marginal cost of additional effort equals its expected
marginal benefit. The benefit of this adaptive effort is determined by a country’s cyclone climate,
because effort only provides benefits when a cyclone actually strikes, so countries that experience more
intense or more frequent cyclones should have greater returns to adaptation. Thus, we expect that
countries endowed with more intense cyclone climates will invest more in costly adaptation, reducing
their marginal long-run losses when a cyclone strikes. Denoting a country’s optimal level of adaptive
36 For

example, governments could build seawalls or invest in early-warning systems.

35

effort e∗ and income Y , the above logic predicts
∂e∗
>0
∂ S̄¯

(4)

where S̄¯ is expected storm exposure, a summary statistic for a location’s typhoon-climate37 . Unfortunately, we cannot directly observe whether this is true because we do not observe e∗ . However,
increasing effort reduces marginal long-run losses (−∂Y /∂S) to a fixed level of actual cyclone exposure
S̄


∂Y (e)
∂
· −
< 0.
(5)
∂e
∂ S̄
This enables us to infer that adaptation is occurring if we see that marginal losses decline as climates
intensify. Assuming populations optimize and noting that Ω = ∂Y /∂ S̄, we can multiply Equations 4
and 5 to obtain
∂Ω(e∗ )
∂ ∂Y (e∗ )
·
=
>0
∂ S̄
∂ S̄¯
∂ S̄¯

(6)

a result that we can investigate empirically. For a more complete treatment of optimal adaptation
to tropical cyclone climates, as well as additional empirical evidence, we refer readers to Hsiang and
Narita (2012).
Cross-Sectional Evidence of Adaptation We test Equation 6 by examining whether cycloneinduced losses vary with the climatological endowment of different countries. To do this, we stratify
our sample of countries into quintiles according to their average level of cyclone exposure S̄. We then
estimate Equation 2-3 for each quintile separately and display the marginal long-run growth effect of
disaster (∂Ω(e∗ )/∂ S̄) in Figure 19. Consistent with Equation 6, the marginal effect of cyclone exposure becomes more positive (declining in magnitude) as the average risk of exposure increases. The
effect of disaster on the quintile with lowest risk (0–20%) is the most negative, while the effect on
the second quintile (20–40%) is less negative and the effect on the three quintiles with highest risk
(40–100%) is closest to zero. These three quintiles with high cyclone risk all exhibit responses that
are statistically indistinguishable from the average effect presented throughout this study (grey stripe)
and the magnitude of the “naive” response among poorly adapted populations (in the first quintile)
is roughly eight times larger. Taken together, these findings support the hypothesis that populations
adapt to cyclones, bolstering our main thesis that cyclones adversely affect growth since there would
be no incentive for populations to adapt if cyclones were benign.
It is important to note three important features of this adaptive response. Firstly, unadapted
countries, though having larger marginal income losses due to tropical cyclone exposure, experience
far fewer storms. This implies that total losses over the sample period are likely smaller in these countries than in frequently exposed countries. Secondly, even though heavily exposed populations appear
37 Hsiang and Narita (2012) demonstrated that average exposure was an approximately sufficient statistic for the
incentive to adapt in the context of direct aggregate damages.

36

10 m/s percentile cyclone events
(each generates a predicted 3.6% loss over 20 years)
Baseline trend
(2% per year)
Counterfactual
trajectories after
each storm

30

Observed
trajectory

20

10

0

Loss from trend

Log GDP per capita × 100
(relative to Year 0)

40

0
ï
ï

0

5

10
Year

15

20

Figure 20: An example GDPpc trajectory in the presence of repeated cyclone exposure. We set
exposure to 10 m/s in years 0, 3, 8, and 15. The penalty to income increases with each event,
leading to a substantial divergence from the pre-disaster trend in income growth. The counterfactual
trajectories that the country would have followed, had exposure stopped after each of the first three
storms, are grey. The observed trajectory (black) appears as an almost-smooth line with an average
growth rate that is depressed relative to the pre-disaster baseline.
to adapt extensively compared to “naive” populations, these heavily exposed populations continue
to suffer losses that are both economically large and statistically indistinguishable from the average
response presented in Figure 9. This implies that the average effect presented in Figure 9 describes
the effect of cyclones on highly adapted and regularly exposed populations38 , so it is a good approximation for the average economic impact of most cyclones observed on the planet. Finally, no countries
undertake “complete adaptation” by driving their marginal damages to zero despite the fact that populations currently exposed to cyclones have been similarly exposed for centuries. If one assumes that
populations are well-informed, this would indicate that the net benefit of additional adaptation effort
is zero, or very low, given each country’s current equilibrium level of adaptive effort e⋆ , suggesting the
cost function in e is likely convex (Hsiang and Narita (2012)).

The effect of cyclone-prone climates on long-run economic development
Up to this point, we have identified the long-run growth effect of cyclones using a within-country
estimate that relies only on each country’s year-to-year variation in cyclone exposure. The country fixed
effects of our model absorb all cross-sectional differences in cyclone climates and growth, preventing
these average differences from influencing our estimates. However, as discussed in the last section and
illustrated in Figures 5 and 6, there are strong cross-sectional differences countries’ average cyclone
exposure: some countries are regularly struck by strong cyclones while other countries are rarely hit.
38 The average effect presented throughout the study is dominated by the response of high risk countries because those
countries experience more cyclone effects during the period of observation.

37

How do the long-run growth effects that we estimate above interact with these cross-sectional patterns
in countries’ geographic endowments to influence their long-run economic development?
If a country is repeatedly hit by cyclones, that country will continuously accumulate growth penalties that can substantially alter that country’s income trajectory. Figure 20 illustrates this process
by demonstrating how the effect of sequential storms add up for a single country. Each storm has
a long-run effect that permanently alters a country’s growth trajectory, and any storms that follow
further lower that country’s long-run growth. Had the “build back better” or “recovery to trend”
hypotheses been true, then the effect of sequential storms would be smaller or would vanish, since later
storms would either replace or offset the effects of earlier storms. However, because national incomes
exhibit “no recovery,” the effect of sequential storms simply add to one another, creating an income
penalty (relative to the trend) that grows monotonically with time.
Two aspects of this process make it particularly insidious for detection by analysts, possibly explaining why this effect has not be characterized in earlier studies. First, the long-run growth response
of an individual storm onsets very gradually (recall Figure 9), so detecting the cumulative effect of
cyclones by visually examining GDP time-series should be nearly impossible. Consider Figure 20: four
large storms (> 1 s.d.) strike over the course of two decades, however the observed trajectory of GDP
appears smooth and almost perfectly linear. There is no “trend-break” of otherwise abrupt movement
in GDP that would attract the attention of an analyst, a problem that would only be compounded
if realistic noise were added to this figure. Second, the cross-sectional variation in average cyclone
exposure is correlated with many other confounding static variables, such as latitude or distance to
coasts, so it is unlikely that any cross-sectional regression of average growth rates could alone reliably
identify the long-run growth effect of a country’s stationary cyclone climate. Together, these two facts
make it very difficult to detect the effect of cyclone climates on long-run development using analytical methods other than the deconvolution that we employed here. Nonetheless, given the strength
of the results above, we have no choice but to conclude that for those countries which are regularly
or perpetually exposed to cyclone disasters, a new permanent reduction in long-run national income
is quietly suffered each time a storm strikes, accumulating on top of similar historical penalties and
causing these countries to grow slower than they otherwise would.
Simulating alternative development trajectories The tropical cyclone climate of each country
is stationary, preventing us from directly identifying the effect of a cyclone climate on average growth
rates in the presence of other omitted geographic variables – however we can use our inter-temporallyidentified estimate for the effect of an individual cyclone to estimate the cumulative influence of each
countries’ climate (repeated exposure to individual cyclones) on its average rate of growth. To estimate
the partial effect of each cyclone climate on long-run development, we use our parameter estimates to
compute how each country’s income trajectory (starting in 1970) would have looked had its cyclone
exposure been fixed at zero since 1950. This approach is simplistic, since it assumes that nothing else
in a country changes when all cyclones are removed, but it is a useful benchmark since it provides us
with a sense of scale for the overall effect of each countries’ cyclone climate. To remove the effect of
all cyclones from historical growth, we preserve the coefficients from our baseline model (Equation 2)
but eliminate the tropical cyclone terms. Letting Si,t be the vector of cyclone exposure for years t to

38

Singapore

20

20

10

0

9.6
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

10
9

0

2000

1950

1960

Wind speed (m/s)

10
9

20

1980

1990

0

2000

8
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

India

30

11

30

20

20

10

10

8

8
10

7

0

6
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

7
10

0
1950

2000

1960

Trinidad & Tobago

1970

1980

1990

0

2000

1950

1960

Thailand

30
Wind speed (m/s)

1970

United States

China
30

11

20

1970

1980

1990

2000

Honduras

30

20

10

30

9

20

9

10
10

10

10

8

8
0

9
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

0

2000

0
1950

1960

Jamaica

1970

1980

1990

2000

1950

1960

Madagascar

30
Wind speed (m/s)

9

10

10
10

30

20

1970

1980

1990

2000

Philippines

30
10

30
8

20

11
10

20

9
10

9

0

10

7

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Log GDP per capita

11

Log GDP per capita

20

Panama

30

10

8

0
1950

Year

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

7
1950

1960

Year

Observed GDP (PWT)
Cyclone wind speed

Log GDP per capita

Wind speed (m/s)

10.4

Log GDP per capita

France
30

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year

GDP simulated with full model
GDP simulated with tropical cyclones removed

Figure 21: Simulations of log GDPpc growth with (red) and without (blue) tropical cyclone exposure.
Observed log GDPpc is black and cyclone exposure in each year are vertical grey lines. Countries
are presented in ascending order based on their average tropical cyclone exposure, from low (France,
top left) to high (Philippines, bottom right). The difference between the slopes of the red and blue
simulations gives an estimate of the partial-equilibrium growth effect of observed tropical cyclone
exposure in comparison to a counterfactual “no storm” world (which is never observed). India and
Trinidad & Tobago represent the median tropical cyclone climates within the sample of countries that
are ever exposed. Plots for all countries are shown in Appendix Figures A.1-A.2

39

A

B

Country-by-year obs. in exposed countries

World GDP
32

4.6% growth

Density

log GDP

.1
31
3.3% growth

0

30
-5

0

5

10

15

1970

1980

Simulated annual growth rates (%)

1990

2000

2010

Year

GDP simulated without tropical cyclones

GDP simulated with full model

Observed GDP (PWT)

Figure 22: A) The global distribution of predicted annual growth rates for exposed countries using the
complete growth model (red) and the model where historical cyclone exposure is removed (blue) during
1970-2008. B) the observed trajectory of World GDP (black, 3.5% growth) and simulated trajectories
with and without tropical cyclones included in the model. Japan, Taiwan and Hong-Kong are not
included in these plots (see text).
t − k, we rewrite Equation 2
∆ ln(GDP )i,t = f (S̄i,t ) + gi,t + ǫi,t ,

(7)

to make clear that our model is additively separable in the cyclone-related terms contained in f (.)
and “everything else” contained in gi,t : country fixed effects, year fixed effects and country-specific
trends. Using our parameter estimates, we predict “actual” historical growth for each country by using
all the terms of Equation 7. We then construct a “cyclone-free” growth history for each country by
setting S̄it = 0 for all observations39 while keeping g unchanged and predicting annual growth again.
Using observed incomes in 1970 as initial conditions, we can integrate both “actual” and “cyclonefree” income trajectories using these two alternative growth histories. For each country, the difference
between these two trajectories represents our estimate for the partial effect of that country’s tropical
cyclone climate.
Cyclone climates and global economic development
Figure 21 displays the simulated “actual” income trajectory using the full model (red) and the “cyclonefree” model (blue), overlaid with the observed trajectory of income (black) for twelve example countries
that face a variety of cyclone climates40 (cyclone events are grey). In countries endowed with very weak
cyclone climates (eg. France and Singapore), removing storms has almost no effect on the model’s prediction for long-run income: both the full and truncated model essentially predict identical trajectories
that both mirror the true trajectory. However, as cyclone climates become progressively more intense,
39 Effectively

dropping f (.) from the model.
7 predicts the long term evolution of income well (when all terms are retained), regardless of the cyclone
climate in each country. Results are presented for all countries with non-missing 1970 GDP in Appendix Figures A.1-A.2.
40 Equation

40

the long-term trajectories for income begin to diverge. The “cyclone-free” model invariably predicts
higher incomes because cyclones negatively influence growth, but the magnitude of this divergence
depends strongly on the cyclone climate. For countries endowed with median cyclone climates, India
and Trinidad & Tobago, models with and without cyclone effects forecast income levels that differ by
roughly fifty log-points (65%) after an integration period of thirty-nine years (1970-2008). In countries
endowed with stronger cyclone climates, such as as Thailand or Honduras, removing cyclones from the
model increases final incomes by about one-hundred log-points (172%) during the same integration
period. In some countries that exhibit almost no actual growth, such as Jamaica, or negative growth,
such as Madagascar, the removal of cyclones from our model generates forecasts for moderate rates
of positive growth. Finally, in countries endowed with extremely intense cyclone climates, such as
the Philippines, our simulations suggests that growth is slowed dramatically: the cyclone-free model
exceeds the full model by 300 log-points (2,000%) after the thirty-nine year integration period. This
effect of removing Filipino cyclones is one of the most extreme cases, equivalent to raising the average
annual growth rate in the Philippines by roughly 7.3 percentage points, and would cause growth in
the Philippines to match that of its near neighbor China. For all countries in the simulation, we list
the estimated effect of their cyclone climate on their average growth rate in Appendix Table A.3.
We summarize the total effect of cyclones on global economic growth in Figure 22. Panel A plots the
distribution of annual country-by-year growth rates with and without cyclones included in the model.
When cyclones are removed, the distribution of growth rates shifts upwards, with the mean increasing
from 2.01% per year to 3.80% per year. Importantly, we remove Japan, Taiwan and Hong-Kong from
this exercise since their growth rates become so high (> 13%) that it seems unlikely that they could
plausibly sustain such high growth rates, since factors unrelated to cyclones are likely to limit output
growth in other ways. Collecting results across the remaining 107 countries for which GDP data in
1970 exists (63 of which are ever exposed to cyclones), we compute the trajectory of World GDP
during 1970-2008, using both the full and cyclone-free simulations. The results are displayed in Figure
22B. Using the full model, World GDP grows at 3.28% annually, near the 3.55% growth rate that
was actually observed. When cyclones are removed from the simulation, World GDP grows 4.56% per
year. Differencing the trajectories of the two simulations suggests that World GDP has been growing
1.27% slower (95% confidence interval = [1.08, 1.47]) than it would in a “counterfactual” world with
no cyclones.
Cyclone climate as an explanatory variable in cross-country comparisons of growth
There are large differences in the tropical cyclone climates that countries are endowed with, and
our simulations suggest that cyclones can have a large impact on average growth rates in countries
that are repeatedly exposed to them. Thus, we can ask how much of the cross-country variation in
average growth is explained by cross-country variation in cyclone climates. To explore this question,
we compute the average annual growth rate in simulations with and without cyclones – the difference
between these two numbers is growth that is “missing,” which we attribute to each country’s cyclone
climate41 . In Figure 23 we examine three regions where cyclones are prevalent, adding each country’s
41 The annual average growth rate in the full simulation is equal to the observed annual average growth rate. This is
because the sample average is equal to the average prediction in OLS.

41

Average annual growth rate (%)

8
“Missing”
growth
lost to
cyclones

6

4

Observed
growth

2

0
HTI

"

JAM

BHS

BRB

CUB

PRI

TTO

DOM

North American mainland

Avgerage annual growth rate (%)

6

4

2

0

-2
NIC

GTM

SLV

CRI

MEX

USA

CAN

BLZ

PAN

East Asia

Avg. annual growth rate observed 1970-2008 (%)

#

HND

Average annual growth rate (%)

20

15

10

5

0

PHL

Avg. annual growth rate observed 1970-2008 (%)

Caribbean islands

Avg. annual growth rate observed 1970-2008 (%)

!

JPN

LAO

VNM

THA

MYS

SGP

KOR

TWN

CHN

8

6

4

DOM

TTO

PRI
BRB CUB
BHS

2

0

JAM

HTI

-2
-8

-6

-4

-2

0

8

6

4
PAN
BLZMEX

2

GTM SLV
HND

USA CAN
CRI

0
NIC

-2
-8

-6

-4

-2

0

8
CHN

6

KOR

SGP
THA

VNM

4

MYS

LAO

JPN

2

PHL

0

-2
-8

-6

-4

-2

0

Avg. simulated tropical cyclone growth rate penalty (%)
Avg. GDP growth simulated with cyclones removed
Avg. GDP growth simulated with full model

Figure 23: Left column: Average annual growth rates as observed historically (red bars, equal to
simulated growth with full model) and average growth in simulations where cyclones are removed
(blue bars). The difference in the height of the bars is the “missing” average annual growth loss to
cyclones. See also Appendix Figure A.3. Results for all countries in the simulation are tabulated
in Appendix Table A.3. Right column: Within-region cross-sectional regressions of average annual
growth rates as historically observed against the growth penalty (i.e. “missing growth”) attributable
to each country’s tropical cyclone climate. Table 6 reports coefficients and pooled estimates. Taiwan
is omitted because it is an extreme outlier.

42

Table 6: Cyclone climate as a predictor of average growth
(1)
Dependent variable
Independent variable
Cross sectional coefficient

Observations
Whithin-region R2

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Average annual growth rate observed 1970-2008 (%)
Simulated growth penalty from cyclone climate (%)
0.382***
[0.127]

0.358***
[0.133]

0.259
[0.274]

0.254
[0.827]

0.263
[0.411]

0.380***
[0.143]

34
0.275

27
0.265

18
0.053

8
0.044

10
0.061

9
0.479

Regions in sample
East Asia
Y
Y
Y
N. America mainland
Y
Y
Y
Y
Caribbean islands
Y
Y
Y
Y
S. Asia
Y
Oceania
Y
Regressor is the average difference between annual growth predicted with the full model
and the model where tropical cyclone exposure is set to zero. Models with more than
one region in the sample include region fixed effects. Observed growth rates are from
the PWT. Also see Figure ??. Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1
“missing” growth to its historically observed growth, allowing us to visualize how the distribution of
growth rates might change if cyclones had not affected these countries (also see Appendix Figure A.3).
If cyclones explained all of the cross-country differences in growth rates within each region, then we
would expect all countries within a region to have the same growth rate once we accounted for the
cyclone growth penalty. We do not observe this, indicating that cyclones are only one of many factors
that probably influence growth – however, we do observe that the distribution of growth rates within
each region flattens out somewhat once the cyclone growth penalty is accounted for. For examples, we
point out that in the absence of cyclones our estimates suggest that average growth rates in Jamaica
and Trinidad & Tobago would be substantially nearer to one another (4.0:4.7 rather than 0.8:3.1),
similar to Guatemala and Panama (3.3:3.2 rather than 1.1:2.9) and the Philippines and China (8.9:8.4
rather than 1.7:7.3).
In the right column of Figure 23, we formalize this comparison by plotting the cross-sectional
regression of each country’s observed average growth against our estimate for each country’s cycloneinduced growth penalty. Within each region, countries with a larger (more negative) growth penalty
tend to grow more slowly. In Table 6 we present coefficients for this regression, including region fixed
effects to account for the large differences in average growth rates between regions. In this simple
cross-sectional model, average growth tends to fall 0.38% per year for each 1% increase in the simulated cyclone-induced growth penalty (column 1). In this limited sample of cyclone-exposed countries,
the within-region R-squared is 0.28, indicating that the cyclone climates of countries predicts a substantial amount of the observed cross-country variation in their average growth rates. It is likely that
43

this estimate suffers from some attenuation bias – since we measure cyclone exposure imperfectly –
and probably omitted variables bias as well – since there are important covariates that are correlated with cyclone climate which we do not attempt to account for here. Nonetheless, we think it is
notable that the positive correlation between our calculated growth penalty and actual growth reduction appears independently within different regions with a relatively stable magnitude42 (columns 2-6).
These simulations help us understand the extent to which repeated disaster exposure might influence economic development in countries endowed with different cyclone climates, however they should
be interpreted cautiously. Even though we account for adaptation to average cyclone exposure, in
terms of expected losses, we cannot account for the numerous and interacting general equilibrium
adjustments that might accompany a large change in the global distribution of cyclones. For example,
if all cyclones were removed from the Earth, patterns of global trade would surely adjust – an effect
that we do not capture here. In addition, there may be unobservable factors that limit growth in
certain countries, so it may be impossible for some countries to achieve the growth rates that our
cyclone-free models suggest. However, it is also worth noting that in some cases, these estimates may
underestimate the effect of cyclones since there may be secondary impacts – such as a civil war that
might not have occurred without disaster-induced economic contraction (Hsiang, Burke and Miguel
(2013)) – that further reduce long-run growth. We feel that all these caveats are substantive enough
that the exact values retrieved from the “cyclone-free” simulations should not be interpreted too literally. However, we think that the general distribution and magnitude of these quantities indicate that
tropical cyclones, and perhaps disasters more generally, are a feature of the planet that exert a strong
influence over global patterns of economic development.

Comparisons with previous studies
While several studies have examined different impacts of disasters, few can be directly compared to
our results. However, two prior studies combine cyclone metrics from LICRICE with alternative data
sets to examine short-run economic losses, so we use these earlier studies as benchmarks to consider
whether the size of our estimates are reasonable. Hsiang and Narita (2012) examine how the direct,
self-reported, short-run economic damages in the Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT) respond to
country-level maximum wind speed in a global sample of countries. A linearization of their result
indicates that direct, short-run damages increase by roughly 0.33% of GDP per m/s on average, which
is similar in magnitude to our estimate of 0.37% of GDP per m/s in long-run losses (Appendix Figure
A.4, top panel). Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011) examine household data from the Philippines to
identify short-run income losses using province-by-year variation in wind speed. They estimate that
an average household suffers short-run income losses of 6.6% in the average year, which is similar
in magnitude to the average 7.5% annual loss of long-run income that we estimate the Philippines
suffers as a country (Appendix Figure A.4, lower panel). Without a theory relating short and long-run
income losses after disaster, we refrain from speculating whether the short-run losses identified in these
two earlier studies represent the exact same income losses that we observe in this study. However,
42 Because the sample sizes are small and the variation in the independent variable is limited for samples that do no
include East Asia, the standard errors for these estimates tend to be large.

44

A

Tropical cyclone risk (climate) in A1B scenario & historical control
2010

2090
anthropogenic

TC risk

+10.3%
Historical tropical cyclone climate of the USA

NPV of expected additional TCs in each year
(discount rate = 5%)

B
0

integral after 2090 =
ï*'3LQ139

% current GDP

ï
ï

integral over 2010-2090 =
ï*'3LQ139

ï
ï
ï
2010

2030

2050

2070

2090

Figure 24: Example calculation of NPV of changes to the tropical cyclone climate of the United
States under “Business as usual” (as tabulated in Table 7). (A) The tropical cyclone climate of the
United States linearly intensifies to the projected intensity between 2010 and 2090 (the midpoint of the
2080-2100 averaging period of Emanuel et al). After 2090, the climate of the United States remains
unchanged at it’s new intensity. (B) The NPV (discount rate = 5%) of income losses that are expected
to be incurred by the intensified climate (as it will be experienced in each year) is computed for each
year and integrated to t = ∞. Most of the expected loss in NPV will be caused by cyclone events
before 2040.
the magnitude of the short and long-run losses are similar, suggesting that the long-run estimates we
present here may be reasonably sized.

Projecting the cyclone-related cost of anthropogenic climate change
There is concern that anthropogenic climate change may cause the frequency and distribution of tropical cyclones to change, thereby raising (or lowering) cyclone-induced costs borne by coastal populations
(Emanuel (2005), Stern (2006), Nordhaus (2010), Mendelsohn et al. (2012), Hsiang & Narita (2012)).
Forecasting the response of cyclones to future climatic conditions has proven difficult and it remains a
field of active research – however, there is some consensus on general patterns (Knutson et al. (2010)).
Globally, there are likely to be fewer total storms that achieve tropical cyclone status but the storms
that do occur are likely to stronger on average. There is likely to be a reduction in the absolute
number of relatively weaker storms, little change in the absolute number of strong storms, and an

45

increase in the absolute number of very strong storms43 . However, these statistics are global statistics
and stronger patterns are expected at the basin level in some cases. For example, there is relatively
broad consensus across models that total energy dissipation over the West Pacific will increase and
that it will decrease over the Southern Hemisphere. Here we use basin-level forecasts to estimate the
Present Discounted Value (PDV) of anthropogenic changes to the global tropical cyclone climate under
a “business as usual” scenario (A1B).
Valuing an altered income trajectory caused by an altered cyclone climate
Above we showed that a marginal increase in cyclone exposure by one unit at time t led to a reduction
of income by Ωj at time t + j. We did not have enough data to observe income losses more than twenty
years after a cyclone event44 , so here we assume that income loss is permanent, thus Ωs = Ω20 for all
s ≥ 21. Assume a discount rate of ρ.
Letting expected cyclone exposure in the absence of anthropogenic forcing be S0 in every period,
the expected exposure of a population under climate change is
S(t) = S0 + ∆(t)

(8)

where ∆(t) is the total effect of all historical climate changes on S at the moment t. Before T1 , human
activity has no effect so ∆(t) = 0 for t < T1 . At some point T2 in the future, the climate stabilizes so
¯ for t > T2 . Between T1 and T2 , the cyclone climate exhibits transient behavior.
we set ∆(t) = ∆
Our goal is to compare a cyclone-dependent income stream Y (S0 ) that is unaffected by climate
change with a similar income stream that is affected by climate change Y (S(t)). A simple way to
summarize the difference between these two trajectories, in a manner useful to policy, is to compute
the PDV of their difference
P DV [Y (S0 ) − Y (S(t))] = P DV [∂Y /∂S × ∆(t)]

(9)

which is true because the marginal impact of cyclone exposure is approximately invariant in the
intensity of exposure (losses are linear), so we only need to consider the anthropogenic changes ∆(t).
To compute this value, we first evaluate the PDV of a single cyclone event with a magnitude of
one at time t = 0, which we denote κ:


κ=

20
X
j=0



Ωj e−ρj  +

Ω20 −21ρ
e
.
ρ

(10)

The first term is the PDV of losses that occur in the year of the cyclone and the twenty years that
follow. The second term is the PDV of the permanent income reduction Ω20 that is observed every
period t ≥ 21. κ is the marginal change in PDV(Y ) that occurs because of a cyclone at time t if the
future losses caused by that cyclone were discounted back to the moment t. Thus, the total losses
from a permanent change in climate is this marginal effect κ times the change in the climate, at each
43 We refer interested readers to Knutson, Landsea and Emanuel (2010) and Knutson et al. (2010) for reviews of this
active literature.
44 Estimates with more lags (not shown) suggest that Ω
30 ≈ Ω20 .

46

period where the climate has changed, discounted back to t = 0
P DV [∂Y /∂S × ∆(t)] =

Z

T2

κ∆(t)e−ρt dt +
T1

¯
κ∆
e−T2 ρ .
ρ

(11)

The first term is the cumulative loss that is incurred by all changes in cyclone risk that occur before
¯ that
the climate stabilizes. The second term is the discounted value of the permanent climate shift ∆
is the new steady state after t = T2 .
Generic climate scenarios Table 7 describes the PDV of changes to the current tropical cyclone
climate under several different discount rates – here we focus on the 5% discount rate for succinctness45 .
In the top panel, we tabulate the PDV of three types of generic scenarios that are not specific to a
country. The first scenario is a single 1 m/s cyclone event today, which has PDV equal to κ, i.e. −5.1%
of GDP (Eq. 10). This value is sizable because income losses from a single event are permanent relative
to the counterfactual income trajectory. The second scenario is an abrupt intensification of the climate
that occurs at 2090 and which persists indefinitely – a plot of ∆(t) would be a step function where the
discontinuity is at t = 2090. The PDV of this scenario is −1.9% of GDP, equal in value to the second
term in Eq. 11. The PDV of this permanent shift in the climate is lower than the one-time event
that occurs immediately only because it occurs in the distant future and is thus discounted, although
the total quantity of additional cyclone risk endured in the second scenario is much larger than in the
first scenario. The third generic scenario is a linear intensification of the climate that begins in 2010
and ends in 2090, where the climate stabilizes in 2090 at 1 m/s above its initial risk level in 2010 (see
Figure 24 for a graphical example). The PDV of this third scenario is the sum of both terms in Eq.
11, and its value exceeds in magnitude both the first and second scenarios. With a high discount rate
(10%) the cost of this third scenario is only slightly higher in PDV than a single event today (2.3:1.9)
because the costs from the gradually intensifying climate are heavily discounted, whereas for a low
discount rate (1%) the PDV of this scenario is very large compared to a single event (2382:34) because
the quantity of total additional risk is much larger and it is not heavily discounted. At a 5% discount
rate the PDV of this scenario is still quantitatively large, amounting to −25.2% of GDP. Panel B
of Figure 24 illustrates the timing of losses under this scenario with a 5% discount rate using actual
climate values for the United States – most of the loss in PDV arises from the intensification of the
cyclone climate that occurs during 2020-2050 because the distant future is still heavily discounted.
Application to a “Business as usual” scenario To apply quantities to Equation 11, we combine
our empirical estimates of Ωj with basin-specific estimates of ∆(t) from Emanuel et al (2008) (shown
in Appendix Figure A.5 for reference). Emanuel et al do not model transient cyclone climates because
it is computationally expensive – instead they model the cyclone climates during 2080-2100 under
the A1B scenario as if it were a steady-state climate46 . Thus, we set T1 = 2010 and T2 = 2090,
45 Much literature has discussed what discount rates should be used for climate change projections. A 5% discount rate
is at the higher end of the spectrum of values that are advocated, so we focus on it in an effort to be both conservative
but reasonable. For a review and perspectives on discount rates, see Gollier (2012).
46 Emanuel et al also model the cyclone climate during the twentieth century as if it were a steady state and report
¯ This procedure is useful because it removes any constant bias exhibited by
the difference, which is analogous to ∆.
individual models.

47

Table 7: PDV of changes to the global tropical cyclone climate under “business as usual” (A1B)
PDV as percentage of current GDP
Discount rate:

1.0%

3.0%

5.0%

7.0%

10.0%

A single +1 m/s tropical
cyclone event today

-34.49
(-10.39)

-9.86
(-2.97)

-5.12
(-1.55)

-3.20
(-0.98)

-1.86
(-0.58)

An abrupt +1 m/s climate
intensification in 2090

-1549.93
(-466.84)

-29.81
(-8.97)

-1.88
(-0.57)

-0.17
(-0.05)

-0.01
(0.00)

A linear climate intensification
to +1 m/s in 2090†

-2382.10
(-717.49)

-124.95
(-37.61)

-25.19
(-7.63)

-8.13
(-2.49)

-2.32
(-0.73)

Generic climate scenarios
(standard errors in parentheses)

Current
climate (m/s)

North Atlantic: linear increase up to +10.3% in 2090
Bahamas
Belize
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Rep.
Guatemala
Honduras
Haiti
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Trinidad & Tobago
United States

-3048
-2029
-304
-2673
-2738
-1304
-1455
-2625
-2420
-1629
-1081
-950
-560

-160
-106
-16
-140
-144
-68
-76
-138
-127
-85
-57
-50
-29

-32.2
-21.5
-3.2
-28.3
-29.0
-13.8
-15.4
-27.8
-25.6
-17.2
-11.4
-10.0
-5.9

-10.4
-6.9
-1.0
-9.1
-9.3
-4.5
-5.0
-9.0
-8.3
-5.6
-3.7
-3.2
-1.9

-3.0
-2.0
-0.3
-2.6
-2.7
-1.3
-1.4
-2.6
-2.4
-1.6
-1.1
-0.9
-0.5

12.4
8.3
1.2
10.9
11.2
5.3
5.9
10.7
9.9
6.6
4.4
3.9
2.3

-4.1
-32.8
-23.7
-15.3
-0.8
-26.9
-7.4
-18.1

-1.2
-9.4
-6.8
-4.4
-0.2
-7.7
-2.1
-5.2

2.6
21.1
15.2
9.9
0.5
17.3
4.8
11.6

4.2
0.2
3.1
0.7

1.2
0.1
0.9
0.2

3.8
0.2
2.7
0.6

3.6
1.8
1.7

1.0
0.5
0.5

7.6
3.9
3.6

West Pacific: linear increase up to +19.1% in 2090
China
Japan
Korea
Laos
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam

-1194
-9600
-6937
-4492
-235
-7878
-2176
-5291

-63
-504
-364
-236
-12
-413
-114
-278

-12.6
-101.5
-73.4
-47.5
-2.5
-83.3
-23.0
-56.0

Oceania: linear decrease down to -13.8% in 2090
Australia
Indonesia
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea

1238
71
904
194

65
4
47
10

13.1
0.7
9.6
2.0

North Indian: linear decrease down to -5.8% in 2090
Bangladesh
India
Sri Lanka

1054
533
499

55
28
26

11.1
5.6
5.3

Estimates for climatic intensification are the relative changes in basin-wide power dissipation between simulations of the twentieth-century and the period 2080-2100 under the A1B emissions
scenario averaged across seven climate models (Emanuel et al. (2008)). Also see discussion in
(Knutson et al. (2010)). Projections assume that country-level exposure increases in proportion
to basin-level activity and basin-level activity strengthens or weakens linearly between 2010 and
2090 (the midpoint of the 2080-2100 averaging period). Models agree strongly on the sign of West
Pacific (7/7) and Oceania (6/7) projections. Models disagree more regarding North Atlantic (4/7)
and North Indian (4/7) projections (see Appendix
48 Figure A.5). Estimates using the 5% discount
rate are converted to 2010 US$ in Table 8. † See Figure 24 for a graphical explanation of this
calculation.

¯ for each
because it is the midpoint of the averaging period in Emanuel et al. Emanuel et al report ∆
basin in aggregate, averaged over seven climate models. For simplicity, we follow Emanuel (2011) and
¯ in 2090, analogous to the third generic
assume that ∆(t) increases linearly from zero in 2010 to ∆
scenario described above, and that the climate of each country intensifies in proportion to the basinlevel aggregate. Figure 24 depicts how estimates from Emanuel et al (2008) are converted to a cyclone
climate trajectory for the United States, which is then valued at each moment in time.
The lower panels of Table 7 present the PDV of the A1B scenario for several major countries in
each basin, as a percentage of each country’s current GDP. Because the timing of these climatological changes are assumed to be identical across basins, the difference between countries arises from
differences in the sign and magnitude of climatic change across basins as well as the differing baseline
climatologies of each country47 (far right column). Anthropogenic climate change is expected to cause
moderate intensification of North Atlantic cyclone activity48 (+10.3%), which has a sizable negative
NPV for many countries (we again focus on the 5% discount rate). Caribbean islands lose the largest
fraction of income, with losses that generally exceed 20% of current GDP in NPV, while mainland
North America loses somewhat less, with losses in the vicinity of 5-15% of current GDP. The United
States, is expected to lose the NPV-equivalent of 5.9% of current GDP. The West Pacific faces the
most extreme intensification of cyclone activity49 (+19.1%) causing large losses for many countries in
East Asia. The NPV of expected losses exceed 40% of GDP for many countries, such as Vietnam and
South Korea, and rises above 80% of current GDP in the cases of the Philippines and Japan. China
is expected to lose the equivalent of 12.6% of its current GDP. Oceania and the North Indian Ocean
are anticipated to have reduced tropical cyclone exposure under anthropogenic climate change (−5.8%
and −13.8% respectively), causing their expected income streams to rise in the future. Because these
climatological changes are small to moderate in magnitude and the initial cyclone climatology of these
countries is somewhat weaker, these gains from climate change tend to be smaller (in percentage terms)
than the losses described above. Australia and Bangladesh benefit the most in percentage terms, with
gains valued at 13.1% and 11.1% of current GDP (resp.). India is expected to gain the NPV-equivalent
of 5.6% of its current GDP.

6

Summary and discusion

A growing literature has examined the short-run economic impact of natural disasters and environmental insults more generally, however it has been widely debated whether extreme events have any
permanent long-run impact on economic outcomes. Here, we have constructed a novel global dataset
of exogenous natural disasters and are the first to demonstrate that permanent losses to national income are large, frequent and generalizable to populations around the globe, regardless of their income
level, geography or the scale of the disaster. Permanent changes in consumption, investment, trade
and international aid all reflect the observed changes in national income, corroborating this result.
Furthermore, our result is supported by global patterns of income losses, which match theoretical pre47 These estimates are a linear rescaling of the third generic scenario (Eq. 11) where ∆
¯ is set to the fractional
intensification of basin-level activity times each country’s baseline climatology.
48 “Cyclone activity” here is total power dissipation.
49 The intensification of the West Pacific is highly consistent across models, so it should be considered the most certain
of these scenarios. See Appendix Figure A.5.

49

dictions for the structure of climate-based adaptations, and two prior studies that produce similarly
sized estimates using different data. Collectively, these findings lead us to reject the “creative destruction,” the “build back better,” and the “recovery to trend” hypotheses for post-disaster impacts –
leading us to embrace the “no recovery” hypothesis as the best description of the data.
The estimated impact of cyclones on long-run growth emerges gradually, rendering it virtually
undetectable to a casual observer, but it persists for more than a decade, generating strikingly large
cumulative losses that have dramatic implications for economic development. Within the 58% of
countries that are affected by cyclones, a one standard deviation event reduces long-run GDP by 3.6
percentage points, and a “one-in-ten” country-year event reduces long-run GDP by 7.4% twenty years
later. For countries that are frequently or persistently exposed to cyclones, these permanent losses
accumulate, causing annual average growth rates to be 1-7.5 percentage points lower than simulations
of “cyclone-free” counterfactuals. Across the global sample of affected countries, simulations suggest
that the 2.0% average annual growth rate that we observe in the real world is depressed relative to the
3.8% growth that we would observe in a counterfactual world that had no tropical cyclones50 . Taken
together, these results suggest that the global tropical cyclone climate is likely to play an important role
in determining the global distribution of countries’ growth rates as well as the global rate of economic
growth. Application of these estimates to a projection of climate change indicates that through its
influence on cyclone activity, anthropogenic warming will have a substantial impact on the income
trajectory of countries, with a PDV cost for individual countries that ranges from +13.1% (a benefit)
to −101.5% (a loss) of current GDP.
Implications for disaster risk management policies In general, natural disaster policies have
two prongs: pre-disaster risk reduction and post-disaster income-smoothing. The latter is often the
focus of actual policy, however the former has received substantial recent attention as researchers
demonstrate that it is sometimes highly cost-effective (Healy and Malhotra (2009), Deryugina (2011),
UNISDR (2011)). The discussion of these two policy-instruments often assumes that they are substitutes for one another, in terms of raising social welfare, and that the efficient allocation of public
funds should be based on their cost-efficacy. However, our results suggest that while both instruments
may have positive net-present value, they are not substitutes in the long-run. Post-disaster income
smoothing is achieved through borrowing, transfers and insurance mechanisms. These measures may
be effective at reducing welfare losses in the short run, but they may generate no net income. Thus, if
incomes decline in the long-run, then the primary welfare gains from smoothing will arise from simply
delaying consumption losses. We observe that long-run income loses unfold gradually over the course
of fifteen years, suggesting that some income smoothing measures are probably slowing the decline in
national income. However, despite access to these instruments, we do not observe that populations
“catch up” with their pre-disaster trajectory, suggesting that these instruments may have limited longrun impact. In contrast, pre-disaster investments that reduce risk, such as infrastructure hardening
and early-warning systems, are likely to influence long-run outcomes after disaster. Many risk reduction measures are similar or identical to adaptive investments, and the results in Figure 19 suggest
that adaptive behaviors are probably effective at lowering the marginal long-run effect of cyclones.
50 See

text above for many caveats of this result.

50

Policy-makers should optimally allocate public resources between post-disaster income smoothing and
pre-disaster risk reduction. If future welfare is discounted heavily, then long-run income is not important and the optimal allocation shifts towards income smoothing. As policy-makers care more about
the future, then risk reduction becomes more important since its impact on future income is enduring.
Implications for economic development policies Tropical cyclone exposure effectively displaces
a country’s GDP trajectory in time – following cyclone exposure, a country’s income does not recover to
its pre-disaster trajectory but instead settles on a new trajectory that is parallel but below the original
trajectory. Thus, a simple way to summarize our result is to compute how much “un-development”
occurs as a result of cyclone exposure. Within the sample of cyclone-affected countries, a one standard
deviation event is equal to 9.4 m/s of wind exposure which generates a long-run loss of 3.57% of
GDP. Because average annual growth in this sample is 2.00% per year, each one standard deviation
event effectively undoes 1.8 year’s worth of economic development51 . Using this metric, each 1 m/s
marginal increase in annual wind exposure undoes 2.3 month’s worth of average development. For
countries endowed with cyclone climates where they are repeatedly exposed to cyclone events, there is
no choice but to adapt to these adverse conditions. Here (Figure 19) and elsewhere (Hsiang & Narita
(2012), Anttila-Hughes & Hsiang (2011)) there is evidence that adaptation to cyclones is feasible, but
the fact that no countries exhibit zero marginal losses indicates that the cost of additional adaptation
remains binding for most populations (Hsiang & Narita (2012)). If policy-makers are able to encourage
technological innovations or otherwise lower the cost of adaptive investments, this should increase
populations’ voluntary adoption and investment in adaptive technologies, which in turn should lower
their long-run economic losses to disaster and raise their growth rate. In addition, it is possible that
some populations may have underinvested in adaption because they undervalue its benefit – perhaps
because it is difficult for populations to observe a return on investment for protective technologies. This
study suggests that instead of conceptualizing adaptive investments as simply “protective,” they can in
fact be conceptualized as “revenue generating investments” since they effectively raise a population’s
expected future income stream.
Implications for climate change policies Optimal climate change policy balances the cost of
reducing greenhouse gas emissions with the benefits of limiting global climatic changes. In practice,
computing the total benefit of climate change policy requires that we identify the various pathways
through which climate changes affect society and then enumerate the costs or benefits of these various
impacts. It has been recognized for some time that anthropogenic climate change might alter tropical
cyclone frequency or intensity (Emanuel (1999)) and recently there has been some effort to quantify
the social cost of these projected changes (Nordhaus (2010), Mendelsohn et al (2012), Houser et al.
(2014)), however these recent efforts have focused on the immediate destruction of assets in storms and
have not accounted for their impact on long-run economic growth. The present study provides evidence
that this later mechanism is economically important in scenarios of future warming, with a social cost
that is larger in magnitude than the projected cost of additional asset destruction. Accounting for the
effect of tropical cyclones on long-run growth will raise our estimate for the global social cost of climate
51 An event at the 90th percentile reverses 3.7 year’s worth of develoment, and an event at the 99th percentile undoes
7.5 years worth of development.

51

Table 8: PDV of the change in countries’ income trajectories resulting from the “business as usual”
climate change scenario (A1B)
Country

PDV using 5% discount rate*
Estimate
( billion US$)
†

95% confidence
interval bounds

-4,461.1
-1,364.5
-1,026.4
-991.9
-855.0
-354.0
-299.3
-260.3
-160.1
-140.6
-40.0
-34.5
-33.0
-13.2
-13.2
-10.9
-10.9
-9.8
-9.3
-9.2
-7.1
-6.3
-5.5
-5.3
-4.7
-4.0
-3.6
-3.2
-3.1

-1,813.6
-554.7
-417.3
-403.2
-347.6
-143.9
-121.7
-105.8
-65.1
-57.2
-16.3
-14.0
-13.4
-5.4
-5.4
-4.4
-4.4
-4.0
-3.8
-3.7
-2.9
-2.6
-2.2
-2.1
-1.9
-1.6
-1.5
-1.3
-1.3

-7,108.5
-2,174.3
-1,635.6
-1,580.5
-1,362.4
-564.1
-476.9
-414.7
-255.1
-224.0
-63.7
-55.0
-52.6
-21.1
-21.1
-17.4
-17.3
-15.6
-14.8
-14.7
-11.2
-10.1
-8.8
-8.4
-7.5
-6.4
-5.8
-5.0
-4.9

All others

-15.5

-6.3

-24.7

Pakistan
Sri Lanka
New Zealand
Bangladesh
Australia
India

3.1
5.1
13.0
26.1
140.0
264.2

1.3
2.1
5.3
10.6
56.9
107.4

4.9
8.2
20.7
41.6
223.1
420.9

Total losses
Total gains

-10,159
455

-4,130
185

-16,188
725

-9,704

-3,945

-15,463

Japan
China
South Korea
Taiwan
United States
Hong Kong
Philippines
Mexico
Vietnam
Thailand
Cuba
Puerto Rico
Dominican Republic
Spain
Guatemala
Canada
Indonesia
Malaysia
Cambodia
Laos
Jamaica
France
Portugal
Singapore
Honduras
Haiti
El Salvador
Trinidad & Tobago
Bahamas

Net PDV (global)

*Value of income stream under A1B less control scenario.
PPP adjusted and based on 2010 income.

52

† Values

are

change substantially. For a sense of scale, our estimates suggest that under the “Business as usual”
scenario (with a 5% discount rate52 ) the PDV of lost long-run growth is $855 billion for the United
States53 (5.9% of current GDP), $299 billion for the Philippines (83.3% of current GDP), $1 trillion for
South Korea (73% of current GDP), $1.4 trillion for China (12.6% of current GDP), and $4.5 trillion
for Japan (101.5% of current GDP)54 – values for other countries are tabulated in Table 8. Aggregating
these estimates across all countries alters the PDV of “full mitigation” relative to “business as usual” by
$9.7 trillion ($5.2 trillion without Japan). For comparison, we note that Nordhaus (2008) calculates
that the total PDV of optimal global climate policy is $5 trillion (in comparison to no regulation,
using a similar discount rate) which costs $2 trillion to implement, for a net gain of $3 trillion55 .
Thus, accounting for the long-run growth impact of cyclones will raise the marginal benefit of green
house gas mitigation, thereby increasing the incentive for populations to undertake somewhat stronger
mitigation measures. Importantly, however, because these losses are relatively focused in the coastal
countries of North America and East Asia, these results are likely to influence the optimal policies of
these particular countries more strongly than they influence optimal global policy.

52 At

a 3% discount rate, these values rise by a factor of 4.9.
consistency with our analysis, here we use PPP adjusted GDP for 2010 listed in the PWT.
54 There are a small number of countries that benefit, however these gains are modest compared to losses globally (in
total dollars). For example, India and Australia are by far the biggest “winners,” with income trajectories that rises in
PDV by $264 and $140 billion (resp.). Bangladesh receives the third largest benefit, a mere $26 billion in PDV.
55 Nordhaus notes that under optimal management, using his model, there are $17 trillion in residual damages that
remain even after optimal regulation.
53 For

53

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A Robinson. 2002. “Reversal of fortune: Geography
and institutions in the making of the modern world income distribution.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4):1231–1294.
Achen, C.H and L.M Bartels. 2004. “Blind Retrospection. Electoral Responses to Drought, Flu, and
Shark Attacks.” Estudios/Working Papers (Centro de Estudios Avanzados en Ciencias Sociales)
(199):1.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
Companion. Princeton University Press.
Anttila-Hughes, Jesse K. and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2011. “Destruction, Disinvestment, and Death:
Economic and Human Losses Following Environmental Disaster.” Working paper URL http://
conference.nber.org/confer//2012/EEEHC12/Hsiang_Antilla-Hughes.pdf.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2013. “Using weather
data and climate model output in economic analyses of climate change.” Review of Environmental
Economics and Policy 7 (2):181–198.
Barrios, S, L Bertinelli, and E Strobl. 2010. “Trends in rainfall and economic growth in Africa: A
neglected cause of the African growth tragedy.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92 (2):350–
366.
Barro, Robert J. 1998. Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study, MIT
Press Books, vol. 1. The MIT Press.
Barro, Robert J. 2006. “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121 (3):823–866.
Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2003. Economic Growth, 2nd edition. The MIT Press.
Belasen, A.R and S.W Polachek. 2008. “How hurricanes affect wages and employment in local labor
markets.” The American Economic Review 98 (2):49–53.
———. 2009. “How disasters affect local labor markets.” Journal of Human Resources 44 (1):251–276.
Bevere, Lucia, Brian Rogers, and Balz Grollimund. 2011. Sigma - Natural catastrophes and man-made
disasters in 2010: a year of devastating and costly events. Swiss Reinsurance Company Ltd.
Bohra-Mishra, Pratikshya, Michael Oppenheimer, and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Nonlinear permanent migration responses to climatic variations but minimal response to disasters.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 111 (27):9780–9785.
Boustan, Leah Platt, Matthew E. Kahn, and Paul W. Rhode. 2012. “Moving to higher ground:
migration response to natural disasters in the early twentieth century.” American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings 102 (3):238–244.

54

Brunner, Allan D. 2002. “El Niño and World Primary Commodity Prices: Warm Water or Hot Air?”
Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1):176–183.
Camargo, J., Suzana and Solomon M. Hsiang. 2014. “Tropical Cyclones: From the influence of climate
to their socio-economic impacts.” In Extreme Events: Observations Modeling and Economics. AGU.
Cameron, L and M Shah. 2013. “Risk-taking behavior in the wake of natural disasters.” NBER
Working Paper No. 19534 .
Carmargo, Suzana J. and Adam H. Sobel. 2005. “Western North Pacific Tropical Cyclone Intensity
and ENSO.” J. Climate .
Cavallo, Eduardo and Ilan Noy. 2011. “Natural Disasters and the Economy A Survey.” International
Review of Environmental and Resource Economics 5 (1):63–102.
Cerra, Valerie and Sweta Chaman Saxena. 2008. “Growth dynamics: the myth of economic recovery.”
The American Economic Review 98 (1):439–457.
Conley, Timothy. 1999. “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence.” Journal of Econometrics
92 (1):1–45.
Cressie, Noel and Christopher K Wikle. 2011. Statistics for spatio-temporal data. John Wiley & Sons.
Cuaresma, J Crespo, J Hlouskova, and M Obersteiner. 2008. “Natural disasters as creative destruction?
Evidence from developing countries.” Economic Inquiry 46 (2):214–226.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and Economic
Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
4 (3):66–95.
Deryugina, T. 2011. “The Dynamic Effects of Hurricanes in the US: The Role of Non-Disaster Transfer
Payments.” agecon.ucdavis.edu URL http://agecon.ucdavis.edu/research/seminars/files/
deryugina-the-dynamic-effects-of-hurricanes-in-the-us.pdf.
Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The economic impacts of climate change: evidence
from agricultural output and random fluctuations in weather.” The American Economic Review
97 (1):354–385.
———. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in
Weather in the US.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (4):152–85.
Deschênes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan. 2009. “Climate change and birth
weight.” The American Economic Review :211–217.
Eisensee, T and D Strömberg. 2007. “News droughts, news floods, and US disaster relief.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2):693–728.
Emanuel, K. 2011. “Global warming effects on US hurricane damage.” Weather, Climate, and Society
3 (4):261–268.
55

Emanuel, K., R. Sundararajan, and J. Williams. 2008. “Hurricanes and global warming: Results from
downscaling IPCC AR4 simulations.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 89 (3):347–
367.
Emanuel, K. A. 1999. “Thermodynamic control of hurricane intensity.” Nature 41.
———. 2005. “Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the past 30 years.” Nature 436.
Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach,
G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley. 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme
Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. Cambridge University Press.
Frankel, Jeffrey A and David Romer. 1999. “Does trade cause growth?” American economic review
89:379–399.
Freedman, D.A. 1991. “Statistical models and shoe leather.” Sociological methodology 21:291–313.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. “Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macrofinance.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2):645–700.
Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D Sachs, and Andrew D Mellinger. 1999. “Geography and economic
development.” International regional science review 22 (2):179–232.
Garrett, Thomas A and Russell S Sobel. 2003. “The Political Economy of FEMA Disaster Payments.”
Economic Inquiry 41 (3):496–509.
Gollier, Christian. 2012. Pricing the planet’s future: the economics of discounting in an uncertain
world. Princeton University Press.
Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the allocation of time: Implications
for climate change.” Journal of Labor Economics 32:1–26.
Greene, William H. 2003. Econometric Analysis, Fifth Edition. Prentice Hall.
Hallegatte, S and P Dumas. 2009. “Can natural disasters have positive consequences? Investigating
the role of embodied technical change.” Ecological Economics 68 (3):777–786.
Heal, Geoffrey. 2009. “Climate economics: a meta-review and some suggestions for future research.”
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3 (1):4–21.
Healy, Andrew and Neil Malhotra. 2009. “Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster Policy.” American
Political Science Review 103 (03):387–406.
Holland, Paul W. 1986. “Statistics and Causal Inference.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 81:945–960.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and Long-Run
Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” The American Economic Review 102 (4):1477–1507.

56

Houser, Trevor, Robert Kopp, Solomon M. Hsiang, Michael Delgado, Amir Jina, Kate Larsen, Michael
Mastrandrea, Shashank Mohan, Robert Muir-Wood, DJ Rasmussen, James Rising, and Paul Wilson.
2014. “American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United States.” Rhodium Group .
Hoyos, C. D., P. A. Agudelo, P. J. Webster, and J. A. Curry. 2006. “Deconvolution of the Factors
Contributing to the Increase in Global Hurricane Intensity.” Science 312.
Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. “Temperatures and Cyclones strongly associated with economic production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
107 (35):15367–15372.
———. 2014. “Reconciling hurricane damages with physical theory.” Mimeo .
Hsiang, Solomon M, Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013. “Quantifying the influence of climate
on human conflict.” Science 341 (6151):1235367.
Hsiang, Solomon M and Kyle C Meng. 2014. “Reconciling disagreement over climate–conflict results
in Africa.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences :201316006.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng, and Mark A. Cane. 2011. “Civil conflicts are associated with the
global climate.” Nature 476 (7361):438–441.
Hsiang, Solomon M. and Daiju Narita. 2012. “Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the Global
Cross-Section.” Climate Change Economics 3 (2).
Jones, Benjamin and Benjamin Olken. 2010. “Climate shocks and exports.” American Economic
Review: Papers and Proceedings 100:454–459.
Jones, Benjamin F and Benjamin A Olken. 2008. “The anatomy of start-stop growth.” The Review
of Economics and Statistics 90 (3):582–587.
Kahn, Matthew E. 2005. “The Death Toll from Natural Disasters: the role of Income, Geography, and
Institutions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 87:271–284.
Kalnay, E., M. Kanamitsu, R. Kistler, W. Collins, D. Deaven, L. Gandin, M. Iredell, S. Saha, G. White,
J. Woollen, Y. Zhu, A. Leetmaa, B. Reynolds, M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki, W. Higgins, J. Janowiak,
K. C. Mo, C. Ropelewski, J. Wang, R. Jenne, , and D. Joseph. 1996. “The NCEP/NCAR 40-Year
Reanalysis Project.” Bulletin of the American Meterological Society 77:437–471.
Kellenberg, Derek K. and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. 2008. “Does rising income increase or decrease
damage risk from natural disasters?” Journal of Urban Economics .
———. 2011. “The Economics of Natural Disasters.” The Annual Review of Resource Economics
3:297–312.
Knapp, Kenneth R., Michael C. Kruk, David H. Levinson, and Ethan J. Gibney. 2009. “Archive
Compiles New Resource for Global Tropical Cyclone Research.” Eos 90:46–47.

57

Knutson, Thomas, Chris Landsea, and Kerry Emanuel. 2010. “Tropical Cyclones and Climate Change:
A Review.” In Global Perspectives on Tropical Cyclones: From Science to Mitigation, edited by
Johnny C. L. Chan and Jeffrey D. Kepert. World Scientific, 243–284.
Knutson, Thomas R., John l. Mcbride, Johnny Chan, Kerry Emanuel, Greg Holland, Chris Landsea,
Isaac Held, James P. Kossin, A. K. Srivastava, and Masato Sugi. 2010. “Tropical Cyclones and
Climate Change.” Nature Geoscience 3:157–163.
Kunreuther, Howard C., Erwann O. Michel-Kerjan, Neil A. Doherty, Martin F. Grace, Robert W.
Clein, and Mark V. Pauly. 2009. At War With the Weather. MIT Press.
Legates, David R. and Cort J. Willmott. 1990a. “Mean seasonal and spatial variability in gaugecorrected, global precipitation.” International Journal of Climatology 10 (2):111–127.
———. 1990b. “Mean seasonal and spatial variability in global surface air temperature.” Theoretical
and Applied Climatology 41:11–21. 10.1007/BF00866198.
Longshore, David. 2009. Encyclopedia of hurricanes, typhoons, and cyclones. Infobase Publishing.
Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang. 2009. “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall.” American Economic Review 99 (3):1006–1026.
Mendelsohn, Robert, Kerry Emanuel, Shun Chonobayashi, and Laura Bakkensen. 2012. “The impact
of climate change on global tropical cyclone damage.” Nature Climate Change 2 (3):205–209.
Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti. 2004. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An Instrumental
Variables Approach.” J. Political Economy 112 (4):725–753.
Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: identifying impacts on education and health in
the presence of treatment externalities.” Econometrica 72 (1):159–217.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West. 1987. “A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica 55 (3):703–708.
Nordhaus, W. D. 2006. “Geography and macroeconomics: New Data and new findings.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (10).
———. 2010. “The economics of hurricanes and implications of global warming.” Climate Change
Econ. 1:1–20.
Nordhaus, William. 2008. A Question of Balance: Weighing the Options on Global Warming Policies.
Yale University Press.
Nordhaus, William D and Zili Yang. 1996. “A regional dynamic general-equilibrium model of alternative climate-change strategies.” American Economic Review 86 (4):741–765.
Noy, Ilan. 2009. “The macroeconomic consequences of disasters.” Journal of Development Economics
88:221–231.

58

Pindyck, Robert S. 2013. “Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell Us?”
Economic Literature 51 (3):860–872.

Journal of

Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S Rogoff. 2009. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.” American
Economic Review 99 (2):466–72.
Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2004. “Institutions rule: the primacy of
institutions over geography and integration in economic development.” Journal of economic growth
9 (2):131–165.
Romer, Christina D and David H Romer. 2010. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” The American Economic Review :763–801.
Sachs, J.D, A Warner, A Åslund, and S Fischer. 1995. “Economic reform and the process of global
integration.” Brookings papers on economic activity 1995 (1):1–118.
Sala-I-Martin, Xavier X. 1997. “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions.” The American Economic Review
87 (2):pp. 178–183.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate severe
damages to US crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
106 (37):15594–15598.
Skidmore, Mark and Hideki Toya. 2002. “Do Natural Disasters Promote Long-Run Growth?” Economic Inquiry 40 (4):664–687.
Smith, V. Kerry, Jared C. Carbon, Jaren C. Pope, Daniel G. Hallstrom, and Michael E. Darden. 2006.
“Adjusting to natural disasters.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 33:37–54.
Stern, Nicholas. 2006. Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge University Press.
———. 2008. “The economics of climate change.” The American Economic Review 98 (2):1–37.
Strobl, Eric. 2011. “The Economic Growth Impact of Hurricanes: Evidence from U.S. Coastal Counties.” Review fo Economics and Statistics .
Strömberg, D. 2007. “Natural disasters, economic development, and humanitarian aid.” The Journal
of Economic Perspectives 21 (3):199–222.
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston. 1991. “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950- 1988.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:327–68.
Tartaglione, Carissa A., Shawn R. Smith, and J. J. O’Brian. 2003. “ENSO Impact on Hurricane
Landfall Probabilities for the Caribbean.” Journal of Climate 16:2925–2931.
Tol, Richard SJ. 2009. “The economic effects of climate change.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives
23 (2):29–51.
Townsend, Robert M. 1995. “Consumption Insurance: An Evaluation of Risk-Bearing Systems in
Low-Income Economies.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (3):83–102.
59

Udry, Christopher. 1994. “Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation
in Northern Nigeria.” Review of Economic Studies 61 (3):495–526.
UNISDR. 2011. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. United Nations Publication.
Vecchi, Gabriel A. and Thomas R. Knutson. 2008. “On Estimates of Historical North Atlantic Tropical
Cyclone Activity.” Journal of Climate 21 (14):3580–3600.
Vigdor, Jacob. 2008. “The economic aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22 (4):135–154.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2009. “On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
change.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (1):1–19.
World Bank. 2008. World Development Indicators 2008. World Bank.
Yang, Dean. 2008. “Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial Flows,
1970-2002.” Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 8 (1):1903–1903.

A

APPENDIX TABLES & FIGURES

60

Appendix Table A.1: Results for all dependent-independent variable pairs
(1)
Dependent variable

(2)

(3)

(4)

Growth (%)

Independent variable

Wind speed (m/s)

Growth data source

PWT

WDI

Energy (sd)
PWT

WDI

Marginal cumulative effect of 1 additional unit of exposure
1 years
2 years
3 years
4 years
5 years
6 years
7 years
8 years
9 years
10 years
11 years
12 years
13 years
14 years
15 years
16 years
17 years
18 years
19 years
20 years

Observations
Adjusted R2

-0.0509∗∗
(0.0208)
-0.0584∗∗
(0.0259)
-0.0876∗∗∗
(0.0303)
-0.0903∗∗∗
(0.0349)
-0.0895∗∗
(0.0427)
-0.0974∗∗
(0.0473)
-0.133∗∗
(0.0535)
-0.197∗∗∗
(0.0591)
-0.190∗∗∗
(0.0647)
-0.223∗∗∗
(0.0711)
-0.257∗∗∗
(0.0747)
-0.292∗∗∗
(0.0797)
-0.325∗∗∗
(0.0837)
-0.364∗∗∗
(0.0893)
-0.378∗∗∗
(0.0938)
-0.405∗∗∗
(0.0975)
-0.398∗∗∗
(0.102)
-0.384∗∗∗
(0.104)
-0.383∗∗∗
(0.109)
-0.374∗∗∗
(0.113)

-0.0241
(0.0218)
-0.0512∗∗
(0.0249)
-0.0798∗∗∗
(0.0275)
-0.105∗∗∗
(0.0292)
-0.129∗∗∗
(0.0322)
-0.147∗∗∗
(0.0372)
-0.188∗∗∗
(0.0444)
-0.232∗∗∗
(0.0488)
-0.225∗∗∗
(0.0524)
-0.272∗∗∗
(0.0582)
-0.297∗∗∗
(0.0623)
-0.327∗∗∗
(0.0660)
-0.349∗∗∗
(0.0702)
-0.368∗∗∗
(0.0772)
-0.383∗∗∗
(0.0820)
-0.403∗∗∗
(0.0879)
-0.415∗∗∗
(0.0910)
-0.419∗∗∗
(0.0955)
-0.387∗∗∗
(0.100)
-0.379∗∗∗
(0.105)

-0.334∗∗
(0.166)
-0.358∗
(0.186)
-0.654∗∗∗
(0.214)
-0.688∗∗∗
(0.242)
-0.722∗∗
(0.289)
-0.716∗∗
(0.318)
-0.796∗∗
(0.355)
-1.118∗∗∗
(0.392)
-1.204∗∗∗
(0.435)
-1.484∗∗∗
(0.461)
-1.695∗∗∗
(0.486)
-1.813∗∗∗
(0.509)
-1.876∗∗∗
(0.534)
-2.033∗∗∗
(0.571)
-2.069∗∗∗
(0.594)
-2.221∗∗∗
(0.617)
-2.153∗∗∗
(0.643)
-2.038∗∗∗
(0.672)
-1.909∗∗∗
(0.692)
-1.825∗∗
(0.733)

-0.191
(0.164)
-0.405∗∗
(0.190)
-0.629∗∗∗
(0.205)
-0.844∗∗∗
(0.221)
-1.052∗∗∗
(0.235)
-1.095∗∗∗
(0.272)
-1.419∗∗∗
(0.330)
-1.746∗∗∗
(0.358)
-1.859∗∗∗
(0.399)
-2.160∗∗∗
(0.424)
-2.316∗∗∗
(0.457)
-2.538∗∗∗
(0.486)
-2.633∗∗∗
(0.498)
-2.761∗∗∗
(0.542)
-2.851∗∗∗
(0.568)
-3.061∗∗∗
(0.599)
-3.146∗∗∗
(0.619)
-3.142∗∗∗
(0.647)
-3.037∗∗∗
(0.669)
-3.090∗∗∗
(0.700)

6415
0.144

6952
0.191

6415
0.144

6952
0.191

All models contain country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and country-specific linear
trends. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to spatial (1000km) and serial (10year) correlation. Each column displays coefficents from our model with a different data
pairing. Column (1) replicates column (2) of Table 3. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
p < 0.01

Appendix Table A.2: Convergence behavior with no linear time-trend
(1)

(2)

Dependent variable
Country sample

(3)

(4)

Growth (%) from PWT
All

Exposed

All

Exposed

Marginal cumulative effect of 1 additional m/s exposure
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years

-0.0944∗∗
(0.0392)
-0.211∗∗∗
(0.0605)
-0.306∗∗∗
(0.0734)
-0.247∗∗∗
(0.0854)

-0.0822∗∗
(0.0390)
-0.190∗∗∗
(0.0616)
-0.282∗∗∗
(0.0744)
-0.212∗∗
(0.0870)

-0.0662∗
(0.0396)
-0.181∗∗∗
(0.0608)
-0.316∗∗∗
(0.0740)
-0.302∗∗∗
(0.0856)
-4.015∗∗∗
(0.555)

-0.0570
(0.0392)
-0.163∗∗∗
(0.0613)
-0.294∗∗∗
(0.0746)
-0.268∗∗∗
(0.0869)
-4.022∗∗∗
(0.588)

6415
0.122

3834
0.150

6415
0.139

3834
0.171

ln(GDP pc)t−1

Observations
Adjusted R2

All models contain country fixed effects, year fixed effects, and countryspecific linear trends. “Exposed” countries are those countries that are ever
exposed to tropical cyclones in the sample. Standard errors in parentheses
are robust to spatial (1000km) and serial (10-year) correlation. ∗ p < 0.10,
∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

62

Appendix Table A.3: Observed and simulated country-specific growth rates with and without cyclones
Country

ARG
AUS
AUT
BDI
BEL
BEN
BFA
BGD
BOL
BRA
BRB
BWA
CAF
CAN
CHE
CHL
CHN
CIV
CMR
COG
COL
COM
CPV
CRI
CYP
DNK
DOM
DZA
ECU
EGY
ESP
ETH
FIN
FJI
FRA
GAB
GBR
GHA
GIN
GMB
GNB
GNQ
GRC
GTM
HKG
HND
HTI
IDN
IND
IRL
IRN
ISL
ISR
ITA
JAM

Prediction
with
full
model*
(%)

Prediction
with
cyclones
removed
(%)

Cyclone
climate
growth
penalty
(%)

1.11
2.12
2.47
0.65
2.25
0.50
1.17
1.48
0.68
2.02
1.67
6.36
-1.26
1.92
1.31
2.60
7.30
-0.17
0.96
1.49
2.44
-0.54
2.74
1.56
3.09
1.86
3.42
1.27
1.86
3.37
2.34
0.78
2.57
1.70
1.94
0.60
2.12
1.40
-0.25
1.21
1.95
8.90
2.34
1.14
4.49
1.13
-0.46
4.06
3.18
3.33
0.80
2.98
2.02
1.96
0.81

1.11
3.77
2.47
0.65
2.25
0.50
1.17
4.83
0.68
2.03
6.19
6.42
-1.26
2.02
1.31
2.60
8.38
-0.17
0.96
1.49
2.48
1.78
4.96
2.23
3.09
1.86
7.64
1.27
1.86
3.37
2.51
0.79
2.57
6.24
1.99
0.60
2.12
1.40
-0.19
1.72
2.36
8.90
2.34
3.33
14.74
3.54
3.33
4.17
4.75
3.33
0.80
2.98
2.02
1.96
4.00

0.00
-1.65
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-3.35
0.00
0.00
-4.52
-0.06
0.00
-0.10
0.00
0.00
-1.08
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.04
-2.32
-2.23
-0.66
0.00
0.00
-4.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.17
-0.01
0.00
-4.54
-0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.06
-0.51
-0.42
0.00
0.00
-2.19
-10.25
-2.41
-3.79
-0.10
-1.57
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-3.19

Country

JOR
JPN
KEN
KOR
LKA
LSO
LUX
MAR
MDG
MEX
MLI
MOZ
MRT
MUS
MWI
MYS
NAM
NER
NGA
NIC
NLD
NOR
NPL
NZL
PAK
PAN
PER
PHL
PNG
PRI
PRT
PRY
RWA
SEN
SGP
SLE
SLV
SWE
SYC
SYR
TCD
TGO
THA
TTO
TUN
TUR
TWN
TZA
UGA
URY
USA
VEN
ZAF
ZMB
ZWE

Prediction
with
full
model*
(%)

Prediction
with
cyclones
removed
(%)

Cyclone
climate
growth
penalty
(%)

0.78
2.29
0.16
5.59
3.39
2.30
3.54
2.29
-0.34
1.87
2.03
1.35
0.82
3.90
0.19
4.54
0.87
-0.54
1.28
-1.43
2.00
2.81
1.34
1.31
2.10
2.86
1.00
1.65
1.90
2.29
2.82
1.70
0.65
0.53
5.33
-0.14
1.23
1.83
4.44
1.53
0.80
-1.46
4.31
3.12
2.80
2.26
5.69
1.54
0.77
2.13
1.89
0.42
1.12
-0.57
-0.82

0.78
10.84
0.16
11.55
5.05
2.30
3.54
2.36
4.06
4.62
2.03
2.48
0.84
11.52
0.36
4.79
0.90
-0.54
1.28
0.43
2.00
2.81
1.53
2.62
2.27
3.20
1.00
8.93
2.17
6.93
3.22
1.70
0.65
0.93
5.42
-0.13
2.79
1.83
5.79
1.53
0.80
-1.46
6.48
4.66
2.80
2.26
16.88
1.57
0.77
2.13
2.76
0.59
1.14
-0.57
-0.59

0.00
-8.55
0.00
-5.96
-1.66
0.00
0.00
-0.07
-4.41
-2.75
0.00
-1.13
-0.02
-7.62
-0.17
-0.25
-0.03
0.00
0.00
-1.87
0.00
0.00
-0.19
-1.31
-0.17
-0.34
0.00
-7.28
-0.27
-4.64
-0.40
0.00
0.00
-0.40
-0.09
-0.01
-1.57
0.00
-1.35
0.00
0.00
0.00
-2.17
-1.55
0.00
0.00
-11.19
-0.02
0.00
0.00
-0.88
-0.18
-0.02
0.00
-0.23

*By construction, observed growth rates are the same as predictions with the full model.

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed

1950 1970
year

LSO

1950 1970
year

IDN

1970
year

GMB

2000

2000

2000

7.2
7
6.8
6.6
6.4
6.2

6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

7.4
7.2
7
6.8
6.6

8

8.2

8.4

8.6

1950

1950

20
15
10
5
0

0

2

4

6

1970
year

MAR

1970
year

IND

2000

2000

8.2
8
7.8
7.6
7.4
7.2

8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5

5.5

0

8

6

5

10.4
10.2
10
9.8
9.6
9.4

9
8.8
8.6
8.4
8.2
8

6.5

2000

2000

2000

2000

10

1970
year

GNB

1970
year

ESP

1970
year

COL

1970
year

6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

7

1950

1950

1950

1950

BGD

15

0

1

2

3

4

0

.5

1

25
20
15
10
5
0

50
40
30
20
10
0

JAM

1970
year

1950 1970
year

1950

2000

2000

5.8

0

8.5

9

9.5

10

10.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

6

.2

GTM

6.2

.4

2000

6.4

.6

1970
year

2000

6.6

ETH

1970
year

7.8
7.6
7.4
7.2
7
6.8

.8

25
20
15
10
5
0

1950

1950

COM

8.2

0

25
20
15
10
5
0

8.4

.2
2000

8.6

.4

1970
year

8.8

.6

1950

9

BRA
.8

40
30
20
10
0

0

20

40

60

0

10

20

30

0

5

10

15

20

0

10

20

30

40

1950

1950

1950

1950

1970
year

JPN

1970
year

HKG

1970
year

FJI

1970
year

CPV

1950 1970
year

BRB

2000

2000

2000

2000

2000

14
13
12
11
10
9

14
13
12
11
10
9

10
9.5
9
8.5
8

9
8.5
8
7.5
7

12
11.5
11
10.5
10
9.5

0

10

20

30

1950

1950

1950

25
20
15
10
5
0

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

5

10

1950

1950

15

1
0

2

3

4

1970
year

2000

2000

2000

2000

2000

KOR

1970
year

HND

1970
year

FRA

1970
year

CRI

1970
year

BWA

12
11
10
9
8

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.6

9.8

10

10.2

10.4

9.2
9
8.8

9.6
9.4

9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5
7

1950

1970
year

2000

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

7

0

LKA

7.5
10

25
20
15
10
5
0

8
20

2000

8.5
30

1970
year

9
40

1950

6.5

HTI

6.6

6.8

8

0
2000

2000

6.7

1970
year

GIN

1970
year

9

10

11

9.8

10

10.2

10.4

10.6

1

1950

1950

2000

DOM

1950 1970
year

CAN

2

3

40
30
20
10
0

0

.5

1

1.5

Appendix Figure A.1: Simulations of log GDPpc with (red) and without (blue) tropical cyclones for exposed countries (right axis). Vertical
grey bars display each country’s wind exposure in each year (left axis).

0

.01

.02

.03

.04

0

.5

1

DZA

1950 1970
year

1950

1.5

0

5

10

0

.5

1

1.5

2000

6

1

8.8

7

2

1970
year

8

3

1950

9

4

2000

2000

9.5

10

10.5

11

11.5

10

CHN

1950 1970
year

AUS

5

0

5

10

15

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

64

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed

1950

10
8
6
4
2
0

1950

1950

1950

1950

1950

50
40
30
20
10
0

8
6
4
2
0

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

2

4

6

25
20
15
10
5
0

1970
year

ZWE

1970
year

TWN

1970
year

SEN

1970
year

PAK

1970
year

MWI

1970
year

MDG

2000

2000

2000

2000

2000

2000

5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5
4.8

8

10

12

14

16

6.8

7

7.2

7.4

7.6

7.8
7.6
7.4
7.2
7

6.2

6.4

6.6

6.8

7

6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed

wind speed
wind speed

6.6
6.4

.5
0

7
6.8

2000

2000

11
10.5
10
9.5
9

1

1950 1970
year

TZA

1950 1970
year

1.5

0

5

10

15

SGP

8

0

20

8.5

5

2000

9

1970
year

2000

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

PAN

1970
year

2000

8.5

9

9.5

10

10.5

9.5

1950

1950

MYS

1950 1970
year

MEX

15

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

5

10

15

MLI

1950

1970
year

USA

2000

11
10.8
10.6
10.4
10.2
10

SYC

1970
year

PNG

1970
year

NIC

1970
year

VEN

1950 1970
year

1950

0

5

10

5
4
3
2
1
0

1950

1950

15

0

2

4

6

0

10

20

30

40

2000

2000

2000

2000

9.3
9.2
9.1
9
8.9
8.8

10.5
10
9.5
9
8.5

7.2

7.4

7.6

7.8

8

7.5

8

8.5

5.5

0
2000

6

5

1970
year

6.5

10

1950

7

MOZ
15

Appendix Figure A.2: Figure A.1 continued.

0

2

4

6

8

8

0
2000

8.5

10

1970
year

9

20

7

8

9

10

11

8

8.2

8.4

8.6

9.5

1950

2000

2000

2000

7
6.8
6.6
6.4
6.2
6

30

SLV

1970
year

PHL

1950 1970
year

NAM

1950 1970
year

1950

30
25
20
15
10

0

.05

.1

.15

2.5
2
1.5
1
.5
0

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed
0

.5

1

ZAF

1970
year

THA

1970
year

1950 1970
year

1950

1950

1.5

0

5

10

15

0

10

20

30

2000

2000

2000

9
8.9
8.8
8.7
8.6
8.5

10
9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5

9

10

11

12

6.4

0

PRI

6.6

1

40

6.8

2

2000

7

3

1970
year

7.2

4

1950

7.1

0

NPL

7.2

.2
2000

7.3

.4

1970
year

7.4

1950

7.5

.6

MRT
.8

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed
wind speed

NZL

1970
year

MUS

TTO

1970
year

0

.05

.1

1950 1970
year

ZMB

1950 1970
year

1950

PRT

1950 1970
year

1950

.15

25
20
15
10
5
0

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

0

10

20

30

40

2000

2000

2000

2000

2000

9

6.5

7

7.5

8

9.5

10

10.5

11

9

9.5

10

10.6
10.4
10.2
10
9.8
9.6

12
11
10
9
8
7

Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita
Log GDP per capita

65

Avgerage annual growth rate (%)

5

South Asia

4

3

2

1

Avgerage annual growth rate (%)

0

IND

LKA

4

Oceania
3

2

1

0

Avgerage annual growth rate (%)

BGD

NZL

PNG

AUS

IDN

4

Europe
3
2
1
0

SWE

FRA

GBR

ESP

NOR

IRL

Growth lost to cyclones (simulated)
Observed 1970-2008 (PWT)

Appendix Figure A.3: Average annual growth rates as observed historically (dark bars, equal to
simulated growth with full model) and average growth in simulations where cyclones are removed
(light bars). The difference in the height of the bars is the “missing” average annual growth loss to
cyclones.

66

Global sample
100

Percent of GDP

80
60
40
20
0
0

20

40

60

Wind speed (m/s)
5HSRUWHGGDPDJHLQ(0ï'$7 +VLDQJ 1DULWD
GLM fit with gamma errors: slope = 0.33
/RQJïUXQ*'3ORVVѫ WKLVVWXG\

3KLOLSSLQHVRQO\

'HQVLW\

$YHUDJHWUHDWPHQWHIIHFWLQ
$QWWLOD+XJKHV +VLDQJ 11)
+RXVHKROGPLFURGDWD
3URYLQFHE\\HDUREV


7KLVVWXG\
6LPXODWHG*'P growth effect
&RXQWU\E\\HDUREV










0

$QQXDOLQFRPHORVWWRWURSLFDOF\FORQHV RILQFRPH

Appendix Figure A.4: Quantitative comparison of our results to related estimates in the literature.
Top: Hsiang and Narita (2012) estimate the relationship between self-reported capital damages and
the maximum wind speed measure used in this study. Bottom: Anttila-Hughes and Hsiang (2011)
estimate the average income lost to Filipino households due to tropical cyclone exposure in the prior
year.

67

50
CCSM3
CNRM
CSIR O
ECHAM
GFDL
MIROC
MRI

40

100*log(A1B/CTR) (%)

30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50

10.3%
Atlantic

–2.2%

19.1%

-5.8%

East Pacific

W est Pacific

North Indian

–13.8%
Southern
Hemisphere

Appendix Figure A.5: Projections for climatic intensification in basin-wide power dissipation between
simulations of the twentieth-century and the period 2080-2100 under the A1B emissions scenario using
seven climate models, from Emanuel et al. (2008). Percentages for each basin are the multi-model
mean. Models agree strongly on the sign of West Pacific (7/7) and Oceania (6/7) projections. Models
disagree more regarding North Atlantic (4/7) and North Indian (4/7) projections. Also see discussion
in (Knutson et al. (2010)). Figure from Knutson et al. (2010).

68

