                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE ECONOMICS OF FAIR TRADE

                                         Raluca E. Dragusanu
                                         Daniele Giovannucci
                                            Nathan Nunn

                                         Working Paper 20357
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20357


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2014




We have received valuable comments from David Atkin, Michael Hiscox, Marc Muendler, Nina Pavcnik,
and Andrea Podhorsky. We also thank Stephanie Cappa and Matthew Summers for valuable research
assistance. Forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Perspectives. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Raluca E. Dragusanu, Daniele Giovannucci, and Nathan Nunn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Fair Trade
Raluca E. Dragusanu, Daniele Giovannucci, and Nathan Nunn
NBER Working Paper No. 20357
July 2014
JEL No. F1,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

Fair Trade is a labeling initiative aimed at improving the lives of the poor in developing countries
by offering better terms to producers and helping them to organize. In this survey, we provide a critical
overview of the economic theory behind Fair Trade, describing the potential benefits and potential
pitfalls. We also provide an assessment of the empirical evidence of the impacts of Fair Trade to date.


Raluca E. Dragusanu                         Nathan Nunn
Harvard University                          Department of Economics
1805 Cambridge Street                       Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                         1805 Cambridge St
rdragus@fas.harvard.edu                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            and NBER
Daniele Giovannucci                         nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
Committee on Sustainability Assessment (COSA)
502 6th Street
Mount Gretna, PA 17064
DG@theCOSA.org
        Fair Trade is a labeling initiative aimed at improving the lives of the poor in

developing countries by offering better terms to producers and helping them to

organize. Although Fair trade certified products still comprise a small share of the

market – e.g., Fair Trade certified coffee exports as a share of global coffee exports was

1.8% in 2009 – there has been very rapid growth over in the past decade.1 Fair Trade

coffee sales have increased from 12,000 tonnes in 2000 to 123,200 tonnes in 2010

(Fairtrade International, 2012b, p. 41).

        Whether Fair Trade can achieve its intended goals has been hotly debated in

academic and policy circles. In particular, debates have been waged about whether Fair

Trade makes “economic sense” and is sustainable in the long-run. Development

economist, Paul Collier, in his book The Bottom Billion, writes that “They [Fair Trade

certified farmers] get charity as long as they stay producing the crops that have locked

them into poverty.” (Collier 2007, p. 163) In a recent article, The Economist writes:

“perhaps the most cogent objection to Fairtrade is that it is an inefficient way to get

money to poor producers.” (The Economist, 2006) On the other side of the debate are

those that argue that Fair Trade does in fact benefit farmers by providing higher

incomes and greater economic stability. For example, Laura Raynolds (2009, p. 1083)

writes that Fair Trade “offers farmers and agricultural workers in the global South better

prices, stable market links and resources for social and environmental projects” and that




1The statistic is for coffee sold as Fairtrade by FLO International. Statistics on Fairtrade exports are from
Fair Trade Labelling Organizations International and statistics on total exports are from International
Coffee Organization.


                                                     2
it “provides consumers with product options that uphold high social and environmental

standards.”

       The emergence of modern Fair Trade labels can be traced back to 1988, when a

faith-based nongovernment organization from the Netherlands began an initiative that

aimed to ensure that growers of crops in low-income countries were provided “sufficient

wages.'' The organization created a fair trade label for their products. It was called Max

Havelaar, named after a fictional Dutch character who opposed the exploitation of

coffee pickers in Dutch colonies. Over the next few years, the concept was replicated in

other countries across Europe and North America, with a number of organizations

emerging, such as TransFair and Global Exchange. In 1997, the various national

labeling initiatives formed an umbrella association called the Fairtrade Labelling

Organizations International (FLO). A common Fair Trade Certification mark was

launched in 2002 and there are several Fair Trade bodies operating today.

       In 2012, FLO’s largest adherent, Transfair USA, split from the organization in to

launch a parallel label, Fair Trade USA. One of the primary reasons for the division was

the difference in beliefs about whether the Fair Trade label should only be available to

small-scale producers. While FLO believes that certification should generally be

restricted to small producers, Fair Trade USA feels that that large producers and

plantations should also be certified.

       “Fairtrade”, the one word form, is used by Fairtrade International for their

certification mark and for references to their specific market. We use “Fair Trade” to

refer to the general initiative and movement without reference to a particular

certification.


                                            3
       Fair Trade attempts to achieve several goals, the primary and best-known is to

provide prices that deliver a basic livelihood for producers. In addition, Fair Trade has a

number of other goals, including longer-term buyer-seller relationships that facilitate

greater access to financing for producers; improved working conditions; the creation

and/or maintenance of effective producer or worker organizations; and the use of

environmentally friendly production processes. A third-party certification process

regularly checks that producers and suppliers adhere to a set of requirements whose

purpose is to achieve these objectives. The Fair Trade label that is displayed on

certified products is a signal to consumers that the product was produced and traded in

accordance with these requirements.

       Fairtrade is one of the many voluntary sustainability standards that have

emerged. These standards share some common overlapping goals but each has its

own focus and priorities. In addition to Fair Trade, other certification standards include

Organic, Rainforest Alliance, and UTZ Certified and there are similarly prominent labels

for different products such as those of the Forest Stewardship Council, Marine

Stewardship Council, Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil, and Global G.A.P.2

       The aim of this article is to provide a critical overview of the economic theory

behind Fair Trade, describing the potential benefits and potential pitfalls. We also

provide an assessment of the empirical evidence of the impacts of Fair Trade to date.




2
  For information on Organic, see the website of the International Federation of Organic Agricultural
Movements at http://www.ifoam.org. For information on UTZ Certified, see https://www.utzcertified.org.
For Rainforest Alliance, see http://www.rainforest-alliance.org. For Forest Stewardship Council, see
https://us.fsc.org. For Marine Stewardship Council, see http://www.msc.org. For Global G.A.P., see
http://www.globalgap.org. Also see the summary in Raynolds, Murray and Heller (2007) and Potts et al.
(2014).


                                                  4
The Mechanisms of Fair Trade Standards

      The stated goal of Fair Trade is to improve the living conditions of farmers and

workers in developing countries. Because coffee is the most traded product in the Fair

Trade market, our discussion here focuses on the specifics of this industry, although we

will also point out some important differences with other commodities as they arise. The

specific mechanisms for achieving this goal are a combination of guidelines for price

negotiation and requirements for certification, which we summarize here.

      1) Price floor. The central characteristic of Fair Trade is the minimum price for

which a Fair Trade certified product can be sold to a Fair Trade buyer, which is intended

to cover the average costs of sustainable production and meet a broadly determined

living wage in the sector (originally set in accordance with the data of the International

Coffee Organization). A Fair Trade buyer agrees to pay certified producers at least the

minimum price when the world price is below this. In all situations, producers and

traders remain free to negotiate higher prices on the basis of quality and other

attributes. By providing a guaranteed minimum price for products sold as Fair Trade, the

price floor is intended to reduce the risk faced by growers. As we discuss in more detail

below, there is no guarantee that all coffee that meets the certification requirements and

is eligible to be sold as Fair Trade is indeed sold as such. Just producing and certifying

a product does not guarantee that a buyer will purchase it as Fair Trade and provide the

associated benefits and price. The relationship between the guaranteed minimum price

and the market price between 1989 and 2014 is shown in Figure 1. Although in recent

years, the market price of coffee has been higher than the Fair Trade minimum price,

data from the price crashes of the late 1990s and early 2000s indicates that the price



                                            5
floor provided significant risk protection to farmers who were selling their coffee as Fair

Trade certified.

       2) Fair Trade premium. Another important characteristic is a price premium, often

termed the community development or social premium. This is paid by the buyer to the

supplier or cooperative organization in addition to the sales price. Prior to 2008, for

coffee this was set at 10 cents per pound, but is now 20 cents per pound with 5 cents

earmarked for productivity improvement. The premium is designed to foster the

associativity and democratic process that are tenets of the Fair Trade philosophy. The

specifics of how the premium is to be used must to be decided in a democratic manner

by the producers themselves. Projects that are typically funded with the Fair Trade

premium include investments made to increase farmer productivity, investments

community infrastructure such as the building of schools, health clinics and crop storage

facilities, offering training for members of the community, the provision of educational

scholarships, improvements in water treatment systems, conversion to organic

production techniques, and so on.

       3) Stability and access to credit. Fair Trade buyers agree to long-term contracts

(at least one year and often several years) and to provide some advance crop financing

to producer groups (up to 60 percent) if it is requested.

       4) Working conditions. Where workers are present, they must have freedom of

association, safe working conditions, and wages at least equal to the legal minimum or

regional averages. Some forms of child labor are prohibited.

       5) Institutional structure. Farmers are encouraged to organize as associations or

cooperatives, where decisions are made democratically and with a transparent


                                             6
administration that can facilitate sales and administer the premium paid to the

organization in an accountable manner. For some products, such as tea, bananas,

pineapples, and flowers, larger enterprises can become Fair Trade certified.3 In such

larger enterprises, joint committees of workers and managers must be formed and

democratically structured.

         6) Environmental protection. Certain harmful chemicals are prohibited for Fair

Trade production. The environmental criteria are meant to ensure that the members

work towards good environmental practices as an integral part of farm management by

minimizing or eliminating the use of less desirable agrochemicals and replacing them,

where possible, with natural biological methods, as well as adopting practices that

ensure the health and safety of farm families, workers, and the community. Producers

must provide basic environmental reports summarizing their impacts on the

environment. The production of genetically modified (GM) crops by farmers is not

allowed. (In practice, this is only relevant for a few crops for which GM varieties are

available, namely cotton and rice.)

         For a product to be sold under the Fair Trade mark, all actors in the supply chain,

including importers and exporters, must also be Fair Trade certified. The standards are

tailored for each crop and for the different actors involved in the chain. The dominant

entity in the global Fair Trade system is Fairtrade International (FLO), which is


3
    For several key crops such as cocoa and coffee that are smallholder dominated, FLO believes that
certification should generally be restricted to small producers. However, Fair Trade USA (a former
member of FLO under the name Transfair USA) believes that unorganized producers and plantations
should also be certified and this difference is a fundamental reason for its recent split from FLO and its
subsequent certification of some larger producers under its own label.



                                                    7
responsible for setting and maintaining standards for all commodities, and an

independent certification company FLO-CERT, which is in charge of inspecting and

certifying producers and traders.4

          To obtain the Fair Trade certification, producer organizations, firms or qualified

farms submit an application with FLO-CERT. If the application is accepted, the

organization goes through an initial inspection process carried out by a FLO-CERT

representative in the region. If the minimum requirements are met, the organization is

issued a certificate that is usually valid for a year and can be renewed following re-

inspection. During the early years of Fair Trade, inspection and certification were free of

charge. However, since 2004 producer organizations must pay application, initial

certification, and renewal certification fees.

          In addition to Fair Trade, there are a number of other certification standards,

together classed as Voluntary Sustainability Standards. Examples include Organic,

Rainforest Alliance, Forest Stewardship Council, Ethical Tea Partnership, UTZ Certified,

Marine Stewardship Council, Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center, and Global GAP. The

basic logic behind the certifications is that they provide information to consumers about

particular attributes of products and the production process.




Certification and Credible Information for Consumers




4
    There are number of other Fair Trade organizations. Among them is Fair Trade USA which uses another
independent certifier but generally accepts FLO-Cert as equivalent.




                                                    8
      One important rationale for the Fair Trade initiative is that it provides credible

information to the consumer. A number of consumers may derive utility from the manner

in which a good is produced, rather than simply the physical characteristics of the final

product. Although many consumers prefer to purchase goods produced in a socially and

environmentally responsible manner (and would be willing to pay more for these goods)

and many producers would be willing to produce in this manner (particularly for a higher

price), without a credible way to differentiate between more-responsible and less-

responsible production processes, a market for responsibly-produced products may not

exist. The Fair Trade label, as well as other third-party certifications, provides the

consumer with information about the nature of the production process. It also provides

producers a way to credibly signal the nature of the production process. In this way,

certifications, such as Fair Trade, can provide information that facilitates mutually

beneficial transactions that otherwise would not occur.

      A number of studies have formally modeled the logic of Fair Trade, finding that if

consumers value the nature of the production process, then voluntary certifications

unambiguously improve aggregate welfare. For example, Podhorsky (2010), focusing

on environmental standards, shows that in an environment with heterogeneous firms, a

voluntary certification program never decreases consumer welfare. Similarly, Podhorsky

(2013b) shows that in a two-country model of North-South trade with differentiated

products, voluntary certifications improve aggregate welfare.

      However, all of this relies on consumers caring about whether goods are

produced in a socially or environmentally responsible manner. Do consumers in fact




                                            9
care about this? A number of studies have tackled this question, attempting to quantify

the extent to which consumers are willing to pay for responsible production.

      Hertel, Scruggs, and Heidkamp (2009) survey 258 individuals and find that 75

percent of coffee buyers report that they would be willing to pay 50 cents extra for a

pound of coffee (approximately 15 percent of the sales price) if it was Fair Trade

certified. Over half would be willing to pay $1 more per pound.

      Complementing the evidence from survey questions asking about hypothetical

scenarios is evidence from field experiments that observe real-life behavior.

Hainmueller, Hiscox, and Sequeira (2011) conduct a number of experiments in 26

stores, belonging to a major US grocery chain. The authors randomly placed Fair Trade

labels on bulk bins of coffee that were Fair Trade certified. In a second experiment, the

authors also randomly varied the prices of the coffee. Each treatment lasted four weeks.

The authors found that sales were 10 percent greater when the coffee was labeled as

Fair Trade. They also found that demand for more expensive (and arguably higher

quality) Fair Trade coffee was insensitive to price, which is consistent with an earlier

finding by Arnot, Boxall and Cash (2006) for brewed coffee sold at a Canadian

University. Interestingly, demand for a cheaper and lower quality coffee was sensitive to

the price: a 9 percent increase in price resulted in a 30 percent decline in demand. In a

follow-up experiment using coffee sold on eBay, Hiscox, Broukhim, and Litwin (2011),

find that on average, consumers are willing to pay a 23 percent premium for coffee

labeled as Fair Trade.

      In a series of auxiliary experiments looking at fair trade labelling for nonfood

consumer items, Michael Hiscox and various coauthors have accumulated a large


                                           10
amount of additional evidence that confirms the findings from Hainmueller, Hiscox, and

Sequeira (2011). Examining fair labor standards for candles and towels sold in a large

retail store in New York City, Hiscox and Smyth (2011) find that the label increased

sales by 10 percent, and when combined by a price markup of 10-20 percent, sales

rose even more, in the range of 16-33 percent. Examining consumers’ willingness to

pay for goods using an auction environment on eBay, Hiscox, Broukhim, Litwin, and

Wolowski (2011) find that consumers paid a 45 percent premium for polo shirts labeled

as being certified for fair labor standards.

       Overall, the evidence from these experiments indicates that consumers value

production that occurs according to Fair Trade standards and they believe that

certification conveys credible information.




Does Fair Trade Work?

       In side-by-side comparisons, Fair Trade certified producers do receive higher

prices, follow specified work standards, and use environmentally-friendly methods. We

review this evidence, but also explore the more difficult questions of interpretation. Are

the changes that are correlated with Fair Trade production also caused by certification

or is some other factor like the entrepreneurial capacity of the producer affecting both

outcomes? What factors make producers more likely to join Fair Trade? What may

happen to the advantages of receiving a higher price from being a Fair Trade producer

as more producers seek to join? After taking these factors into account, the balance of

the evidence does suggest that Fair Trade works—but the evidence is admittedly both

mixed and incomplete.


                                               11
Fair Trade and Higher Prices: Direct Comparisons

       There is overwhelming evidence that Fair Trade certified producers do receive

higher prices than conventional farmers for their products. For example, Mendez et al.

(2010) surveyed 469 households for 18 different cooperatives in four countries -- El

Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, and Nicaragua -- during the 2003/2004 coffee harvest. In

all four countries, they find a significant positive relationship between average sales

price for coffee and both Fair Trade and Organic certification. In a study of 845 coffee

farmers from southern Mexico during the 2004/2005 season, Weber (2011) finds that

farmers who were Fair Trade and Organic certified received an average of 12 cents

more per pound of coffee sold.

       Bacon (2005) examines the sales price of coffee during the coffee price crisis of

2000/2001 for a sample of 228 coffee farmers from Nicaragua and finds that Fair Trade

certified farmers obtained significantly higher prices for their coffee. Farmers selling

coffee as Fair Trade received an average price of $0.84 per pound (net of costs paid to

the cooperative for transport, processing, certification, debt service, and export),

farmers selling coffee as Organic received $0.63 per pound, while farmers selling

conventional coffee to a cooperative received $0.41 per pound. (Since Fair Trade

(and/or Organic) farmers are not able to sell all of their coffee as certified, the average

price received by certified and conventional farmers for their full harvest is lower than

the figures above. Fair Trade and/or Organic farmers received an average price of

$0.56 per pound, while conventional farmers received an average price of $0.40 per

pound.)


                                            12
       In a follow-up study, Bacon, Mendez, Gomez, Stuart and Flores (2008) attempt

to get a better sense of the causal mechanisms behind these differences. Examining

the same set of Fair Trade certified farmers as in Bacon (2005), they find that 100

percent of these farmers felt that the cooperative they certified with helped them obtain

higher prices. This figure can be contrasted to the response of farmers in conventional

cooperatives. Among this comparison group only 50 percent for farmers felt that the

cooperative helped them obtain higher prices.

       Given the price premium and price floor associated with Fair Trade, it is

unsurprising that Fair Trade certified farmers receive higher prices. However, what is

less obvious ex ante is whether production volumes and, as a consequence, total

incomes would be affected by certification. Overall, the evidence does suggest that Fair

Trade is often also associated with higher output and higher incomes. Arnould, Plastina,

and Ball (2009) examine 1,269 farmers from Nicaragua, Peru, and Guatemala in

2004/2005 and find that in addition to higher prices, Fair Trade certified farmers also

have greater sales and higher incomes. Jaffee (2009) also finds the same pattern for 51

coffee producers (26 Fair Trade certified and 25 conventional) from Oaxaca, Mexico,

surveyed between 2001 and 2005. He also finds that Fair Trade certified producers

were less likely to experience food shortages and had diets that contained more meat,

milk, and cheese.




Interpreting the Evidence: Causality and Selection into Certification

       Of course, simple comparisons of certified and non-certified farmers raise

obvious questions. Perhaps the characteristics that cause farmers to become Fair


                                            13
Trade certified also cause farmers to produce and sell more, to produce better quality

coffee that sells for a higher price, and to earn more income as a result. Therefore, such

comparisons may not capture a causal effect.

      Well aware of these empirical difficulties, a number of studies have attempted to

reduce the bias in their estimates through the use of matching methods. Intuitively,

rather than compare Fair Trade farmers to non-Fair Trade farmers, matching estimates

instead compare each certified farmer to conventional farmers that are similar based on

observable characteristics that may affect their propensity to certify and be successful

producers, such as educational attainment, age, family size, farm size, specialization of

production, farm tenure, value of assets, and so on. The hope is that by matching on

these characteristics, one is then comparing a Fair Trade certified farmer to an

otherwise similar conventional farm.

      Using this method, Beuchelt and Zeller (2011) examine 327 members of coffee

cooperatives in Nicaragua and find that farmers associated with Fair Trade cooperatives

are able to obtain higher prices for their coffee (as are Organic producers). In contrast,

Fort and Ruben (2009) and Ruben and Fort (2012) examine 360 coffee farmers from

three Fair Trade certified cooperatives and three non-certified cooperatives in Peru.

They find no statistically significant evidence that Fair Trade certified farmers receive

higher prices, using either ordinary least squares or matching estimates.

      Although arguably a methodological improvement, matching estimates also have

their own shortcomings. The choice of which variables should be used to match farmers

is not clear. Certain variables like the age of the household head, along with experience

or educational attainment, are arguably exogenous, but other variables like farm size,


                                           14
specialization or diversification of production, the legal status of farm tenure, and value

of assets may be endogenous to the certification process itself. In addition, matching

requires that the omitted factors be observable. If the important omitted factors are

unobservable, like the entrepreneurial zeal of farmer, the bias arising from this factor

cannot easily be eliminated.

       Yet another strategy, though less commonly employed, is to examine a panel of

producers over time rather than just a cross-section in one time period. In this way, one

can examine whether a producer begins to obtain higher prices (for example) just after

they become Fair Trade certified. Using such a strategy, Dragusanu and Nunn (2013)

examine an annual panel of 262 coffee mills from Costa Rica between 1999 and 2010.

They find that Fair Trade certified mills receive 5 cents more per pound for exports than

conventional mills. They find no difference between Fair Trade certified and

conventional mills in terms of the total quantity sold or exported.




Causality and Selection into Certification

       Another way to tackle the question of causality is to develop a deeper

understanding of what determines which cooperatives choose to become Fair Trade

certified (and which farmers choose to join Fair Trade certified cooperatives). Again,

the primary concern is that the “best” farmers or cooperatives in some difficult-to-

observe but real way become certified and also produce more and obtain higher prices

– that is, that there is positive selection into Fair Trade.




                                              15
       At a theoretical level, it is unclear whether the selection into Fair Trade should be

positive or negative. On one hand, Fair Trade intentionally targets producers who are

small and economically disadvantaged, with limited capital, market access, and

bargaining power, which suggests that they may be negatively selected. In addition,

because the price premium is a fixed amount, it is relatively more appealing (i.e., is a

larger share of the final price) for producers selling lower quality coffee. This too

suggests negative selection. On the other hand, farmers and cooperatives who join Fair

Trade tend to have some measure of organizational ability, social cohesion, and

governance, which suggests the possibility of positive selection.

       Seeking to better understand the nature of selection into Fair Trade, Dragusanu

and Nunn (2013) interviewed members of Fair Trade certified cooperatives and

conventional mills in Costa Rica. They found four important determinants of certification.

First, it turns out that many mills in Costa Rica often also operate stores that sell

agricultural products, including certain chemicals (primarily pesticides) that are banned

under Fair Trade requirements. The mills that obtain greater revenues from selling

banned chemicals find Fair Trade more costly and are less likely to certify. Second,

mills that forecast lower prices in the future perceived a greater benefit from Fair

Trade’s price floor, and thus were more likely to join. Third, individual farmers who

believed in environmental or socially responsible farming practices were more likely to

join Fair Trade. Finally, access to information about the logistics of becoming certified

and managerial ability were also important. While positive selection likely arises from

the last determinant, the nature of selection from the first three is ambiguous.




                                            16
       Some empirical studies have estimated how various factors affect the probability

of certification, usually by estimating a propensity score to match farmers belonging to

certified mills with conventional producers. These studies tend to find evidence that

point towards negative selection. For example, Saenz-Segura and Zuniga-Arias (2009)

estimate a very strong negative relationship between Fair Trade certification and

experience, education, and income within a sample of 103 Costa Rican coffee

producers. This finding is echoed in Ruben and Fort’s (2012) study of 360 Peruvian

coffee farmers (also see Fort and Ruben (2009)). In their sample, farmers that are less

educated and own smaller farms are more likely to become certified.

       This question of how famers via cooperatives select into Fair Trade is important

and understudied. We view the evidence as incomplete, but suggestive of negative

selection. If this is the case, then the correlational evidence may actually understate the

true causal impacts of Fair Trade.




Fair Trade in the Long-Run: Dynamics and the Role of Free Entry in Production

       We now turn to the question of the dynamics of Fair Trade. Consider the case in

which a small number of producers in a country are Fair Trade certified. Thus, for the

same yield and quality of coffee, certified farmers earn more than the other producers in

the region. Other producers observe this outcome, and, if they qualify, will likely apply to

become Fair Trade certified. In other words, entry will occur. Over time, as more

producers become Fair Trade certified, holding constant the total demand for Fair trade,

the proportion of each FT farmer’s output that can be sold as Fair Trade declines. Many

economic models have the property that entry dissipates rents. In this case, entry could


                                            17
continue until the expected benefits of Fair Trade certification just equals the cost to

producers. The rents that originate from the greater utility consumers obtain from

consuming Fair Trade certified products end up all going to paying the costs of

certification. This process of dissipation is the centerpiece of the model developed in de

Janvry, McIntosh, and Sadoulet (2012). It is also a feature, though less central, in a

number of other models of Free Trade, e.g. Podhorsky (2010).

      Based on the predictions of their model, de Janvry, McIntosh, and Sadoulet

(2012) argue that free entry represents the death knell for the notion that Fair Trade can

actually help farmers in the long-run. However, there are a number of other aspects one

needs to consider before accepting this conclusion. First, a number of barriers to

certification limit the extent of entry. An important barrier is limits on farm sizes. For

example, when it comes to coffee, Fairtrade International targets small family farms that

do not hire permanent labor year round.

      Second, and most importantly, Fair Trade and other certification standards

include many nonmonetary goals: creating better conditions for hired workers, creating

democratic and transparent cooperatives, encouraging environmentally sustainable

production, improving access to credit, and establishing stable long-term buyer-seller

relationships. If a high level of entry means that higher-than-normal economic rents are

fully dissipated, it also means that these other outcomes are spreading. Indeed, other

certifications like UTZ, Organic, Bird Friendly, and Rainforest Alliance have an even

greater focus than Fair Trade on goals other than increased incomes for farmers.

      This aspect of certification is illustrated in the model developed by Podhorsky

(2010). Although the certification in her model is for environmentally responsible


                                           18
production, the logic is identical to that for Fair Trade certification. In her model,

although excess profits are competed away by free entry as firms choose more

environmentally responsible production processes, consumers are unambiguously

better off because they value environmentally sustainable production. Here certification

and free entry work together to increase the prevalence of sustainable production.

       This link between free entry and rents provides an interesting dilemma for

certification agencies. On the one hand, they wish to induce the spread of socially and

environmentally responsible production as much as possible. On the other hand, they

may also wish to structure certain limits to entry so that they can continue to maintain

higher-than-average rents for certified producers.




Free Entry into Certifications

       Another important issue that is not yet fully understood is the consequence of

entry into certification. Fairtrade International (2012a, p. 47) report that in 2011, 80

percent of Fair Trade certified producers organizations reported holding at least one

additional certification. Sixty one percent also held Organic, eight percent had

Rainforest Alliance and seven percent also had UTZ.

   An important role of certifications is to provide credible information to the consumer

about the nature of the production process. A potential concern is that if there are many

different standards with distinct yet overlapping requirements then certification may

introduce a measure of confusion and may therefore be less effective.




                                           19
   A second issue is related to the incentives and potential agency issues that can

arise. In general, it may not always be in the interest of the certifying agency to fully

enforce certification requirements. Although this is potentially a concern with third-party

NGO-based organizations, it is particularly a concern with private certifications. A

concern is that more recent private certifications may be little more than smart

marketing and attempts to cash in on consumers’ willingness to pay for sustainably

produced products. The existence of these additional certifications may affect

consumers’ views about the validity and reliability of third-party certifications generally.

   A final issue is that from the producer’s perspective, multiple certifications mean

multiple reports, multiple audits, greater administrative costs, and a greater tax on

scarce managerial capital. Further, it is possible that the existence of multiple standards

may decrease the extent to which farmers can fully understand and benefit from each

certification. For example, Valkila and Nygren (2009) found that Nicaraguan farmers

belonging to Fair Trade certified cooperatives had a poor understanding of Fair Trade,

including its requirements, and potential benefits. According to the authors, one reason

was the multiplicity of certification schemes, quality standards, and rural development

projects faced by farmers. They simply were not able to keep track of them all and to

distinguish one program from another. Mendez et al. (2010) also found that farmers

were often unclear or confused about certifications, particularly about Fair Trade,

although farmers did have a better understanding of Organic certification.

   Overall, the consequences of the rapid growth of certifications are something we

know little about, although it is potentially very important.




                                              20
Does Fair Trade Provide Greater Financial Stability to Farmers?

       Fair Trade seeks to increase financial stability for certified farmers through a

number of mechanisms, including higher prices, a price floor, financing from purchasers

and coops, and longer-term ties between producers and buyers. The evidence seems to

indicate that in many environments these benefits are observed. However, there are

important exceptions. For example, Raynolds (2009) collects information from

interviews and focus groups with members and leaders of four cooperatives in Peru and

Mexico. She reports that corporate buyers of coffee, what she calls “market driven”

buyers (e.g., importers that sell to Starbucks, Nestle, and Costco), in practice often

refuse to buy from cooperatives that request credit. She also finds that these market-

driven mainstream buyers, unlike other Fair Trade buyers, are less willing to enter into

longer-term stable contracts. They often sign one-year contracts as a minimum Fair

Trade requirement, but do little else to create longer-term partnerships with suppliers.

However, despite the behavior of these corporate buyers, she still finds that the

producer cooperatives view financing as the second-most beneficial aspect of Fair

Trade -- after the price floor.

       Other studies confirm that Fair Trade has succeeded in increasing the credit

available to farmers. Bacon et al. (2008) finds that, within a sample of 177 Nicaraguan

coffee farmers, 77 percent of Fair Trade certified farmers reported that their cooperative

provided pre-harvest credit, while this figure was only 33 percent for farmers belonging

to conventional cooperatives. Mendez et al. (2010), examining data from 469

households from four Latin American countries, find that Fair Trade certified farmers are

more likely to report having access to credit than conventional farmers. Interestingly,



                                           21
they find no relationship between Organic certification, in which Organic buyers are not

required to provide access to credit. This finding suggests that differences in access to

credit may be due to a causal effect of Fair Trade rather than selection. If “better”

farmers are more likely to certify with Fair Trade and Organic, then one might also have

expected a similar relationship between farms and credit to exist with Organic

certification too. Absence of such a relationship is thus evidence against positive

selection.

       Perhaps the most important tool through which Fair Trade aims to provide

greater stability to farmers is the price floor. However, not all coffee produced by Fair

Trade certified farmers can be sold for the Fair Trade price. In the Mendez et al. (2010)

sample of Fair Trade-certified farmers from four Latin American countries, 60 percent of

certified coffee was sold as Fair Trade. Among the four Fair Trade cooperatives

interviewed by Dragusanu and Nunn (2013), the proportion of coffee sold in the

previous year as Fair Trade was 10, 40, 53 and 80 percent. These figures are in line

with FLO’s official statistics that report that on average 45 percent of coffee sold by Fair

Trade certified producers is sold on Fair Trade terms. This figure is slightly higher for

bananas (72 percent), cane sugar (54 percent), cocoa (61 percent), and cotton (60

percent) (Fairtrade International, 2012a, p. 44)

       Although empirical evidence remains limited, existing studies often find that Fair

Trade certified farmers perceive and experience greater economic stability than

conventional farmers. For example, Bacon (2005) examines a sample of 228 coffee

farmers from Nicaragua and finds that Fair Trade farmers report being less concerned

about losing their farm in the coming year than conventional farmers.



                                            22
The Impacts of Certifications on the Environment

      Fair Trade and other environmental labels have been successful in promoting

more environmentally-friendly farming practices among certified farmers. For example,

Jaffee (2009) finds that among a sample of 51 Mexican coffee farmers -- 26 Fair Trade

and 25 conventional -- there is a strong association between Fair Trade certification and

environmentally friendly farming practices, such as composting, live fences, and

terracing. Figure 2 shows the differences in these practices by reporting the proportion

of Fair Trade producers and proportion of conventional producers in his sample that

were engaged in each practice. In all five cases, the differences between the two

groups are statistically significant. Similarly, based on a sample of 177 coffee farmers

from Nicaragua, surveyed in 2006, Bacon et al. (2008) find that 68 percent of Fair Trade

farmers had implemented ecological water purification systems, compared to 40 percent

for conventional farmers. Moreover, 43 percent of Fair Trade farmers had implemented

soil and water conservation practices, while only 10 percent of conventional farmers had

done so.

      Other certifications that target the environment also seem to increase

environmentally friendly farming practices. For example, Blackman and Naranjo (2012)

examine the impacts of Organic certification among 2,603 coffee farmers in Costa Rica

(36 of them certified organic and 2,567 conventional). Using propensity score matching,

they find strong evidence that organic farmers are less likely to engage in the use of

pesticides, herbicides and chemical fertilizers and they were more likely to use organic




                                           23
fertilizers, shade trees, and windbreaks, and to undertake a variety of soil conservation

measures.




How Certifications Affect Local Governance and Institutions

       The empirical evidence on whether Fair Trade has been able to successfully

strengthen local institutions remains limited. In their study of 360 randomly sampled

coffee farmers in Peru, Ruben and Fort (2012) show that when comparing Fair Trade

certified farmers matched conventional farmers, they are more likely to strongly identify

with their cooperative and are more likely to believe the cooperative is important and

helpful in the sales process. Interestingly, these differences are only robustly statistically

significant when comparing Fair Trade and conventional farmers that are both also

certified Organic.

   There is also evidence that suggests that Fair Trade does not foster stronger

institutions. Elder, Zerrifi and LeBillon (2012), examining 107 coffee farmers from

Rwanda in 2009, find that membership in a Fair Trade certified cooperative is

associated with less trust in the leaders of the cooperative. By contrast, they found no

difference on trust in the members of one’s own community. Along similar lines, Saenz-

Segura and Zuniga-Arias (2009), using propensity score matching among a sample of

103 farmers from Costa Rica, find that, relative to conventional farmers, Fair Trade

certified farmers identify less with their cooperative and perceive their cooperative to

function more poorly.




                                             24
   These quantitative finding suggests a pattern of tension between farmers belonging

to Fair Trade certified cooperatives and the cooperative itself that is consistent with the

qualitative findings from a number of studies. Prevezer (2013) interviewed farmers

belonging to Fair Trade certified coffee cooperatives in Tanzania. He found that farmers

commonly complained of a lack of communication about the use of the premiums, the

reasoning behind decisions, and the decision-making process itself. Prevezer also

found evidence of elected farmers on the boards misusing the funds -- for example, by

paying themselves for attending meetings. In their case study of a Fair Trade coffee

cooperative in Costa Rica (Coopermontes de Oro R.L.), Saenz-Segura and Zuniga-

Arias (2009) found a significant amount of distrust in the cooperative arising because of

deficient management in the past. Mendez et al. (2010) report evidence, from farmer

surveys, of dissatisfaction and concern over a lack of transparency, accountability, and

communication on the part of cooperative members (i.e., farmers) directed towards

cooperative leaders across four Latin American countries.

    An important factor is likely a lack of knowledge about Fair Trade on the part of

farmers and particularly about the existence and intended nature of the Fair Trade price

premium. In their case study of a Fair Trade coffee cooperative in Costa Rica, Saenz-

Segura and Zuniga-Arias (2009) found that one-third of producers did not know about

the existence of a premium and about half felt that they had not receive any benefits

from Fair Trade certification. As another example, Fort and Ruben (2009) find that

among 180 Fair Trade-certified coffee farmers from Peru, 12 percent did not know

about the existence of the Fair Trade premium and 77 percent felt that they did not

receive any benefits from the premium.



                                            25
      Although much more research is needed, one can imagine a number of

theoretical reasons why Fair Trade certification could erode trust and increase tensions

within a cooperative. With certifications come increased rents. With more at stake, it is

natural that tensions may escalate. In addition, because the specifics of Fair Trade

remain opaque to members, this may directly cause increased suspicion on their part.




Distributional Considerations of Fair Trade

      According to the World Fair Trade Organization and Fairtrade International

(2009, p. 4), Fair Trade seeks to contribute “to sustainable development by offering

better trading conditions to, and securing the rights of, marginalized producers and

workers.” In this quotation, as in many discussions, producers and farm owners are

often lumped together with workers as being potential beneficiaries of certification. But

to what extent are the benefits of certification felt by the farm owners and how many

reach the hired workers?

      In the coffee industry, the majority of farms are small and family-run with few

hired workers that tend to be seasonal harvesters. In addition, the cooperative itself may

hire workers. While coffee and cacao are primarily stallholder crops, commodities, like

bananas, citrus fruits, and tea are more commonly produced on large plantations. For

these products, certification has been expanded to also include larger plantations with

the same general principles of Fair Trade being followed, although details of the

certification standards vary by product and by organizational form (e.g., plantation vs.

cooperative).




                                           26
      The evidence on the distribution of the benefits of Fair Trade remains limited, but

the available studies suggest that, within the coffee industry, Fair Trade certification

benefits workers little or not at all. Valkila and Nygren (2009) interviewed 94 producers

and 64 hired workers from 11 Nicaraguan coffee cooperatives over a six-month period

in 2005 and 2006. They found that although the records of Fair Trade farmers indicated

that they received higher prices for their coffee, the workers (like the rest of rural

Nicaragua) were paid the minimum wage and were not given benefits like social

security, medical care, vacation, pension, and paid sick leave. Dragusanu and Nunn

(2013) come to a similar conclusion in their empirical study of the impacts of Fair Trade

coffee in Costa Rica. Examining a panel of over 110,000 individuals annually between

2003 and 2010, they find that while Fair Trade certification is associated with

significantly greater incomes for farmers, it is not associated with increased incomes for

hired workers.

      Jaffee’s (2009) direct comparison of 26 Fair Trade farmers and 25 conventional

farmers from Oaxaca, Mexico in 2002/2003, also suggests that few of the benefits of

Fair Trade are passed on to workers. Although he finds that the average price obtained

by Fair Trade certified farmers is 130 percent higher than for conventional farmers

(13.22 vs. 5.74 pesos per kilogram), the wages paid to hired workers are only 7 percent

higher (47 vs. 44 pesos per day). As a result, labor costs (measured as a share of

coffee sales) were lower for Fair Trade certified farms than for conventional farms (57.2

versus 68.3 percent).

      Looking outside of coffee, the effects of Fair Trade on workers are more

noticeable. When large plantations are certified, Fair Trade regulations pay particular



                                           27
attention to workers (who comprise a larger group relative to farm owners in these

products). In the case of plantations, certification requires workers’ freedom of

association, safe and equitable working conditions, the absence of forced or child labor,

and salaries that are at least as high as the established minimum wage. In addition,

certification requires that workers form a democratically elected workers’ organization if

one does not already exist.

      Ruben and van Schendel (2009) survey workers from two banana plantations in

Ghana, one Fair Trade certified, the other not. Comparing 50 workers from the

conventional plantation with 50 matched workers from the Fair Trade plantation, they

find that workers in the conventional plantation received a higher base salary, but they

worked longer hours and received fewer fringe benefits. Fair Trade workers felt a

greater sense of identity and co-ownership with the plantation. Granville and Telford

(2013) survey 381 workers (273 Fair Trade workers and 108 conventional workers) in

South Africa’s wine industry. Directly comparing the two groups, they find that Fair

Trade workers are more likely to make more than minimum wage and as a result they

are also able to save more of their income. Consistent with this, 91 percent of Fair

Trade workers said in survey results that Fair Trade (and their membership in the joint

body) was responsible for improving their living standards. In particular, 95 percent of

workers reported that Fair Trade provided help with education and/or health (and 51

percent reported being helped with both).

      Another distributional concern is whether Fair Trade results in greater inequality

between farmers that are certified and those that are not. Kadow (2011) examines this

possibility theoretically in a Ricardian model of North-South trade. In the model, Fair



                                            28
Trade and conventional coffee are differentiated products. The price of Fair Trade

coffee is higher and the price gap is due to preferences of Northern consumers for

consumption of coffee produced in a socially responsible manner. In the model, Fair

Trade increases global welfare. This arises primarily by reducing the income differences

between the North and South since there is diminishing marginal utility of income. In

addition, because Fair Trade increases the incomes of certified producers in the South

and does not benefit conventional producers, Fair Trade would theoretically increase

inequalities within the South.

       While it is clearly true that Fair Trade certified farmers benefit more from Fair

Trade, in reality there are reasons why non-certified farmers may also gain (or even

those outside of the coffee industry). The primary reason that non-certified farmers may

benefit from Fair Trade is due to the use of the price premium for projects that benefit

the broader community, such as education, health care services, water, electricity, road

infrastructure, etc. Dragusanu and Nunn (2012) describe a scholarship program,

Children of the Field Foundation, initially implemented in Costa Rica by COOCAFE

using Fair Trade premiums. Since its implementation in 1996, the program has provided

scholarships to 2,598 students and financial support to 240 schools. COOCAFE

estimates that in total, over 5,800 students have been helped by the foundation.

       Dragusanu and Nunn’s (2013) empirical study of Fair Trade coffee producers in

Costa Rica is one of the few studies that directly estimates potential spillovers from Fair

Trade certification. In their panel analysis, they estimate the impacts of more Fair Trade

certification on households but living in the same area. They find that incomes of

households (that are not coffee producers) increase as the extent of Fair Trade



                                            29
certification increases in a district. Although not conclusive, this finding provides

preliminary evidence that spillovers may exist and may be positive.

       The model developed by Podhorsky (2013a) illustrates another mechanism

through which certification can benefit conventional farmers. In the model, a small

number of oligopolistic intermediaries buy from local producers and sell to foreign

buyers. (This is the typical structure of the industry.) In her model, the existence of a

Fair Trade certification decreases the market power of intermediaries, and as a result,

even producers that do not choose to become Fair Trade certified benefit. It is

interesting to note that the original impetus for Max Havelaar was to correct the

exploitation of coffee farmers by middlemen due to a severe imbalance of bargaining

power. Therefore, Podhorsky’s model (2013a) seems particularly appropriate for

thinking about Fair Trade and its spillovers.




Conclusions

       Many consumers value goods produced in a socially and environmentally

responsible manner. As a result, efficiency and welfare gains are possible from credible

third-party certifications, like Fair Trade, that provide consumers with information about

the production process.

       The existing empirical evidence, based primarily on conditional correlations,

suggests that Fair Trade does achieve many of its intended goals, although on a

comparatively modest scale relative to the size of national economies. Fair Trade

farmers do on average receive higher prices, have greater access to credit, perceive




                                            30
their economic environment as being more stable, and are more likely to engage in

environmentally friendly farming practices. However, some aspects of Fair Trade and its

consequences are not yet well understood. There is evidence that farmers in Fair Trade

cooperatives may not be fully aware of the details of Fair Trade and can sometimes

mistrust those who run the cooperative. Another issue is the trade-off between limiting

certification to small-scale disadvantaged producers and allowing larger plantation-style

producers to also become certified. By scaling-up Fair Trade and increasing entry into

certification, the increased entry may dissipate some of the monetary benefits of

certification.

       Some scholars have argued that consumers may be better off using institutions

that directly transfer benefits to producers in developing countries rather than using

market-based mechanisms like Fair Trade. We are skeptical that anything resembling

direct transfers is preferable. It has long been recognized that direct transfers of money

distort incentives, diverting effort away from productive activities and towards rent-

seeking and corruption. For example, a number of recent empirical studies show that

foreign aid (whether it is economic, military or food aid) increases conflict (Crost, Felter

and Johnston, forthcoming; Dube and Naidu, 2012; Nunn and Qian, forthcoming). In our

view, the largest potential benefit of market-based systems like Fair Trade is that they

do not distort incentives in as deleterious a way as foreign aid. Instead, they work within

the marketplace and reward productive activities and production processes that are

valued by consumers and that are good for the local environment and economy.




                                            31
Acknowledgements




      We have received valuable comments from David Atkin, David Autor, Michael

Hiscox, Ulrike Malmendier, Marc Muendler, Nina Pavcnik, Andrea Podhorsky, and

Sandra Sequeira, and in particular Timothy Taylor. We also thank Stephanie Cappa and

Matthew Summers for valuable research assistance.




                                        32
References

Arnould, Eric J., Alejandro Plastina, and Dwayne Ball. 2009. “Does Fair Trade Deliver

    on Its Core Value Proposition? Effects on Income, Educational Attainment, and

    Health in Three Countries,” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 28(2): 186-201.


Arnot, Chris, Peter C. Boxall, and Sean B. Cash. 2006. “Do Ethical Consumers Care

    About Price? A Revealed Preference Analysis of Fair Trade Coffee Purchases,”

    Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 54: 555-565.


Bacon, Christopher. 2005. “Confronting the Coffee Crisis: Can Fair Trade, Organic, and

    Specialty   Coffee   Reduce    Small-Scale   Farmer    Vulnerability    in   Northern

    Nicaragua?” World Development, 33(3): 497-511.


Bacon, Christopher M, V. Ernesto Mendez, Maria Eugenia Flores Gomez, Douglas

    Stuart, and Sandro Raul Diaz Flores. 2008. “Are Sustainable Coffee Certifications

    Enough to Secure Farmer Livelihoods? The Millennium Development Goals and

    Nicaragua’s Fair Trade Cooperatives,” Globalizations, 5 (2): 259-274.


Becchetti, Leonardo and Marco Costantino. 2008. “The Effects of Fair Trade on

    Affiliated Producers: An Impact Analysis on Kenyan Farmers,” World Development

    36(5): 823-842.


Beuchelt, Tina D. and Manfred Zeller. 2011. “Profits and Poverty: Certification’s

    Troubled Link for Nicaragua’s Organic and Fair Trade Coffee Producers,”

    Ecological Economics, 70: 1316-1324.




                                         33
Blackman, Allen and Maria A. Naranjo. 2012. “Does Eco-Certification have

     Environmental Benefits? Organic Coffee in Costa Rica,” Ecological Economics, 83:

     58-66.


Benjamin Crost, Joseph Felter and Patrick Johnston. 2012. “Aid Under Fire:

     Development Projects and Civil Conflict,” Mimeo.


de Janvry, Alain, Craig McIntosh, and Elisabeth Sadoulet. 2012. “Fair Trade and Free

     Entry: Can a Disequilibrium Market Serve as a Development Tool?” Mimeo,

     University of California, Berkeley.

Collier, Paul. 2007. The Bottom Billion. New York: Oxford University Press.

Crost, Benjamin, Joseph Felter, and Patrick Johnston. Forthcoming. “Aid Under Fire:

     Development Projects and Civil Conflict,” American Economic Review.

Dragusanu, Raluca, and Nathan Nunn. 2013. “The Impact of Fair Trade Certification:

     Evidence from Coffee Producers in Costa Rica,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Dube, Oeindrila and Suresh Naidu. 2012. “Bases, Bullets, and Ballots: The Effect of

     U.S. Military Aid on Political Conflict in Colombia,” Mimeo, New York University.

Elder, Sara D., Hisham Zerriffi, and Philippe Le Billon. 2012. “Effects of Fair Trade

     Certification on Social Capital: The Case of Rwandan Coffee Producers,” World

     Development, 40 (11): 2355-2367.

Fairtrade International. 2011. “Fair Trade Standard for Coffee for Small Producer

     Organizations,” Version: 01.04.2011, Mimeo, May 2011.




                                           34
Fairtrade International. 2013. “Unlocking the Power: Annual Report, 2012-13,” Mimeo,

     September 2013.

Fairtrade International. 2012a. “Monitoring the Scope and Benefits of Fair Trade, Fourth

     Edition, 2012,” Mimeo.

Fairtrade International. 2012b. "Fair Trade and Coffee. Commodity Briefing," Mimeo.

FLO-CERT. “Fee System Small Producer Organization: Explanatory Document.

     Effective as of: 01.01.2013,” Mimeo.

Fort, Ricardo and Ruerd Ruben. 2009. “The Impact of Fair Trade Certification on Coffee

     Producers in Peru,” Ruerd Ruben (ed), The Impact of Fair Trade, pp. 75-98.

     Wageningen: Wageningen Academic Publishers.


Fort, Ricardo, Ruerd Ruben, and Guillermo Zuniga-Arias. 2009. “Measuring the Impact

     of Fair Trade on Development,” Development in Practice 12(6): 777-788.


Giovannucci, Daniele, Oliver von Hagen, Joseph Wozniak. forthcoming. “Corporate

     Social Responsibility and the Role of Voluntary Sustainability Standards,” Carsten

     Schmitz-Hoffmann, Michael Schmidt, Berthold Hansmann and Dmitry Palekhov

     (eds), Voluntary Standards Systems – A Contribution to Sustainable Development.

     Berlin: Springer Publishing.

Granville, Brigitte and Steven Telford. 2013. “Empirical Evidence from South Africa,”

     Brigitte Granville and Janet Dine (eds), The Process and Practices of Fair Trade,

     pp. 286-340. London: Routledge.




                                            35
Hainmueller, Jens, Michael J. Hiscox, and Sandra Sequeira. 2011. “Consumer Demand

    for the Fair Trade Label: Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Mimeo, Harvard

    University.

Hertel, Shareen, Lyle Scruggs, and C. Patrick Heidkamp. 2009. “Human Rights and

    Public Opinion: From Attitudes to Action,” Political Science Quarterly, 124 (3): 443-

    459.


Hiscox, Michael J., Michael Broukhim, Claire S. Litwin, and Andrea Woloski. 2011.

    “Consumer Demand for Fair Labor Standards: Evidence from a Field Experiment

    on e-Bay,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Hiscox, Michael J., Michael Broukhim, and Claire S. Litwin. 2011. “Consumer Demand

    for Fair Trade: New Evidence from a Field Experiment using e-Bay Auctions of

    Fresh Roasted Coffee,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Hiscox, Michael J. and Nicholas F.B. Smyth. 2011. “Is there Consumer Demand for Fair

    Labor Standards? Evidence from a Field Experiment,” Mimeo, Harvard University.

Jaffee, Daniel. 2009. “`Better, but not Great’: The Social and Environmental Benefits

    and Limitations of Fair Trade for Indigenous Coffee Producers in Oaxaca, Mexico,”

    Ruerd Ruben (ed), The Impact of Fair Trade, pp. 195-222. Wageningen:

    Wageningen Academic Publishers.


Kadow, Alexander. 2011. “The Fair Trade Movement: An Economic Perspective,”

    Mimeo, University of Glasgow.

Mendez, V. Ernesto, Christopher M. Bacon, Maryl Olson, Seth Petchers, Doribel

    Herrador, Cecilia Carranza, Laura Trujillo, Carlos Guadarrama-Zugasti, Antonio


                                          36
    Coron, and Angel Mendoza. 2010. “Effects of Fair Trade and Organic Certifications

    on Small-Scale Coffee Farmer Households in Central America and Mexico,”

    Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, 25(3): 236-251.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian. forthcoming. “U.S. Food Aid and Civil Conflict,”

    American Economic Review.

Podhorsky, Andrea. 2010. “Environmental Labeling,” Mimeo, York University.

Podhorsky, Andrea. 2013a. “A Positive Analysis of Fair Trade Certification,” Mimeo,

    York University.

Podhorsky, Andrea. 2013b. “Certification Programs and North-South Trade,” Mimeo,

    York University.

Potts, Jason, Matthew Lynch, Ann Wilkings, Gabriel Huppé, Maxine Cunningham, and

    Vivek Voora. 2014. The State of Sustainability Initiatives Review 2014: Standards

    and the Green Economy. Winnipeg, Canada: International Institute for Sustainable

    Development and London: The International Institute for Environment and

    Development.

Prevezer, Martha. 2013. “Fair Trade Governance and Its Impact on Local Development:

    A Framework,” Brigitte Granville and Janet Dine (eds), The Process and Practices

    of Fair Trade, pp. 19-42. London: Routledge.

Raynolds, Laura T., Douglas Murray, and Andrew Heller. 2007. “Regulating

    Sustainability in the Coffee Sector: A Comparative Analysis of Third-Party

    Environmental and Social Certification Initiatives,” Agriculture and Human Values,

    24: 147-163.



                                         37
Raynolds, Laura T. 2009. “Mainstreaming Fair Trade Coffee: From Partnership to

     Traceability,” World Development, 37 (6): 1083-1093.


Ruben, Ruerd and Lucie van Schendel. 2009. “The Impact of Fair Trade in Banana

     Plantations in Ghana: Income, Ownership and Livelihoods of Banana Workers,”

     Ruerd Ruben (ed), The Impact of Fair Trade, pp. 137-153. Wageningen:

     Wageningen Academic Publishers.


Ruben, Ruerd and Ricardo Fort. 2012. “The Impact of Fair Trade Certification for Coffee

     Farmers in Peru,” World Development, 40 (3): 570-582.


Saenz-Segura, Fernando and Guillermo Zuniga-Arias. 2009. “Assessment of the Effect

     of Fair Trade on Smallholder Producers in Costa Rica: A Comparative Study in the

     Coffee Sector,” Ruerd Ruben (ed), The Impact of Fair Trade, pp. 117-135.

     Wageningen: Wageningen Academic Publishers.


Sidwell, Mac. 2008. Unfair Trade. London: ASI (Research) Ltd.


The Economist Newspaper Limited. 2006. “Voting with Your Trolley,” The Economist,

     December 7. Retrieved from http://www.economist.com/node/8380592.


Valkila, Jon and Anja Nygren. 2009. “Impacts of Fair Trade Certification on Coffee

     Farmers, Cooperatives, and Laborers in Nicaragua,” Agriculture and Human

     Values, 27(3): 321-333.

Weber, Jeremy. 2011. “How Much More do Growers Receive for Fair Trade-Organic

     Coffee?” Food Policy, 36: 678-685.




                                          38
World Fair Trade Organization and Fairtrade Labelling Organizations International.

    2009. “A Charter of Fair Trade Principals,” Mimeo, January 2009.




                                         39
Table 1. Number of Fairtrade producers and workers by product.




                             40
Figure 1. Fairtrade price and the market price for coffee, 1989-2014.




                                 41
Figure 2. Differences in environmental practices between Fair Trade and conventional coffee
producers in Oaxaca, Mexico. Averages (and 95 percent confidence intervals) are reported for
25 Fair Trade farms and 26 conventional farms. Source: Jaffee (2009, Chapter 9, Table 6).




                                            42
