NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUPPLY VS. DEMAND UNDER AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BAN:
ESTIMATES FROM UC LAW SCHOOLS
Danny Yagan
Working Paper 20361
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20361
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2014

I thank Joseph Altonji, David Card, Raj Chetty, David Cutler, John N. Friedman, Roland Fryer, Claudia
Goldin, Joshua Gottlieb, Nathaniel Hilger, Caroline Hoxby, Lisa Kahn, Lawrence Katz, Ilyana Kuziemko,
Jessica Laird, Justin McCrary, Sendhil Mullainathan, Jesse Rothstein, Emmanuel Saez, Matthew Weinzierl,
and Martin West for their comments. Sarah Abraham, Michel Kim, Amol Pai, and Michael Stepner
provided excellent research assistance. The 2012-2013 version of this paper circulated with the title
"Law School Admissions under the UC Affirmative Action Ban." The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Danny Yagan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Supply vs. Demand under an Affirmative Action Ban: Estimates from UC Law Schools
Danny Yagan
NBER Working Paper No. 20361
July 2014, Revised December 2015
JEL No. I0,J0,K0
ABSTRACT
Affirmative action bans can reduce black enrollment not only by reducing black admission advantages
(contracting demand) but also by reducing applications (contracting supply) from black students who
can still gain admission but prefer alternative schools that still practice affirmative action. When affirmative
action was banned at UC law schools, Berkeley's black applications and enrollment declined by almost
half even as black admission rates rose relative to whites. I ask whether black enrollment at UC law
schools would have markedly declined even without the supply contraction. I find in a large sample
of students applying to law schools nationwide that black supply contractions were driven mostly or
entirely by students unlikely to gain admission under the ban, yielding stronger post-ban black applicant
pools. Holding applicant pools constant, I estimate that the ban reduced black admission rates at both
Berkeley and UCLA by half. Hence, black enrollment at these elite schools would likely have plummeted
even if supply contractions had been muted---as could occur under a nationwide ban that eliminates
affirmative-action-practicing alternatives.
Danny Yagan
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
yagan@berkeley.edu

I

Introduction

Black students in the United States would be substantially underrepresented at elite universities if
admission decisions were made purely on the basis of academic credentials and without regard to
race (Kane 1998; Bowen and Bok 2000; Espenshade, Chung, and Walling 2004; Rothstein and Yoon
2008). Elite universities that value diversity therefore practice a¢ rmative action: awarding admission
advantages to black applicants on the basis of race. However, a¢ rmative action is in legal jeopardy:
seven states have banned the practice at their public universities, and the U.S. Supreme Court has
indicated that it expects to broaden these bans nationwide by 2030.1
A¢ rmative action bans can reduce black enrollment through two related channels.

First, a¢ r-

mative action bans increase the opportunity cost of admitting black students by weakening the racial
information that schools can use in admissions and thereby increasing the non-racial student strength
that schools must forgo. The higher opportunity cost can induce schools to contract demand in the
form of reduced black admission advantages (Chan and Eyster 2003; Fryer, Loury, and Yuret 2007;
Epple, Romano, and Sieg 2008).2

Second, a demand contraction of any size can reduce the value

to black students of attending an a¤ected school (e.g. due to smaller black campus communities),
inducing a supply contraction in the form of reduced applications even from black students who can
still gain admission but prefer alternative schools that still practice a¢ rmative action (Long 2004;
Card and Krueger 2004 and 2005; Dickson 2006).3

Separating supply and demand e¤ects can be

crucial for modeling consequences of a nationwide a¢ rmative action ban that eliminates a¢ rmativeaction-practicing alternatives and thus can mute supply responses (Arcidiacono 2005; Epple, Romano,
and Sieg 2008).

I separate these e¤ects in the context of the …rst and largest ban— the 1996 Uni-

versity of California a¢ rmative action ban— at the UC’s elite law schools Berkeley and UCLA, which
experienced extraordinary contractions in black applications after the ban.4
Figure 1 motivates the analysis using public aggregates. It shows that after a transition period, the
ban permanently reduced the black share of Berkeley’s applicant pool by 47.7% even as black admission
rates rose slightly relative to white admission rates— resulting in Berkeley’s black enrollment share
falling by 40.0% (as yield rates changed little).5 The demand-centric explanation of these e¤ects would
1

The most recent Supreme Court decision on a¢ rmative action (Grutter v. Bollinger 2003) concluded with the widely
quoted warning “We expect that 25 years from now [in 2028], the use of racial preferences will no longer be necessary to
further the interest approved today” because “race-conscious admissions policies must be limited in time.” The Court
has just heard new oral arguments in the a¢ rmative action challenge Fisher v. Texas (December 2015).
2
See Appendix A.i for a simple model.
3
See Appendix A.ii for the simple model of Card and Krueger (2004).
4
All references to Berkeley and UCLA pertain to their law schools.
5
Changes are measured 1992-1995 to 2000-2003. Yield rates (the shares of admitted students who enrolled) did not
change di¤erentially across races (see the …gure notes). UCLA exhibited similar declines in the black share of enrollees
(48.7%) and the applicant pool (38.3%) though black admission rates fell relative to white admission rates, underscoring

be that Berkeley substantially contracted demand for black students and that only less-credentialed
black students stopped applying, due to expected rejection. A nationwide ban would therefore also be
expected to substantially reduce elite black enrollments. In contrast, the supply-centric explanation
would be that Berkeley barely contracted demand for black students, but black students of all credential
levels nevertheless stopped applying in favor of “black-friendlier” schools with slightly higher racial
diversity. A nationwide ban may therefore have little e¤ect on elite black enrollments, as no blackfriendlier schools exist. This paper asks: would UC black enrollments have markedly declined even if
black students had not stopped applying?
I address this question using a large sample of applicants to UC and non-UC law schools. I …nd that
black supply contractions were very concentrated among students unlikely to gain admission under the
ban, yielding stronger post-ban black applicant pools. After controlling for selective attrition from
applicant pools, I robustly estimate that the ban reduced the black admission rate in this sample in
half at both Berkeley and UCLA. Hence based on this sample, black enrollment at these elite schools
would likely have declined dramatically even if black students had not stopped applying.
Economically, one can understand the results as follows.

A¢ rmative action bans weaken the

racial information that can be used in admissions, which increases the non-racial student strength that
schools must forgo in order to admit each additional black student.

UC schools responded to this

higher opportunity cost by collecting race-correlating information like diversity essays and maintained
a selection-corrected black admission rate (31%) well above the rate that would prevail under pre-ban
white admission standards (8%). But UC schools nevertheless substantially contracted demand for
black students: the 31% selection-corrected post-ban black admission rate was still only half the 61%
pre-ban rate. On the supply side, highly credentialed black students continued to apply (exhibiting
no signi…cant change) relative to less-credentialed black students (exhibiting a ¬42% change). This
pattern is consistent with supply responding less to campus racial diversity than to one’s own admission
probability, with …xed per-school application costs. Colloquially, the results are consistent with black
students still wanting to attend UC schools but simply not being able to get in anymore.
The …ndings are local to and made possible by administrative application-level data on all 25,499
applications submitted to law schools nationwide between 1990 and 2006 by 5,353 undergraduates
from one elite college. The dataset’s information on the application behavior of non-UC applicants
and on the admission decisions of both UC and non-UC applicants permits this paper’s joint analysis
of supply and demand under the UC ban. The data contain only 185 applications of black students
to UC schools, but the key speci…cations are nevertheless su¢ ciently statistically powerful because
the limited informativeness of public aggregates; see Online Appendix Figure 1.

2

law school admissions are unusually formulaic and because e¤ects are large. Omitted variables bias
is possible but minimized in this context because the observed covariates are such powerful predictors
of admission and because the dataset’s thousands of independent screens— admission decisions of UC
applicants at non-UC schools— provide a unique opportunity to control for an inferred measure of
not-directly-observed applicant strength (e.g. recommendation letters), similar to Dale and Krueger
(2002).
The results contribute to a large empirical literature on a¢ rmative action bans. On the supply side,
Card and Krueger (2005) and Dickson (2006) …nd no enduring response of minority applications—
neither overall nor among highly credentialed minorities— to California’s and Texas’s bans, respectively, based on high-school student SAT submission data.6 My paper studies a context with a huge
and enduring overall black application response, which therefore provides an especially ripe opportunity to identify supply responses that could be driving large black enrollment declines.

On the

demand side, Long and Tienda (2008), Arcidiacono, Aucejo, Coate, and Hotz (2014), and Antonovics
and Backes (2014) also use administrative data to study admissions under an a¢ rmative action ban.
I break from their work by using data on students who applied to both a¤ected and una¤ected schools
in order to study both supply and demand as well as to address selection on unobserved characteristics
like recommendation letter strength. I also study professional school admissions, which spawned the
two landmark Supreme Court cases upholding a¢ rmative action (University of California v. Bakke
1978; Grutter v. Bollinger 2003).
Finally, the selective response of black applications provides a key empirical moment to match in
structural simulations of a nationwide a¢ rmative action ban at law schools and related settings (Arcidiacono 2005; Epple, Romano, and Sieg 2008). My admissions results further suggest that such simulations should assume neither full elimination of black admission advantages— as assumed in Krueger,
Rothstein, and Turner (2006) and Rothstein and Yoon (2008)— nor fully sustained advantages— as
assumed in Fryer, Loury, and Yuret (2007). A midpoint between those extremes may be more reasonable.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the UC a¢ rmative action
ban. Section III introduces the data. Section IV presents the results. Section V concludes.
6
Long (2004) …nds no overall response to Texas’s ban but a negative overall response to California’s ban in 1999,
which Card and Krueger …nd was small (¬13%) and short-lived (insigni…cant and near-zero in 2000 and 2001).

3

II
II.A

Legal and Institutional Environment

Legal Environment

On November 5, 1996, California became the …rst state to ban a¢ rmative action— awarding admission
preference to underrepresented minorities on the basis of race— when voters approved Proposition 209
to amend the state constitution to read: “The state shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential
treatment to, any individual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin in the
operation of public employment, public education, or public contracting.” In particular, no University
of California applicant is to be preferred to another on the basis of race. The ban went into e¤ect
immediately at UC law schools.7 Six other states have since passed similar bans.8
Legally, the UC a¢ rmative action ban prohibits the use of race in choosing among applicants but
permits the use of applicant characteristics that correlate with race as long as those characteristics
have defensible non-racial justi…cation if challenged in court. For example, UC schools are free to use
of low family income (which correlates with black status) because broadening socioeconomic access is
considered to be independently valuable to universities, but the use of participation in a black-focused
extracurricular group would almost certainly be considered illegal.

Law school admission decisions

are made by a small group of selectors applying subjective criteria with little transparency, so the
actual information used is unknown. UC schools (which refer throughout this paper to Berkeley and
UCLA law schools) were not bound by any other new laws.9
Nationally, the U.S. Supreme Court in 5-4 rulings in both 1978 (Regents of the University of
California v. Bakke) and 2003 (Grutter v. Bollinger ) upheld the federal constitutionality of a¢ rmative
action, keeping the practice legal at all public universities not subject to a statewide ban. The Court’s
rationale is that although the U.S. Constitution guarantees equal protection to all races under the
law, “the educational bene…ts that ‡ow from a diverse student body”are a “compelling governmental
interest” that justi…es the use of race when there are no “workable race-neutral alternatives that will
achieve the diversity the university seeks” (Grutter ).

However, the Court concluded Grutter with

the widely quoted warning “We expect that 25 years from now [in 2028], the use of racial preferences
will no longer be necessary to further the interest approved today”because “race-conscious admissions
7

The ban went into e¤ect one year later at UC undergraduate campuses. The state constitutional amendment
superceded the 1995 UC Board of Regents SP-1 resolution, which would have ended a¢ rmative action beginning in 1997
and was later repealed to no legal e¤ect.
8
The six other states currently under a¢ rmative action bans are Arizona, Florida, Michigan, Nebraska, New Hampshire, and Washington. Georgia and Texas had temporary bans.
9
Soon after the ban, the State of California guaranteed that high school seniors graduating in the top 4% of their
high schools would gain admission to at least one UC campus but not necessarily the one of their choice. With eight
UC campuses, this had little binding e¤ect on undergraduate admissions at the elite campuses of Berkeley and UCLA.
No such guarantee applied to law school admissions.

4

policies must be limited in time.”The Court recently heard oral arguments in Fisher v. Texas, widely
reported to bode poorly for a¢ rmative action’s future.10
A¢ rmative action is currently legal at all private universities but a¢ rmative action may in principle
be banned there too, such as through restrictions on all federal-aid-receiving universities. Perhaps as
a result, most of the nation’s top private universities petitioned the Court in 2003 in detailed amicus
briefs to keep it legal at public universities.

II.B

Institutional Responses

A large theoretical literature predicts that a¤ected schools may respond to an a¢ rmative action ban
by shifting admissions weight to legal black-correlates, at least partially sustaining pre-ban black
enrollment levels (see Appendix A). Consistent with that prediction, UC application forms changed
immediately after the ban. Beginning in 1996, application forms have stated that race is not a criterion
for admission, and the page requesting applicant race has been diverted to a UC statistical department
and not reported to admission o¢ ces. Application forms instead solicited new written information
that correlates with race (law school applicants are rarely interviewed). For example before the ban,
Berkeley gave applicants ten short unconnected prompt options for the personal statement, eight of
which did not refer to diversity or disadvantages.

Immediately after the ban and ever since, all

ten were replaced by a single lengthy one that invited applicants to discuss their contributions to
“the diversity of the entering class” and their backgrounds including “a personal or family history
of cultural, educational, or socioeconomic disadvantage” (see Online Appendix Figure 2). In 1998,
Berkeley added a full-page socioeconomic questionnaire to its application form requesting information
such as college attendance rates of high-school friends and whether the applicant was raised by a single
parent. Beginning in 2001, UCLA solicited declarations of interest in a Critical Race Studies program
and instituted admission preference for interested applicants.
The schools’diversity preferences likely changed little after the ban. UC administrators strongly
opposed the ban before it passed and were not systematically replaced after it passed. As the California
political climate turned against a¢ rmative action in 1995, the UC president, UC vice-presidents, and
the chancellor of each UC campus united to “unanimously urge, in the strongest possible terms,” the
continuation of a¢ rmative action.11 Berkeley’s dean added “The need to diversify the legal profession
is not a vague liberal ideal: it is an essential component to the administration of justice.”12 The day
10
See for example the article “Supreme Court Justices’ Comments Don’t Bode Well for A¢ rmative Action”
(http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/10/us/politics/supreme-court-to-revisit-case-that-may-alter-a¢ rmativeaction.html).
11
1995 “Statement Supporting A¢ rmative Action by UC President, Chancellors, and Vice Presidents”,
http://www.development.umd.edu/Diversity/Response/Action/policy.
12
1995 press release, http://www.berkeley.edu/news/berkeleyan/1995/0524/regents.html.

5

after voters approved the ban, the UC president announced that the question facing the university
was “How do we establish new paths to diversity consistent with the law?”13 One year after the ban,
Berkeley’s dean launched an audit of policies and procedures “to see whether we can achieve greater
diversity” after “dire” admission results.14 Berkeley’s dean and the UC president continued in their
posts through 2000 and 2003, respectively. Christopher Edley, a vocal proponent of a¢ rmative action
and adviser to President Bill Clinton on the topic, served as Berkeley’s dean from 2004 to 2013. Other
institutional features like the number of …rst-year enrollees remained nearly unchanged.

III
III.A

Data

Source, Basic Variables, and Sample Restrictions

This paper’s primary dataset— which I call the Elite Applications to Law School (EALS)— comprises
administrative application-level data on 67% of an elite college’s seniors and graduates (collectively
referred to here as “students”) who applied to law schools nationwide between the fall of 1990 and the
fall of 2006. Applications to every U.S. law school are submitted through the Law School Admissions
Council, which records application information and the admission decision for every application …led.15
Two-thirds of applicants choose to release their data to their colleges’administrators, and I obtained
and digitized seventeen years of a single college’s data. The college is elite, is not on the west coast,
and has never been subject to an a¢ rmative action ban. Subsection B investigates possible selection
over time into the EALS, and Section IV estimates and accounts for selection over time into the
Berkeley and UCLA applicant pools.
The EALS contains six variables for each application: student race, LSAT test score (integers
between 120 and 180), undergraduate grade point average (GPA) to two decimal places on a 4.00 scale,
application year, law school submitted to, and admission decision. I standardize LSAT and GPA to
each have mean zero and standard deviation one across students.

Motivated semi-parametrically

in Subsection C and used below in Figure 3, I summarize applicants’ LSAT and GPA scores with a
scalar measure that I call “academic strength” equal to the standardized sum of standardized LSAT
and standardized GPA, similar to the rescaling that Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007) employ in a
di¤erent context. Application years 1990-1991 through 2001-2002 as well as 2005-2006 also contain
13

1996 “Letter from President Richard C. Atkinson to the University Community Re: Passage of Proposition 209”,
http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/
article/20607.
14
1997 Berkeley press release, http://berkeley.edu/news/berkeleyan/1997/0820/kay.html.
15
Academic credentials are veri…ed through third-party reports, and race is reported by applicants where dishonest
answers are grounds for revocation of an admission o¤er, expulsion from law school, or disbarment. To the extent that
any applicants misreported their race, the EALS race variable nevertheless represents the race that was reported to
schools on application forms.

6

applicant state of permanent residence; for these years, I digitized a California resident indicator for
Berkeley and UCLA applications only.
The raw data contain 38,200 applications of 6,072 applicants to 187 law schools. For simplicity
I restrict the analysis sample to the 94.3% of applicants listed as white, Asian, black, or Hispanic
and the 78.9% of applications submitted to UC Berkeley, UCLA, or one of the …fteen most-appliedto schools that were never subject to an a¢ rmative action ban.

These …fteen schools correspond

closely to the top-ranked law schools according to U.S. News and World Report, so I refer to them
only somewhat imprecisely as the “top …fteen non-UC law schools.”16 The 170 other schools received
relatively few applications in the EALS and are poor control schools for Berkeley and UCLA because
these 170 other schools are less selective. The …nal seventeen-school EALS sample comprises 25,499
applications submitted by 5,353 applicants. Results reported in the main text restrict to the 17,814
applications from only the 3,774 black or white applicants; the appendix reports results using all races.
See Appendix B for additional data-coding details.

III.B

Summary Statistics

Table 1 lists summary statistics. The EALS sample is 61% white, 10% black, 19% Asian, and 10%
Hispanic. Black applicants on average possess LSAT scores and GPA’s 1.1 and 1.0 standard deviations
lower, respectively, than white applicants. Online Appendix Figures 3a-c use non-parametric densities
of these academic characteristics to illustrate the …rst order stochastic dominance of the black and
Hispanic distributions by the white and Asian distributions.

This stochastic dominance motivates

universities’use of a¢ rmative action in order to achieve more racially diverse cohorts. Online Appendix Figure 3d plots means of academic strength over time by race among EALS applicants; pre-ban
and post-ban means are very similar within races, suggesting little di¤erential selection over time into
the EALS. Section IV estimates and accounts for di¤erential selection over time into the Berkeley
and UCLA applicant pools.
Berkeley received applications from 28% of all applicants (1,594, making it the seventh-mostapplied-to school in this sample) and UCLA received applications from 14% of all applicants (777,
the thirteenth most in this sample); see Online Appendix Table 1 for additional comparisons. These
schools received relatively few applications from black students— 60 before the ban and 67 after the
ban at Berkeley, and 31 before the ban and 27 after the ban at UCLA— which is unsurprising given
the relatively small size of elite professional school cohorts. The EALS nevertheless provides su¢ cient
statistical power because law school admission decisions are largely determined by academic credentials
16

Deviations from U.S. News rankings are usually explained by a lower-ranked school being located in a large city.
Berkeley was ranked sixth and UCLA was ranked …fteenth in 2010.

7

and race and because e¤ects are large.

III.C

Race and Admission in the Pre-Ban Cross Section

To provide a feel for the admissions data and also to motivate the use of a standardized measure
of academic strength below in Figure 3, Figure 2a displays the semi-parametric relationship between
LSAT, GPA, and admission within race-school-years in the EALS, using a 5% random sample of
all 23,128 applications submitted to non-UC schools (Online Appendix Figure 4 displays the 100%
sample, intelligible only in color). Each application’s admission decision is plotted in (LSAT, GPA)
space, where each application’s LSAT score has been re-centered by the estimated race-school-year
…xed e¤ect in order to account for selectivity di¤erences across races, schools, and years. Speci…cally
I …t a probit regression of admission on standardized LSAT (mean zero and standard deviation one),
standardized GPA, and school-year-race …xed e¤ects; add each application’s estimated school-yearrace e¤ect to its LSAT value; and plot individual application decisions in GPA vs. adjusted LSAT
space. Applications above and to the right of the best-…t admission threshold line have high enough
LSAT and GPA scores to have a predicted admission probability of more than 50%, while those below
and to the left do not.17
The best-…t line correctly predicts 89.1% of all admission decisions, and incorrect predictions are
concentrated near the line. The ratio of the coe¢ cients on LSAT and GPA in the underlying probit
is 0.95, indicating that a one standard deviation higher LSAT is about as valuable in the admissions
cross section as a one standard deviation higher GPA. When useful for subsequent illustrations,
I therefore summarize an applicant’s academic strength as the standardized (mean zero, standard
deviation one) unweighted sum of standardized LSAT and standardized GPA. Figure 2b con…rms
that the semi-parametric relationship between academic strength and admission within race-schoolyears is well-approximated by a univariate probit regression of admission on academic strength alone.
I refer to such a curve relating admission to academic strength as an admission rule in academic
strength.
Figure 2c plots …tted admission rules for blacks and whites in pre-ban Berkeley and UCLA admissions.18

For ease of comparison, each school’s …tted rules have been shifted horizontally by an

additive constant so that the admission probability for whites equals 0.5 at academic strength 0. The
17
The probit model is Pr(    ) = ( 1  + 2   +  ) where  denotes an applicant and 
denotes the school-year-race …xed e¤ects. Adjusted LSAT equals  + ^   ^ 1 . The slope of the best-…t admission
threshold line is 0.95, equal to ¬ ^ 1  ^ 2 .
18
For each school I estimate the probit model Pr (    ) =
( 1      +
2  +  ) using pre-ban black and white applications, where  is a black indicator and
 denotes
year …xed e¤ects. This paper focuses on black outcomes for simplicity and statistical power, but results for Hispanics
are similar.

8

graph shows that there are levels of academic strength at each school where blacks were nearly assured
admission and whites were nearly assured rejection. Berkeley’s black and white admission rules are
separated by 1.90 standard deviations of academic strength, implying black status is observed to be
worth more than the di¤erence between an A- GPA and a B- GPA for a given LSAT in the pre-ban
cross section.19 At UCLA, the di¤erence is 1.39 standard deviations. Had pre-ban black applicants
to each school been subjected to the observed pre-ban white admission standards, Berkeley’s black
admission rate is predicted to have been 6% rather than the actual 57%, and UCLA’s to have been
10% rather than 65% (documented in Section IV.B below). These black-white di¤erences in the EALS
are similar in magnitude to those found in the universe of law school applicants to elite schools like
Berkeley and UCLA (Rothstein and Yoon 2008) and in undergraduate admissions (Kane 1998; Bowen
and Bok 2000; Espenshade, Chung, and Walling 2004).20

III.D

Inferred Strength

The previous subsection showed that LSAT and GPA explain the vast majority of the variation in
within-race admission decisions, and the di¤erence-in-di¤erences analysis below will hold applicant
pools constant along LSAT, GPA, and race.

However, one may yet be concerned in that analysis

that there is selection on unobservables, conditional on LSAT and GPA across races and over time.
In particular, all top law schools solicit and are believed to value additional applicant characteristics
like recommendation letters, leadership experience, and a background of no criminal behavior or
academic dishonesty.21 I proxy for such commonly-valued unobserved admission determinants using
the intuition that if an applicant who is predicted to be rejected based on LSAT, GPA, and race
is in fact consistently admitted across schools in the EALS, then this applicant is likely strong on
unobserved characteristics like recommendation letters.22
Speci…cally, I construct an inferred strength variable for each application, equal to the mean
admission success that a given applicant experienced in her other applications that is not explained by
observed characteristics. For each school  in either the pre-ban (1990-1995) or post-ban (1996-2006)
era, I …t:
Pr (    ) = (

1 

+

2  

+

3 

+

4   

+

5 

+

)

That is, ^ 2  ^ 1 = 190 in the underlying Berkeley regression.
Using individual-level data on matriculants but not applications, Rothstein and Yoon estimate that black enrollment
at elite law schools would have been 90% lower under white admission standards.
21
Admission selection criteria are highly correlated across law schools; Figure 2a showed this to be the case for directly observed applicant characteristics (LSAT, GPA, and race). Characteristics that are valued inconsistently across
admissions o¢ ces include the applicant’s geographic preference and intended legal specialty.
22
Dale and Krueger (2002) similarly use the rich information embedded in independent screens (admissions decisions
at other schools) to estimate the returns to higher education.
19
20

9

where     is an indicator for whether student ’s application in year  earned an admission o¤er;  ,    , and  are indicators of racial status;
…xed e¤ects; and



is a vector of year

( ) denotes the Normal cumulative distribution function using only the applications

submitted to school  in the given era.

I use the resulting coe¢ cients to compute a predicted ad-

mission probability Pr (    ) for each application and compute admission residuals  =
    ¬Pr (    ) for each application. Then for each application , I compute
inferred strength equal to the leave-out mean of student ’s admission residuals from her applications
to schools other than :23
      = 0   0 6=  .
Note that this leave-out-mean formula uses information only from independent screens (admission
decisions at schools other than ) to assign the inferred strength value for the applicant’s application
to school . When using inferred strength in student-level regressions of the decision to apply to UC
schools in Section IV.A, I compute each student’s inferred strength as the average of inferred strength
across the student’s applications.
Inferred strength ranges from ¬1 to 1 and is positive for applications submitted by students with
relatively weak direct observables who were nevertheless accepted at other schools. Likewise, inferred
strength is negative for applications submitted by students with relatively strong observables who
were nevertheless rejected at other schools.24 Online Appendix Figure 5 demonstrates the predictive
power of the inferred strength variable using the full sample of applications by plotting the strongly
upward-sloping non-parametric relationship between admission and inferred strength, conditional on
LSAT, GPA, and school-year …xed e¤ects.

IV

Results

This section uses the EALS to estimate the e¤ect of the UC a¢ rmative action ban on applications to
and admissions at Berkeley and UCLA. All estimates are local to the EALS. I begin by investigating
the application (supply) response to the ban, …nding that black student attrition from UC applicant
pools was driven by less-credentialed black students.

This implies that the UC’s average black

 
0
That is,       = 1¬ 1 
0 =10 6=   , where  equals the total number of schools applied
to by student  in year  and where the schools applied to by applicant  in year  are indexed 1 to  . To ‡exibly
handle the small share of applicants who applied to only one school, I assign their applications inferred strength equal
to zero and include an indicator for these applicants in all regressions where inferred strength is used.
24
For example, consider a student who applied to Berkeley, Harvard, and Northwestern; who had an admission probability of 025 at Harvard and 075 at Northwestern based on her LSAT, GPA, and race and the selectivity at Harvard and
Northwestern in the given application year; and who was admitted at both Harvard and Northwestern. This candidate’s
application to Berkeley would be assigned an inferred strength value of 05 (= [(1 ¬ 25) + (1 ¬ 75)] 2).
23

10

applicant has become more highly credentialed, so raw admission rate changes that do not control for
selective attrition from applicant pools (like those shown in Figure 1) can fail to re‡ect changes in
black admission advantages. I then correct for selective attrition to estimate the paper’s main object
of interest: the admissions (demand) response to the ban. I robustly …nd that the ban cause a large
reduction in black admission advantages at UC schools. However, large observed cross-sectional black
admission advantages remain.

IV.A

Applications (Supply)

I test for e¤ects of the UC a¢ rmative action ban on the likelihood that EALS black students applied
to each UC law school by …tting probit models based on the following DD speci…cation:
Pr (   ) = (X

(1)

+

1 

+

2 

  +

)

using black and white students, where    is an indicator for whether student  in year
 submitted an application to the UC school being studied;  is an indicator of black racial
status;   is an indicator for the application being submitted after the ban; X is a vector containing LSAT score, GPA, inferred strength, and potentially other covariates linearly, depending on the
speci…cation;



is a vector of year …xed e¤ects; and

function.25 The coe¢ cient

2

( ) denotes the Normal cumulative distribution

is the coe¢ cient of interest: the e¤ect of the ban on the likelihood that

a black student applied to the UC school being studied.

Reported coe¢ cients are marginal e¤ects

averaged over the right-hand-side characteristics of pre-ban black students, accompanied by robust
standard errors (the dataset comprises one observation per student).
Table 2 column 2 presents the results for the whether the applicant applied to Berkeley (panel A)
or UCLA (panel B). Panel A reports that the ban reduced application rates to UC Berkeley among
black students in the EALS by 93 percentage points with a t-statistic of 26 and equal to a 347%
decline relative the actual pre-ban mean among black students of 268 percentage points. Panel B
shows an identical e¤ect size in percentage terms (344%) at UCLA. These e¤ect sizes are comparable
to those shown for the full Berkeley and UCLA applicants pools (477% and 383%) in Figure 1 and
Online Appendix Figure 1.
Columns 3-5 presents results by whether black students could still be expected to be admitted
with high probability— which cannot be studied using public aggregates.

Column 3 replicates the

regression underlying column 2 while including two additional covariates that divide students by a
25

Results are similar when including Hispanics and Asians along with Hispanic and Asian indicators, or when omitting
inferred strength. Application probabilities can be non-monotonic in the controls but including higher orders of the
controls barely changes the results. Basic ordinary least squares are also reported.

11

composite measure of applicant strength: an indicator for whether the student had at least a 99%
predicted probability of admission to the given UC school (under pre-ban standards based on preban estimation of equation 1 with admission as the dependent variable, as in column 7 introduced
below), as well as the interaction between this “highly credentialed” indicator and the black-x-postban indicator.26

Using pre-ban admission standards to categorize students has the property that

the categorization is not endogenous to the policy change.

For interpretation, highly credentialed

post-ban black students (320% of all black EALS students for Berkeley and 435% for UCLA) were
on average still quite likely to be admitted post-ban: a 673% admission probability at Berkeley
and 918% at UCLA based on post-ban estimation of the column 7 regression.

In contrast, non-

highly-credentialed (“less-credentialed”) post-ban black applicants had on average a 91% admission
probability at Berkeley and 179% at UCLA.
The coe¢ cients in panel A column 3 indicate that the large negative e¤ect on black applications
reported in column 2 was driven entirely by less-credentialed black applicants. Highly credentialed
black applicants are estimated to have been insigni…cantly 27 percentage points more likely to apply
post-ban.

In contrast, less-credentialed black applicants were signi…cantly 142 percentage points

less likely to apply (t-statistic of 36), equal to a ¬480% change relative to this sub-group’s pre-ban
mean application rate of 296%.

The standard error on the e¤ect among highly credentialed black

applicants does not permit rejection of all meaningful response magnitudes, but the heterogeneity
in application behavior is clear. Panel B shows similar e¤ects at UCLA, with a percentage change
among less-credentialed black applicants of ¬350% (= ¬60174). Thus on average across Berkeley
and UCLA, the ban reduced applications from less-credentialed black students by 415%. Columns
4-5 present alternative speci…cations that categorize black applicants into those who were quite likely
(at least 90% for column 4 and at least 75% for column 5) to be admitted after the ban, based on
post-ban estimation of the regression underlying column 2.27 Results are qualitatively similar to those
in column 3.
I conclude that there is robust evidence of a large decline in applications to UC schools from lesscredentialed black applicants with no evidence of a decline in applications from highly credentialed
black applicants. This implies that the average post-ban black applicant to UC schools was substantially more highly credentialed than the average pre-ban black applicant, relative to contemporaneous
white applicants. Hence, raw changes in the black-white admission rate gap (like the one displayed
26

For this categorization, I assume that post-ban students were applying to law schools in 1992 (i.e. I use the 1992
…xed e¤ect) which was an approximately average-selectivity pre-ban year.
27
For these categorizations, I assume that pre-ban students were applying to law schools in 1999 (i.e. I use the 1999
…xed e¤ect) which was an approximately average-selectivity post-ban year.

12

in Figure 1) can fail to re‡ect changes in black admission advantages (demand responses). The next
subsection estimates the change in black admission advantages at UC schools by estimating the change
in black admission rates, correcting for selective attrition from UC applicant pools.

IV.B

Admissions (Demand)

For simplicity and transparency, I …rst display the time series of selection-corrected admission rates for
black and white applicants at UC and non-UC schools using semi-parametric reweighting on academic
strength. Figure 3 displays the time series of black and white admission rates at Berkeley, UCLA,
and non-UC schools, where applicant characteristics have been held constant at pre-ban levels using
simple semi-parametric reweighting as in DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996). To construct the time
series of black admission rates at Berkeley, I …rst compute terciles of academic strength among only
pre-ban black applications to Berkeley. Then for each time period shown in the …gure, I weight black
applications to Berkeley so that each pre-ban-de…ned tercile receives equal weight when computing
the displayed admission rate.28 I repeat this process for whites at Berkeley and for whites and blacks
separately at UCLA and at each non-UC school, averaging resulting admission rates across non-UC
schools to construct the plotted non-UC series. This semi-parametric reweighting is data-demanding,
so I reweight on academic strength only and group the data into two pre-ban time periods (1990-1992
and 1993-1995) and two post-ban time periods (1996-2000 and 2001-2006).
The …gure shows that at non-UC schools, there was little change over time in the di¤erence
between black and white admission rates. At Berkeley the black admission rate rose between 19901992 and 1993-1995 about as much as the white admission rate did, thus exhibiting parallel pre-ban
trends. Between 1993-1995 and 1996-2000, the black admission rate fell from 64.4% to 33.3% and did
not subsequently recover relative to the white admission rate. Figure 3b shows a similar decline at
UCLA. One can use these reweighted admission rates to compute a simple selection-corrected tripledi¤erence (DDD) estimate of the e¤ect of the ban on the black admission rate at each UC school:
¬299 percentage points at Berkeley (relative to the actual pre-ban black admission rate of 56.7%)
and ¬407 percentage points (relative to the actual pre-ban black admission rate of 64.5%).29 These
declines were much larger than those observed at any non-UC school, so the empirical  value on each
of these declines relative to the distribution of changes at non-UC schools is 0.
Though parsimonious and transparent, Figure 3 does not control for LSAT and GPA separately,
28
That is, each application in time period  with academic strength lying in tercile  receives weight 1  , where
  is the number of applications in the sample submitted to Berkeley in time period  with academic strength in
tercile . Quartiles yield similar results; I use terciles because some bin counts are small.
29
Pooling pre-ban years and separately pooling post-ban years for each series, each DDD estimate is equal to the
change in black admission rates at the UC school, minus the change in white admission rates at the UC school and the
change in the black-white admission rate di¤erence at non-UC schools. See Online Appendix Table 2 for the arithmetic.

13

does not control inferred strength or California residency, and does not allow for selection within tercile
bins.

Table 2 columns 5-9 report regression estimates of the e¤ect of the ban on black admission

outcomes at each UC school. The underlying regressions are based on equation (1) using black and
white applications to a given UC school and use the dependent variable     , which is an
indicator for whether student ’s application in year  earned an admission o¤er.

When producing

DDD estimates that account for national trends, I include all black and white applications to the top…fteen non-UC schools and interact the second and third terms with an indicator for the application
being submitted to a non-UC school.30

Standard errors are clustered at the student level. Online

Appendix Tables 3-5 replicate Table 2 columns 6-9 using alternative speci…cations that include all
races or control for more interactions.
Column 8 controls for national trends and is my preferred speci…cation. Panel A reports that the
ban caused an estimated 339 percentage point reduction in black applicants’probability of admission,
averaged over the right-hand-side characteristics of pre-ban black applicants and relative to the actual
pre-ban black admission rate of 56.7%. Panel B reports an analogous estimate for UCLA of ¬335
percentage points, relative to the actual pre-ban black admission rate of 64.5%.

These estimates

have  statistics of 5.2 and 3.0 respectively. The other columns report similar magnitudes in other
speci…cations, including column 9 which controls for California residency— a UC-speci…c admission
determinant that inferred strength is unlikely to encompass— in the years it is available.
A decline in black admission rates relative to whites opens up space in the admitted cohort for
both black and white applicants, implying that the above estimates somewhat overstate the e¤ect
of the ban on black admission rates.

I therefore compute an adjusted estimate of the e¤ect of the

ban on the black admission rate at each UC school by using the UC-speci…c coe¢ cients of each
regression to compute a probit latent variable value for each black and white pre-ban application
according to post-ban criteria and then add a constant to every application’s value until the mean
predicted admission probability across applications equals the actual admission rate observed among
these applications.31 The resulting estimates are reported in the bottom row of each panel of Table
2 column 8: ¬300 percentage points at Berkeley and ¬302 percentage points at UCLA. These are
my preferred estimates of the e¤ect of the ban on UC black admission rates in the EALS. These
30
The DDD speci…cation is Pr (    ) = (X + 1  + 2    + 3 
  + 4      +  ), where   is an indicator for whether the application was submitted to
the UC school being analyzed and  is a vector of school-year …xed e¤ects. I weight applications so that each school
carries equal weight in each time period (pre-ban and post-ban).
31
Adding a constant varies selectivity uniformly across applications (i.e. preserves application rank). I obtain similar
results under the similar method of using the UC-speci…c coe¢ cients to rank pre-ban applications and then admitting
the  highest-ranked applications, where  equals the total number of black and white pre-ban EALS applicants that
the UC school admitted.

14

declines were much larger than those estimated at any individual non-UC school, so the empirical 
value of each of these estimates is 0.

Averaging these DDD estimates across Berkeley and UCLA,

I conclude that the ban reduced the black admission rate from 606% to 305% in the EALS when
holding applicant pools constant.
Online Appendix Table 4 replicates Table 2 columns 6-9 using applications from all races (white,
black, Hispanic, and Asian); the results are very similar to those in Table 2. Online Appendix Table
5 replicates Online Appendix Table 3 while also fully interacting covariates X with race indicators,
the post-ban indicator, and the non-UC indicator; the DD results are somewhat larger in magnitude
(more negative) than those in Table 2.
As a benchmark for the large e¤ect sizes estimated above, I estimate the black admission rate
that would prevail under observed pre-ban white admission standards— i.e. the black admission rate
that would prevail if ban simply eliminated cross-sectional black admission advantages. Speci…cally,
I estimate the cross-sectional analogue to equation (1) for each UC school among pre-ban black and
white applications:
Pr (    ) = (X

(2)

+

1 

where X is a vector of LSAT, GPA, and inferred strength and



+

)

are year …xed e¤ects.32 I then use

only the estimated coe¢ cient vector ^ and the year …xed e¤ects to compute a probit latent variable
value for each application.

Finally to account for the fact that a decline in the black admission

rate opens up space in the admitted cohort, I add a constant to every application’s value until the
mean predicted admission probability across applications equals the actual admission rate among these
applications.
Columns 1-2 of Table 3a report the results. Whereas Berkeley actually admitted 56.7% of pre-ban
black applicants, I estimate that it would have admitted only 5.6% under observed white admission
standards.

For UCLA, the statistics are 64.5% and 10.4%.

Thus averaging across Berkeley and

UCLA, I estimate that the black admission rate would have fallen to 8.0% had both black and white
applicants been subjected to the same observed pre-ban white admission standards. Thus in spite of
the large e¤ects of the ban, the ban far from eliminated cross-sectional black admission advantages:
holding the applicant pool constant at pre-ban levels, post-ban UC schools sustained average black
admission advantages over observably similar whites equal to 22.5 percentage points (= 305%¬ 80%).
This is consistent with admissions o¢ ces either having shifted admissions weight to non-racial black32

Results are similar when omitting inferred strength or including Hispanics and Asians in the regression along with
Hispanic and Asian indicators.

15

correlates like family income and diversity essays in post-ban admissions (see Section II.B), or with
UC admissions o¢ ces having placed uniquely large admissions weight on non-racial black correlates
even before the ban and relative to other schools (since I control for inferred strength).

V

Conclusion

A¢ rmative action bans can reduce black enrollment not only by inducing reductions in black admission advantages (demand contractions) but also by inducing reductions in applications (supply
contractions) from black students who can still gain admission but prefer alternative schools that still
practice a¢ rmative action. I analyzed the case of Berkeley and UCLA law schools which experienced
severe declines in black applications, acceptances, and enrollment after the UC a¢ rmative action ban
even as black admission rates rose relative to whites at Berkeley.

Data on a large sample of UC

and non-UC applications as well as on their admission decisions made possible a unique joint analysis
of supply and demand responses. I found that black attrition from UC applicant pools was driven
mostly or entirely by less-credentialed black applicants who could no longer expect admission, yielding
stronger post-ban black applicant pools. After holding applicant characteristics constant at pre-ban
levels, I estimated that the ban cut black admission rates in half at both schools.
The results imply that even if supply responses had been muted— as might happen under a nationwide ban that eliminates a¢ rmative-action-practicing alternatives— UC black enrollment would likely
still have plummeted. Economically, the demand response is consistent with schools using non-racial
admission factors that only partially sustained black admission advantages, in favor of sustaining
other admissions objectives: the selection-corrected post-ban black admission rate (31%) remained
well above the rate that would prevail under observed white admission standards (8%) but was still
only half the pre-ban black admission rate (61%). The supply response is consistent with black students still wanting to attend UC schools despite lower campus racial diversity, but declining to apply
if they can no longer get in.
E¤ects may be di¤erent under a nationwide a¢ rmative action ban. Notably, enrollment changes
at less-elite schools under a nationwide ban may di¤er from the UC’s experience depending on the
cascading behavior of black students who no longer attend elite schools (Arcidiacono 2005; Epple,
Romano, Sieg 2008).

Less-elite black enrollment would be expected to decline if these new non-

elite-attending black students abandon law school altogether, while it can actually increase if they are
willing to trade down to lower-ranked schools where they can gain admission even without a¢ rmative
action. Hinrichs (2012) …nds no e¤ect of a¢ rmative action bans on less-elite undergraduate minority enrollment though with sizeable standard errors; precise estimates of cascading behavior across
16

hierarchies of undergraduate and professional schools are a priority for future work.
Finally, the results may bear on judicial debates.

The Supreme Court has decided that a¢ r-

mative action is unconstitutional whenever there are “workable race-neutral [non-racial] alternatives
to achieve the diversity the university seeks” (Grutter v. Bollinger 2003).33

Workability “does not

require exhaustion of every conceivable race-neutral alternative...[nor] a university to choose between
maintaining a reputation for excellence or ful…lling a commitment to provide educational opportunities to members of all racial groups” but does “require serious, good faith consideration of workable
race-neutral alternatives” (Grutter ).

I …nd that UC law schools collected and used non-racial al-

ternatives like family income and diversity essays, yet did not use them aggressively enough to keep
black admission advantages from plummeting. This indicates by revealed preference that non-racial
alternatives are far from workable from these elite law schools’ perspectives, potentially bearing on
courts’own judgments of workability.34
33

“Race-neutral alternatives” include the use of non-racial black correlates like family income in admissions.
The ongoing Supreme Court a¢ rmative action case Fisher v. Texas centers on this question, in the context of Texas
undergraduate admissions. The Court in 2012 returned Fisher to lower courts for strict scrutiny of whether a workable
non-racial alternative exists. The Court heard new oral arguments on Fisher in December 2015.
34

17

References
1. Antonovics, Kate and Ben Backes. 2014. “The E¤ect of Banning A¢ rmative Action on College
Admissions Rules and Student Quality.” Journal of Human Resources, 49(2): 295-322.
2. Arcidiacono, Peter. 2005. “A¢ rmative Action in Higher Education: How Do Admission and
Financial Aid Rules A¤ect Future Earnings?” Econometrica, 73(5): 1477-1524.
3. Arcidiacono, Peter, Esteban Aucejo, Patrick Coate, and V. Joseph Hotz. 2014. “A¢ rmative
Action and University Fit: Evidence from Proposition 209.” IZA Journal of Labor Economics,
3:7.
4. Bowen, William G., and Derek Bok. 2000. “Chapter 2: The Admissions Process and Race
Neutrality.” In The Shape of the River, 15-52. Princeton: Princeton University Press, (Orig.
pub. 1998).
5. Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2004. “Would the Elimination of A¢ rmative Action A¤ect
Highly Quali…ed Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.” National Bureau
of Economics Working Paper 10366.
6. Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 2005. “Would the Elimination of A¢ rmative Action A¤ect
Highly Quali…ed Minority Applicants? Evidence from California and Texas.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 58(3): 416-434.
7. Chan, Jimmy, and Erik Eyster. 2003. “Does Banning A¢ rmative Action Lower College Student
Quality?” American Economic Review, 93(3): 858-872.
8. Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payo¤ to Attending a More
Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117(4):1491-1527.
9. DiNardo, John, Nicole Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica, 64(5): 10011044.
10. Dickson, Lisa. 2006. “Does Ending A¢ rmative Action in College Admissions Lower the Percent
of Minority Students Applying to College?” Economics of Education Review, 25(1): 109-119.
11. Epple, Dennis, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg. 2008. “Diversity and A¢ rmative Action in
Higher Education.” Journal of Public Economic Theory, 10(4): 475-501.
12. Espenshade, Thomas J., Chang Y. Chung, and Joan L. Walling. 2004. “Admission Preferences
for Minority Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities.” Social Science Quarterly,
85(5): 1423-1446.
13. Fryer, Roland, Glenn Loury, and Tolga Yuret. 2007. “An Economic Analysis of Color-Blind
A¢ rmative Action.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2): 319-355.
14. Hinrichs, Peter. 2012 “The E¤ects of A¢ rmative Action Bans on College Enrollment, Educational Attainment, and the Demographic Composition of Universities,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 94(3): 712-722.
15. Kane, Thomas. 1998. “Racial and Ethnic Preference in College Admissions.” In The BlackWhite Test Score Gap, ed. Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, 431-456. Washington:
Brookings Institution.
18

16. Kling, Je¤rey, Je¤rey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood E¤ects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.
17. Krueger, Alan B, Jesse Rothstein, and Sarah Turner. 2006. “Race, Income, and College in 25
Years: Evaluating Justice O’Connor’s Conjecture.”American Law and Economics Review, 8(2):
282-311.
18. Long, Mark. 2004. “College Applications and the E¤ect of A¢ rmative Action.” Journal of
Econometrics, 121(1-2): 319-342.
19. Long, Mark, and Marta Tienda. 2008. “Winners and losers: Changes in Texas university
admissions post-Hopwood.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 30(3): 255-280.
20. Rothstein, Jesse and Albert H. Yoon. 2008. “A¢ rmative Action in Law School Admissions:
What Do Racial Preferences Do?” University of Chicago Law Review, 75: 649-714.

19

Appendix A: Models of Demand and Supply under an A¢ rmative Action Ban
The …rst part of this appendix presents a simpli…ed version of earlier models of admissions under an
a¢ rmative action ban (Chan and Eyster 2003; Fryer, Loury, and Yuret 2007; Epple, Romano, and Sieg
2008) in order to show how a ban can induce a reduction in black admission advantages (a contraction
in demand for black students) holding the applicant pool constant. The reduction in black admission
advantages is large when legal non-racial admission factors like family income correlate only weakly
with race (i.e. when the ban substantially raises the opportunity cost of admitting black students)
and when schools are unwilling to sacri…ce other objectives in order to sustain costlier racial diversity
(i.e. when substitution e¤ects dominate income e¤ects).
The second part reproduces Card and Krueger’s (2004) model of application decisions in order
to show how a ban can reduce black applications (a contraction in supply of black students). The
reduction in black applications from marginal black candidates is large when demand contractions are
large. The reduction in black applications from black students of all credential levels is large when
black students’ utility of attending an a¤ected school substantially declines independently of their
individual credential levels— e.g. via lower black campus representation following declines in other
black students’applications, acceptances, and enrollment.
(i) Demand Contraction. Consider a school with concave preferences over the number of black
enrollees  (short for “racial diversity”) and the aggregate non-racial strength of enrollees  (short
for “quali…cations”). Each applicant is either black or white, the applicant pool is the same pre-ban
and post-ban (abstracting here from supply e¤ects), and all admitted students enroll. The school
maximizes utility subject to a binding capacity constraint (it can admit no more than a …xed number
 of applicants and must reject some applicants):
max  ( ) s.t.  ( )




where  ( ) is the minimum number of applicants that must be admitted in order to deliver  black
admits and  aggregate non-racial strength.  ( ) is an implicit function of the joint distribution of
race and non-racial strength in the applicant pool. The school faces a tradeo¤ in that the admission
rule that maximizes the number of black admits is not the one that maximizes aggregate non-racial
strength.
The school can admit applicants  on the basis of two pieces of information: non-racial strength
 and a binary signal   2 f0 1g of black status. The black signal may be perfect
(all black-signaled applicants are black and all white-signaled applicants are white) or diluted (not all
black-signaled applicants are black and some white-signaled applicants are black). When diluted, I
assume that dilution is orthogonal to non-racial strength. The optimal admission rule can then be
characterized as a “rank-and-yank”rule that admits the  applicants that have highest rank according
to:
  =  + B 
where
is chosen to maximize utility. This is true because for any number of admitted blacksignaled applicants, the school maximizes aggregate non-racial strength by adopting a threshold rule
within each black signal value: only black-signalled applicants with non-racial strength above some
 =1 and white-signalled applicants with non-racial strength above some  =0
are admitted. Rank-and-yank implements any such pair of threshold rules by setting weight equal
to  =0 ¬  =1 .
When a¢ rmative action is not banned, the black signal is perfect. Online Appendix Figure 6a
illustrates a feasible pair of optimal admission thresholds and illustrates its consequences for black
and white applicants. To de…ne the no-a¢ rmative-action benchmark, let  be the level of nonracial strength above which there are exactly  applicants. This is the race-neutral threshold that
20

would maximize aggregate non-racial strength and corresponds to a rank-and-yank admission rule with
= 0. A school practicing a¢ rmative action chooses  0 and thus adopts a threshold admission
rule for blacks at  =1 and a separate higher threshold for whites at  =0 
 =1 . Relative to the no-a¢ rmative-action benchmark, the school practicing a¢ rmative
action admits extra blacks (the grid …ll pattern) and rejects extra whites (the solid …ll pattern).
Online Appendix Figure 6c illustrates an a¢ rmative action budget set in ( ) space for the simple
case of uniform distributions of non-racial strength within each race. The range of weights 2 [0 1)
traces out the a¢ rmative action (“AA”) budget constraint. Point A is a potentially optimal bundle
under a¢ rmative action. The budget constraint is strictly convex because the …rst black applicant
admitted through a¢ rmative action is almost as strong as the white applicant that is rejected in order
to make room. After that, stronger and stronger white applicants are rejected in order to make room
for weaker and weaker black applicants.
An a¢ rmative action ban prohibits the school from using a pure signal of race but allows it to
use non-racial black-correlates like low family income that have plausible non-racial justi…cation. I
model this as dilution of the black signal with fraction  of black applicants and fraction 
of white applicants signaled as black (e.g. those having family income below some threshold), with
 ¬   1 and for simplicity    ?  . The school increasing racial diversity above
the no-a¢ rmative-action benchmark now makes “mistakes” in the sense that the school rejects some
applicants that have higher non-racial strength than accepted applicants of the same race, as illustrated
in Online Appendix Figure 6b. Thus an a¢ rmative action ban raises the opportunity cost of admitting
black applicants.
In the analytically tractable case of uniform distributions of non-racial strength within race,35 the
diluted black signal under an a¢ rmative action ban (“BAN”) raises the marginal rate of transformation
of admitted blacks for non-racial strength by a factor that is decreasing in the purity of the black signal:
BAN
 
AA
 

=

1
1
( ¬  )2

The larger opportunity cost puts the a¢ rmative-action-ban budget set inside the a¢ rmative action
budget set, illustrated in Online Appendix Figure 6c. If substitution e¤ects dominate, the school
may respond to a ban by substantially contracting demand for black students (e.g. moving to bundle
B)— sustaining the non-racial strength of admitted cohorts at the expense of racial diversity. But
if income e¤ects dominate, the school may barely contract demand for black students (e.g. moving
to bundle C) or even increase demand (if preferences are Gi¤en)— sustaining racial diversity at the
expense of non-racial strength. Thus the degree to which a ban reduces black enrollment depends on
the degree to which a ban dilutes the usable signal of race in admissions and on the substitutablity of
racial diversity for non-racial strength in the school’s preferences.36
(ii) Supply Contraction. A student has utility  of attending a school , a probability  of gaining
admission to  conditional on applying, and von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility. Assume for
simplicity that the student’s admission decisions across di¤erent schools are independent conditional
on  . Assume that there is a positive utility cost  of applying to each school, and let 0 denote the
utility of not attending any school. Let  denote the student’s application set, comprising an ordered
list of  schools with 1 2   .
Taking f   g as given, a student applies to a given school  if and only if the admission probability  exceeds a -speci…c threshold. Speci…cally, let ( ) denote the optimal choice set when
35

Without this or a similar assumption, the budget set can be non-convex over some intervals.
Chan and Eyster (2003) adopt preference and technology restrictions to predict that the post-ban school introduces
idiosyncratic noise— an imperfect black signal when black applicants are concentrated at lower levels of the non-racial
strength distribution— to admission decisions. Fryer, Loury, and Yuret (2007) analyze the case in which the post-ban
school uses non-racial black correlates aggressively enough to admit the same number of black applicants as it did pre-ban.
36

21

excluding school  from consideration, with ( ) denoting the number of schools in this set. The
student will include  in her …nal choice set if and only if the expected value of applying to  exceeds
the application cost:
(
)
(Q)

 max [0  ¬  ]  
=0


where  = 
=+1 (1 ¬  ) equals the probability that school  2  is the highest-utility school
she gains admission to and 0 = =1 (1 ¬  ) equals the probability that the student is admitted to
no school.37 The expected value of applying to school  equals the probability of being admitted to
, times the probability that  is the best school she is admitted to.
An a¢ rmative action ban can cause a black student to remove an a¤ected school  from her
application set through two channels.38 First, the ban can reduce her probability of gaining admission
 . In relatively formulaic contexts like law school admissions where students with su¢ ciently high
test scores and grades are virtually guaranteed admission, the reduction in  may be zero for highly
credentialed black students but large for less credentialed black students, inducing selective attrition
from ’s applicant pool. Second and to the extent that the student values a larger black student
presence on campus, the ban can reduce utility  — via the lower likelihood of other black students
applying, gaining admission, and enrolling— and thereby induce the student to remove  from her
application set, especially if there are comparable una¤ected schools that she can add to her application
set. This substitution force (replacing a¤ected schools with una¤ected schools) can be arbitrarily large
following even a small reduction in black admission advantages and can dissuade applications from
black students uniformly across the credential distribution. The substitution force can be arbitrarily
small when all schools are a¤ected by the a¢ rmative action ban.

Appendix B: Details of EALS Data Coding
The …rst application year’s LSAT scores are in a more compact scale than all other years’, and I
convert them to the modern scale using percentile rank. I de-mean GPA by year to account for modest
grade in‡ation over time. I code “Hispanic”, “Chicano/Mexican-American”, and “Puerto Rican” as
Hispanic. Undergraduate major is available in some years’ raw data; it has low statistical power
in subsamples and its use would limit the years available for analysis so I omit it. The admission
decision for a small percentage of accepted students is classi…ed as rejected when the applicant in
fact accepted and deferred an admission o¤er. The relatively minor importance of this measurement
error is suggested visually in Figure 2b, where actual admission rates are close to 100% at high levels
of academic strength, rather than plateauing at a smaller number. Year of college graduation is
available in all years; I omit it from the analysis for simplicity but every qualitative result holds when
also controlling for graduation year. The only other information in the raw data are indicators for
whether the applicant took the LSAT more than once, whether the applicant withdrew an application
before an admission decision was made, and whether the applicant accepted an admission o¤er. I
exclude withdrawn applications from the analysis, and I do not have su¢ cient power to analyze
matriculation decisions.
The raw data do not contain student identi…ers, so for each year I create student identi…ers by
treating as coming from the same student those applications that match on all of the applicationinvariant variables. This is a powerful method for identifying applications submitted by the same
student in largest part because GPA is coded to two decimal places. I exclude the fewer than
37

She of course does not apply to any schools dominated by the no-school option.
Not modeled here is the possibility that an a¢ rmative action ban raises a black student’s likelihood of applying to
an a¤ected school, for example due to potentially higher signal value from gaining admission without a¢ rmative action.
38

22

one percent of observations for which this method implies that a single student submitted multiple
applications to the same school.
Finally, I do not include the University of Michigan in the group of …fteen most-applied-to schools
because it was subject to an a¢ rmative action ban during the sample. I do not analyze Michigan as
a treatment school because its bans were e¤ective during the sample only in 2001 and 2006 and I do
not have su¢ cient power to conduct year-by-year di¤erence-in-di¤erences. UC law schools at Davis
and Hastings as well as public Texas law schools received few applications in the EALS and similarly
do not permit robust inference.

23

TABLE 1
Applicant Characteristics by Race

Share of
applicants

LSAT score
(sd 6.7)

Undergraduate
Academic
GPA
strength
(sd 0.33)
(mean 0, sd 1) Admission rate

A. All Applicants (N = 5,353, collectively submitting 25,499 applications to top-17 schools)
White
Black
Asian
Hispanic

60.8%
9.7%
19.4%
10.1%

167.3
159.9
167.6
162.8

3.47
3.15
3.52
3.31

0.24
-0.98
0.33
-0.48

41%
56%
41%
39%

167.5
160.8
167.0
162.3

3.47
3.13
3.49
3.31

0.23
-0.92
0.21
-0.53

31%
43%
36%
34%

165.4
159.6
165.2
159.8

3.38
3.03
3.43
3.23

-0.09
-1.17
-0.06
-0.89

54%
53%
60%
35%

B. Applicants to Berkeley (N = 1,594)
White
Black
Asian
Hispanic

56.6%
8.0%
24.2%
11.3%

C. Applicants to UCLA (N = 777)
White
Black
Asian
Hispanic

55.0%
7.5%
24.5%
13.1%

Notes - Panel A lists mean student characteristics for the Elite Applications to Law School (EALS) sample used
in this paper. The sample comprises the 5,353 students who together submitted 25,499 applications over
seventeen years to Berkeley, UCLA, and the top-fifteen law schools that were never subject to an affirmative
action ban. LSAT is the standardized test score used in law school admissions and ranges from 120 to 180.
Undergraduate grade point average is the cumulative undergraduate GPA on a 4.00 scale. Academic strength is
a scalar index of the strength of an applicant's academic credentials, equal to the standardized (mean zero and
standard deviation one) sum of standardized LSAT and standardized GPA (see Figure 2) and is used only for
Figure 3. Panels B and C list the same statistics for applicants to Berkeley and UCLA, respectively, in the EALS.
Online Appendix Table 1 lists summary statistics on application behavior and comparisons to the nationwide
population of law school applicants.

TABLE 2
Effects on Black Application Rates and Selection-Corrected Black Admission Rates
Applied

Dependent Variable:

Admitted

(pp)
(1)

(pp)
(2)

(pp)
(3)

(pp)
(4)

(pp)
(5)

(pp)
(6)

(pp)
(7)

(pp)
(8)

(pp)
(9)

-10.5
(4.0)

-9.3
(3.6)

2.7
(6.1)

8.2
(10.0)

1.4
(7.2)

-39.7
(6.8)

-40.0
(5.3)

-33.9
(6.5)

-43.6
(5.5)

X

X
X

X

A. Berkeley
Black × Post-ban
Black × Post-ban × Pre-ban-admit-rate<99%

-14.2
(4.0)

Black × Post-ban × Post-ban-admit-rate<90%

-15.5
(5.4)

Black × Post-ban × Post-ban-admit-rate<75%
Ordinary least squares estimation
Probit estimation
National trend controls
CA residency control

-11.5
(5.1)
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

Number of observations
Number of clusters

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

1,029
1,029

1,029
1,029

17,329
3,754

779
779

Actual pre-ban black dependent variable mean
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

26.8

26.8

26.8

26.8

26.8

56.7
-34.2

56.7
-35.6

56.7
-30.0

56.7
-39.7

-5.1
(3.0)

-4.8
(2.9)

-0.4
(4.3)

-0.9
(4.6)

-1.9
(4.1)

-48.1
(10.5)

-35.0
(11.2)

-33.5
(11.1)

-31.1
(10.5)

X

X
X

X

B. UCLA
Black × Post-ban
Black × Post-ban × Pre-ban-admit-rate<99%

-6.1
(3.1)

Black × Post-ban × Post-ban-admit-rate<90%

-5.0
(3.6)

Black × Post-ban × Post-ban-admit-rate<75%
Ordinary least squares estimation
Probit estimation
National trend controls
CA residency control

-4.4
(3.5)
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

Number of observations
Number of clusters

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

3,774
3,774

485
485

485
485

16,785
3,736

371
371

Actual pre-ban black dependent variable mean
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

13.8

13.8

13.8

13.8

13.8

64.5
-41.6

64.5
-32.0

64.5
-30.2

64.5
-29.2

Notes - This table uses black and white students in the EALS to report difference-in-difference estimates of the effect of the UC
affirmative action ban on whether a student applied to (columns 1-5) or was admitted at (columns 6-9) Berkeley (panel A) or UCLA
(panel B). Standard errors clustered by student (equivalent to robust standard errors in all specification except column 8) are in
parentheses, and reported coefficients in probit columns are marginal effects averaged over the UC school's pre-ban black applicant
characteristics. All specifications include a black indicator, a black indicator interacted with a post-ban indicator, LSAT test score,
undergraduate GPA, inferred strength, and year fixed effects; see Table 1 and Figure 2 for variable definitions. Specifications with
national trend controls are triple-difference regressions that control for black and white admission trends at non-UC schools; these
regressions include school-year fixed effects and are weighted so that each school receives equal weight in each time period (pre-ban
and post-ban). The California residency indicator control is available only for applications to UC schools and in certain years. Column
3 includes two covariates that divide applicants by a composite measure of applicant strength: an indicator for whether the applicant
had a 99% predicted probability of admission to the given UC school based on pre-ban estimation of the column 7 regression, as well
as the interaction between this indicator and the black-x-post-ban indicator. Columns 4-5 present alternative specifications that group
black applicants into those who were quite likely (at least 90% for column 4 and at least 75% for column 5) to be admitted after the ban,
based on post-ban estimation of the regression underlying column 7. The final row in each panel of columns 6-9 reports estimates of
the change in the admission rate that pre-ban black applicants are predicted to have experienced had the ban been in effect,
accounting for the minor space-opening effect of a decline in black admission rates (see Section IV.B for details).

TABLE 3
Black-White Admission Rate Differences in Pre-ban and Post-ban Admissions

Actual black
admission rate

Hypothetical black
admission rate under
white coefficients

Average conditional
black-white admission
rate difference
(col. 1 minus col. 2)

(%)
(1)

(%)
(2)

(pp)
(3)

Berkeley

56.7
[43.6, 69.5]

5.6
[1.2, 11.4]

51.1
[38.7, 62.5]

UCLA

64.5
[46.7, 80.6]

10.4
[2.2, 21.0]

54.1
[37.0, 70.5]

Berkeley

31.3
[20.4, 43.4]

13.5
[7.1, 20.6]

17.8
[9.3, 27.0]

UCLA

40.7
[23.1, 60.0]

21.1
[7.9, 37.6]

19.6
[6.2, 34.1]

A. Pre-ban

B. Post-ban

Notes - Each cell reports an estimate of either a black admission rate or a black-white
admission rate difference using the EALS dataset. Ninety-five percent confidence
intervals are computed using one thousand bootstrapped samples of each school-time
period and are listed in brackets. Only black and white applications are used. Column
1 lists the actual black admission rate in the specified school-time period. Column 2
reports the black admission rate that is predicted to have prevailed if black applicants
had been subjected to observed white admission standards, calculated by estimating a
probit regression of admission on LSAT, GPA, inferred strength, a black indicator, and
year fixed effects and then using the coefficients other than on the black indicator to
predict admission probabilities for each applicant and accounting for the minor spaceopening effect of a decline in black admission rates. Reported estimates are means of
these predicted admission probabilities. Column 3 equals the difference between
columns 2 and 1 and is an estimate of the average black-white admission rate
difference for this school-time period's black applicants, conditional on covariates.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 1
Application Behavior and Comparison of Applicant Characteristics
A. Application Behavior in the Full EALS, 1990-2006
Applications per student
Applications per student who applied to Berkeley or UCLA
Percent of applications sent to schools ranked 1-10
Percent of applications sent to schools ranked 11-20
Percent of students who applied to Berkeley
Percent of students who applied to UCLA

5.7
7.8
59%
20%
28%
14%

B. Applications and Students in the 17-School EALS Sample Used in the Paper
Applications
Students
Applications and applicants to Berkeley (7th-most in the 17-school sample)
Applications and applicants to UCLA (13th-most in the 17-school sample)

25,499
5,353
1,594
777

C. Mean Student Characteristics in the 17-School EALS Sample Used in the Paper and Nationwide
EALS
(sd)
LSAT
GPA
White
Asian
Black
Hispanic
Post-ban

166.2
(6.7)
3.43
(0.33)
60.8%
19.4%
9.7%
10.1%
54.8%

Nationwide
151.5
3.16
70.9%
7.7%
12.4%
9.1%

Notes - Panel A lists statistics on the application behavior of EALS students, using all complete observations (32,627
applications from 5,692 students applying to law schools nationwide). The rankings refer to the rankings from the 1998
issue of U.S. News and World Report 's "America's Best Graduate Schools". Panel B lists statistics on applications
submitted to the seventeen law schools used in the paper; see the notes to Table 1 for details. Panel C lists mean applicant
characteristics. The Nationwide column lists statistics for all U.S. law school applicants in application year 2000-2001, the
closest available year to the midpoint of the EALS sample. LSAT is the standardized test score used in law school
admissions and ranges from 120 to 180. Undergraduate grade point average is the cumulative undergraduate GPA on a
4.00 scale. The Hispanic category includes students classified as Hispanic, Chicano/Mexican-American, or Puerto Rican.
Post-ban is an indicator for the student applying to law school in application year 1996-1997 or later. The 5.4% of EALS
students who either do not report race or list their race as American Indian/Alaskan Native, Canadian Aboriginal, or Other
are omitted from EALS statistics in this table and all analyses; the corresponding 7.9% of U.S. applicants are omitted from
the nationwide percentages as well. The nationwide data were collected from various tables at
http://www.lsac.org/LSACResources/default.asp.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 2
Effect on Selection-Corrected Black Admission Rates
Semi-Parametric Estimates
Admission Rates at Non-UC Schools
White
Black
Difference (pp)

Pre-ban

Post-ban

Difference (pp)

40.6%
61.2%

46.1%
63.0%

5.5
1.9

20.6

16.9

-3.6

Admission Rates at Berkeley
White
Black
Difference (pp)

Pre-ban

Post-ban

Difference (pp)

31.0%
56.7%

33.9%
26.0%

2.9
-30.6

25.7

-7.9

-33.6

DDD estimate (percentage points):
DDD estimate, as % of pre-ban black admission rate:

-29.9
-52.8%

Admission Rates at UCLA
White
Black
Difference (pp)

Pre-ban

Post-ban

Difference (pp)

48.0%
64.5%

60.1%
32.4%

12.2
-32.1

16.6

-27.7

-44.3

DDD estimate (percentage points):
DDD estimate, as % of pre-ban black admission rate:

-40.7
-63.0%

Notes - This table constructs the semi-parametric triple-difference (DDD) estimates of the change in black
admission rates at Berkeley and UCLA reported in Figure 3. Each pre-ban admission rate is an actual
admission rate. Each post-ban admission rate is a reweighted estimate of the admission rate that pre-ban
applicants of each race and school are predicted to have experienced after the ban; see Section IV.B for the
reweighting procedure. The differences computed in the DDD are between pre-ban and post-ban periods,
UC and non-UC schools, and black and white races. The non-UC schools are the top-fifteen schools in the
EALS that were never subject to an affirmative action ban. See Table 2 for analogous parametric DDD
estimates that account for the fact that a decline in black admission rates opens up space in the admitted
cohort for members of both races.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 3
Effect on Selection-Corrected Black Admission Rates
Admitted

Dependent Variable:

Probit
(average marginal effect)

OLS
(pp)
(1)

(pp)
(2)

(pp)
(3)

(pp)
(4)

(pp)
(5)

(pp)
(6)

(pp)
(7)

-39.7
(6.8)

-31.8
(7.3)

-40.5
(5.4)

-35.5
(6.3)

-40.0
(5.3)

-33.9
(6.5)

-43.6
(5.5)

X

X
X

A. Berkeley
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control

X

X

X
X

N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)

1,029
1,029

17,329
3,754

1,029
1,029

17,329
3,754

1,029
1,029

17,329
3,754

779
779

Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

56.7
-34.2

56.7
-27.4

56.7
-35.7

56.7
-31.1

56.7
-35.6

56.7
-30.0

56.7
-39.7

-48.1
(10.5)

-41.6
(10.4)

-35.3
(11.1)

-32.8
(11.0)

-35.0
(11.2)

-33.5
(11.1)

-31.1
(10.5)

X

X
X

B. UCLA
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control
N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)
Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

X

X

X
X

485
485

16,785
3,736

485
485

16,785
3,736

485
485

16,785
3,736

371
371

64.5
-41.6

64.5
-35.9

64.5
-32.1

64.5
-29.2

64.5
-32.0

64.5
-30.2

64.5
-29.2

Notes - This table replicates columns 6-9 from Table 2, including two additional columns that use ordinary least squares
rather than probit estimation.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 4
Effect on Selection-Corrected Black Admission Rates
Using Applications from All Races
Admitted

Dependent Variable:

Probit
(average marginal effect)

OLS
(pp)
(1)

(pp)
(2)

(pp)
(3)

(pp)
(4)

(pp)
(5)

(pp)
(6)

(pp)
(7)

-38.1
(6.9)

-30.8
(7.3)

-39.8
(5.6)

-34.8
(6.4)

-38.6
(5.5)

-32.7
(6.7)

-42.5
(5.8)

X

X
X

A. Berkeley
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control

X

X

X
X

N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)

1,594
1,594

24,722
5,324

1,594
1,594

24,722
5,324

1,594
1,594

24,722
5,324

1,197
1,197

Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

56.7
-34.6

56.7
-28.0

56.7
-36.5

56.7
-31.7

56.7
-36.0

56.7
-30.3

56.7
-40.1

-45.4
(10.4)

-39.0
(10.5)

-35.9
(10.3)

-32.1
(10.8)

-35.1
(10.3)

-32.0
(10.8)

-33.2
(10.2)

X

X
X

B. UCLA
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control
N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)
Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

X

X

X
X

777
777

23,905
5,300

777
777

23,905
5,300

777
777

23,905
5,300

586
586

64.5
-41.4

64.5
-35.5

64.5
-34.6

64.5
-30.4

64.5
-34.6

64.5
-30.9

64.5
-33.0

Notes - This table replicates Appendix Table 3 using applications from all races (black, white, Asian, and Hispanic). The
regressions underlying this table are the same as those underlying Table 2 except that the black indicator is replaced by a
vector of black, Asian, and Hispanic indicators.

ONLINE APPENDIX TABLE 5
Effect on Selection-Corrected Black Admission Rates
Using Applications from All Races and Controlling for Full Interactions
Admitted

Dependent Variable:

Probit
(average marginal effect)

OLS
(pp)
(1)

(pp)
(2)

(pp)
(3)

(pp)
(4)

(pp)
(5)

(pp)
(6)

(pp)
(7)

-47.3
(7.1)

-40.6
(7.4)

-47.2
(4.8)

-46.0
(5.3)

-49.1
(4.6)

-47.7
(5.1)

-50.3
(4.7)

X

X
X

A. Berkeley
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control

X

X

X
X

N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)

1,594
1,594

24,722
5,324

1,594
1,594

24,722
5,324

1,588
1,588

24,716
5,318

1,192
1,192

Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

56.7
-42.9

56.7
-36.9

56.7
-44.2

56.7
-42.9

56.7
-44.5

56.7
-43.0

56.7
-45.6

-46.0
(10.8)

-38.0
(10.8)

-44.9
(8.9)

-41.8
(9.7)

-44.7
(8.7)

-41.3
(9.8)

-46.4
(7.7)

X

X
X

B. UCLA
Black × Post-ban
National trend controls
Inferred strength control
CA residency control
N (applications)
Clusters (applicants)
Actual pre-ban black admission rate
Δ implied by Black × Post-ban effect

X

X

X
X

777
777

23,905
5,300

777
777

23,905
5,300

777
777

23,905
5,300

586
586

64.5
-41.9

64.5
-34.6

64.5
-42.1

64.5
-38.9

64.5
-42.4

64.5
-38.8

64.5
-45.1

Notes - This table replicates Appendix Table 3 using applications from all races (black, white, Asian, and Hispanic) and
more interactions. The regressions underlying this table are the same as those underlying Table 2 except for two changes.
First, the black indicator is replaced by a vector of black, Asian, and Hispanic indicators. Second, each non-racial covariate
(LSAT, GPA, inferred strength, and California residency, depending on the specification) is interacted with each of the DD
or DDD variables (the vector of race indicators, the post-ban indicator, the UC-school indicator, and any interactions of
these variables). For example, column 1 regresses admission on LSAT, GPA, race indicators, year fixed effects, the race
indicators interacted with the post-ban indicator, LSAT interacted with the post-ban indicator, GPA interacted with the postban indicator, LSAT interacted with the race indicators, and GPA interacted with the race indicators.

10%

Admission rate

20%
8%
15%

6%

10%

5%

Ban

Black share of applicant pool

FIGURE 1
Berkeley Admission Rates and Racial Mix of Applicants

4%

92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Application Year
Black admission rate
White admission rate
Black share of the applicant pool

Notes – This graph uses public aggregates on the universe of applicants to Berkeley to plot the time series of overall
admission rates by race and the black share of the applicant pool at Berkeley for all available years. Application year refers
to the autumn of the application year. Averaged across 1992-1995 and 2000-2003, the black-minus-white admission rate
differential rose from 0. 6 to 2. 6 percentage points, and the black share of the applicant pool declined from 8. 9% to 4. 7%.
Yield rates (the share of admitted students who enrolled, not plotted here) changed comparably for blacks and whites: 29. 2%
to 32. 9% for blacks and 30. 4% to 33. 1% for whites. The share of first-year enrollees who were black (not plotted here but
implied by these preceding statistics) declined from 8. 7% to 5. 2%. These school-year-race aggregates contain no
information on applicant credentials. See Online Appendix Figure 1 for the analogous graph for UCLA. The underlying
data are no longer posted on the website of the UC Office of the President but are available on the author’s website.

FIGURE 2
Race, Academic Credentials, and Admission under Affirmative Action
(a) Scatterplot of 23,128 Admission Decisions at
Non-UC Schools (5% Random Sample)

(b) Characterizing Admission Rules
Using Academic Strength (LSAT+GPA)

Admission Probability

Undergraduate GPA (sd 1)

1

1

0

.8
.6
.4
.2
0

-1
-3

-2

-1
0
1
LSAT (sd 1)
Rejected Admitted

2

-2

-1
0
1
2
Academic Strength (sd 1)
Actual
Probit fit

Admission Probability

(c) Pre-ban UC Admission Rules in Academic Strength
1

0
-3

-2
-1
0
1
2
Academic Strength (sd 1)
Blacks to Berkeley
Whites to Berkeley
Blacks to UCLA
Whites to UCLA

Notes – Panel A plots standardized LSAT score (mean zero and standard deviation one), standardized undergraduate GPA,
and the actual admission decision for a 5% random sample of the 23,128 Elite Applications to Law School (EALS)
applications submitted to the top-fifteen non-UC schools that were never subject to an affirmative action ban. Online
Appendix Figure 4 displays the full sample in color. To account for cross-school selectivity differences, each application’s
LSAT has been additively shifted by its school-year-race fixed effect from a probit regression of admission on LSAT, GPA,
and these fixed effects (see Section III.C); the overlaid best-fit admission threshold line correctly predicts 89.1% of
admissions decisions. The regression indicates that a one standard deviation higher LSAT is about as valuable in the
admissions cross section as a one standard deviation higher GPA. Thus when useful for Figure 3, I summarize an
application’s LSAT and GPA with the scalar index academic strength, equal to the standardized sum of standardized LSAT
and standardized GPA. Panel B plots admission rates within fifteen academic strength bins using all 23,128 non-UC
applications and overlays the univariate probit fit, where each application’s academic strength has been additively shifted by
its school-year-race fixed effect from a probit regression of admission on academic strength and these fixed effects. Panel C
plots probit-fitted admission rules by race at UC schools before the 1996 affirmative action ban, derived from a regression of
admission on academic strength, a black indicator, and year fixed effects using pre-ban black and white applications to
Berkeley, and separately for UCLA. For ease of comparison, each school’s pair of admission rules has been horizontally
shifted by an additive constant so that the predicted admission probability for whites equals 0.5 at academic strength 0.

FIGURE 3
Selection-Corrected Admission Rates by Race
(a) Berkeley

Admission Rate

1

DDD: -30 pp (-53%)

.8
.6
.4
.2
Ban

0
90-92

93-95
96-00
01-06
Application Years
Blacks to Berkeley
Whites to Berkeley
Blacks to non-UC schools
Whites to non-UC schools
(b) UCLA

Admission Rate

1

DDD: -41 pp (-63%)

.8
.6
.4
.2
Ban

0
90-92

93-95
96-00
01-06
Application Years
Blacks to UCLA
Whites to UCLA
Blacks to non-UC schools
Whites to non-UC schools
Notes – This figure displays the time series of black and white admission rates at Berkeley, UCLA, and non-UC schools,
where applicant characteristics have been held constant at pre-ban levels using semi-parametric reweighting as in DiNardo,
Fortin, and Lemieux (1996). To construct the time series of black admission rates at Berkeley, I first compute terciles of
academic strength among pre-ban black applications to Berkeley. Then for each time period shown in the figure, I weight
black applications to Berkeley so that each pre-ban-defined tercile receives equal weight when computing the displayed
admission rate. I repeat this process for whites at Berkeley and for whites and blacks separately at UCLA and at each
non-UC school, averaging across non-UC schools to construct the non-UC series. This semi-parametric reweighting on
academic strength is data-demanding, so I group the data into two pre-ban time periods (1990-1992 and 1993-1995) and two
post-ban time periods (1996-2000 and 2001-2006). Pooling all pre-ban years and all post-ban years, the triple-difference
(DDD) estimate of the effect of the ban on the black admission rate at each UC school is overlaid, with the DDD estimate as
a fraction of the pre-ban black admission rate in parentheses. Online Appendix Table 2 lists the numbers underlying these
DDD estimates. Table 2 reports parametric DDD estimates that account for the minor space-opening effect of a decline in
black admission rates.

10%

Admission rate

25%
8%

15%

5%

6%

Ban

Black share of applicant pool

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 1
UCLA Admission Rates and Racial Mix of Applicants

4%

92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03
Application Year
Black admission rate
White admission rate
Black share of the applicant pool

Notes – This graph replicates Figure 1 for UCLA; see the notes to that figure for details. Averaged across 1992-1995 and
2000-2003, the black-minus-white admission rate differential fell from 1. 4 to 6. 7 percentage points, and the black share of
the applicant pool declined from 8. 9% to 5. 5%. Yield rates (the share of admitted students who enrolled, not plotted here)
rose somewhat among blacks relative to whites: 25. 4% to 37. 1% for blacks and 26. 6% to 30. 9% for whites. The share of
first-year enrollees who were black (not plotted here but implied by these preceding statistics) declined from 8. 3% to 4. 3%.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 2
Personal Statement Prompts on Berkeley Application Forms
(a) 1995, the last pre-ban year

(b) 1996, the first post-ban year

Notes – This figure reprints the personal statement prompts from the 1995 (the autumn of the last pre-ban application year)
and the 1996 (the autumn of the first post-ban application year) Berkeley application forms. The 1995 personal statement
prompt was nearly identical to the one from 1994, and the personal statement prompt has remained nearly unchanged since
1996.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 3
Distribution of Academic Credentials By Race

Density

(b) Distribution of Undergraduate GPA

Density

(a) Distribution of LSAT Score

150

160
LSAT
Black
White

170

2

2.5

Hispanic
Asian

Density

(c) Distribution of Academic Strength

-4

180

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
Academic Strength (mean 0, sd 1)
Black
Hispanic
White
Asian

3
GPA
Black
White

Academic Strength (mean 0, sd 1)

140

3.5

4

Hispanic
Asian

(d) Time Series of Academic Strength
0.5
0
Ban

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
90

92

94

96 98 00 02 04
Application Year
Black
White
Race-Time Period Mean

06

Notes – This figure displays the student-level distribution of academic credentials by race in the paper’s EALS analysis
sample. LSAT is the standardized test score used in law school admissions and ranges from 120 to 180. Undergraduate
grade point average is the cumulative undergraduate GPA on a 4.00 scale. Academic strength is a scalar index of the
strength of an applicant’s academic credentials, equal to the standardized (mean zero and standard deviation one) sum of
standardized LSAT and standardized GPA (see Figure 2). Each displayed density is estimated non-parametrically using an
Epanechnikov kernel with Silverman bandwidth. Application year refers to the autumn of the application year.

Undergraduate GPA (sd 1)

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 4
Scatterplot of 23,128 Admission Decisions at Non-UC Schools

1

0

-1
-3

-2

-1
0
LSAT (sd 1)
Rejected
Admitted

1

2

Notes – This figure is intelligible only in color. It replicates Figure 2a except that it plots all 23,128 applications to non-UC
schools, rather than just a 5% random sample. See the notes to that figure for details.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 5
Inferred Strength and Admission Rates

Admission minus Predicted Admission

.2

.1

0

-.1

-.2
-.4

-.2

0
Inferred Strength

.2

.4

Notes – This graph displays the ability of the inferred strength variable (motivated by Dale and Krueger 2002) to predict
admission, conditional on other covariates. I proxy for unobserved admission determinants using the intuition that if an
applicant predicted to be rejected based on LSAT, GPA, and race is in fact consistently admitted across schools in the EALS,
this applicant is likely strong on commonly-valued unobserved characteristics like recommendation letters. Specifically I
construct the inferred strength variable for an application submitted by student i to school s equal to the mean across all
applications submitted by student í to schools other than s of residuals from within-school probit regressions of admission on
LSAT, GPA, race indicators, and time-period fixed effects (see Section III.D). Then to construct this illustrative graph, I
compute inferred strength residuals from an ordinary least squares regression of inferred strength on LSAT, GPA, race, and
school-year fixed effects, and I compute admission residuals from a probit regression of admission on the same covariates. I
then group applications into twenty equal-sized (five-percentile-point) bins based on the inferred strength residuals and plot
mean admission residuals within each bin.

ONLINE APPENDIX FIGURE 6
Admissions under an Affirmative Action Ban
(a) Affirmative Action
White
density

Black
density

Black
density

White
density

(b) Affirmative Action Ban

q*

BLACKSIGNAL=1

New admits

q* q*

q*

BLACKSIGNAL=0

BLACKSIGNAL=1

New rejects

New admits

q* q*

BLACKSIGNAL=0

New rejects

Total Non-racial
strength (q)

(c) Optimal Bundles

A
B

C
BCBAN

BCAA

Total black admits (r)
Notes – This figure illustrates the simple model of admissions under an affirmative action ban presented in Appendix A in
which the applicant pool is held fixed and the school has concave preferences over the number of black applicants enrolled
and the aggregate non-racial strength of the enrolled cohort. The school can admit applicants on two pieces of applicant
information: non-racial strength and a signal of black status. Panels (a) and (b) depict applicant densities in non-racial
strength; “new” refers to the effects of placing positive weight on the black signal. Panel (c) plots budget sets under the
simplification of uniform distributions of non-racial strength. The graph omits feasible but always-dominated bundles by
defining the x-intercept as the number of black applicants admitted if the school were to maximize only non-racial strength
and the y-intercept as the aggregate non-racial strength achieved if the school were to maximize only the number of admitted
blacks. Under affirmative action (AA), the black signal is pure. Under an affirmative action ban (Ban), the usable black
signal available to the school is impure, so the school faces a higher opportunity cost (in terms of non-racial strength) of
admitting black students. It therefore changes its optimal bundle from a bundle like A to some bundle on the interior budget
set depending on whether substitution effects (e.g. bundle B) or income effects (e.g. bundle C) dominate.

