NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REMIX RIGHTS AND NEGOTIATIONS OVER THE USE OF COPY-PROTECTED
WORKS
Joshua S. Gans
Working Paper 20364
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20364
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

I thank Ariel Katz, Shane Greenstein, Avi Goldfarb, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants
at the University of Toronto Law School for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20364.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joshua S. Gans. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Remix Rights and Negotiations Over the Use of Copy-Protected Works
Joshua S. Gans
NBER Working Paper No. 20364
August 2014, Revised June 2015
JEL No. O34
ABSTRACT
This paper examines an environment where original content can be remixed by follow-on creators.
The modelling innovation is to assume that original content creators and remixers can negotiate over
the ‘amount’ of original content that is used by the follow-on creator in the shadow of various rights
regimes. The following results are demonstrated. First, traditional copyright protection where the original
content creators can block any use of their content provides more incentives for content creators and
also more remixing than no copyright protection. This is because that regime incentivises original
content creators to consider the value of remixing and permit it in negotiations. Second, fair use can
improve on traditional copyright protection in some instances by mitigating potential hold-up of follow-on
creators by original content providers. Finally, remix rights can significantly avoid the need for any
negotiations over use by granting those rights to follow-on innovators in return for a set compensation
regime. However, while these rights are sometimes optimal when the returns to remixing are relatively
low, standard copyright protection can afford more opportunities to engage in remixing when remixing
returns are relatively high.
Joshua S. Gans
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto ON M5S 3E6
and NBER
joshua.gans@gmail.com

2

I.

Introduction
Remixing is a term used to describe taking content (sound, music, photos and words) and

altering them in some manner to create new content. While the notion of derivative works has
existed in copyright law for some time, digital technology has allowed a wider range of content
types to be combined to produce remixed creative works and for that work to reach a wider
audience. For example, users now attract millions of views on YouTube with their own video
representations of popular songs (e.g., the Harlem Shake phenomenon) or re-working of television
shows and movies (e.g., the synchronisation of video of George W. Bush and Tony Blair to the duet,
Endless Love). For the purposes of this paper, remixing occurs whenever someone takes copy
protected content and repurposes it in some manner. Thus, while it does not include direct copying,
parts, or maybe all, of the copy protected material are used in the derivative work.
Legal and economic scholars have been challenged in considering how such remixing should
be treated. In law, there is a position that it may fall under “fair use.”2 Fair use is an exemption to
copyright protection, that exists in some jurisdictions, related to works that use copy protected
materials for reviews, discussion and parody. This may, in some circumstances, encompass remixed
content. However, it should be noted that a fair use exemption does not exist everywhere; including,
notably, Europe and Australia. Moreover, while fair use can potentially be readily applied to noncommercial remixing and use of copy-protected material, when it is uploaded or distributed using
commercial platforms (such as YouTube or SoundCloud), the precise nature of the content becomes
ambiguous.
In this paper, we explore remix rights in the context of considering the optimality of copyright
law from a property rights perspective. That is, the law sets default rights on various parties.
Usually, in fact, no copy-protected material can be used in any form by others unless express
permission is given by the copyright owner. Thus, potential user/creators need to obtain permission
to use such materials. As Lessig (2008) notes, this has occurred on open platforms such as YouTube
where amateurs, for instance, uploaded videos with songs playing in the background only to be
cited with takedown notices because appropriate permissions had not been sought. These takedown
notices invariably occurred after remix effort had been expended. In other cases cited by Lessig,
users who sought permissions found transaction costs prohibitive. Google and other platforms have
since opted for solutions that encourage remixed content and lower transaction costs for obtaining
permissions.

2

For a review see Katz (2013).

3

Lessig (2008) argues that these measures still stifle creativity. He claimed that technology has
made copying so easy that it is hard to base the structure of the law on the presumption that copying
can be prevented. He argues that remix rights should be applicable where the user has a
demonstrably amateur characteristic. For instance, a song in the background of a family video is not
copy-protected but if it is uploaded to YouTube and publicly available it becomes so. Indeed, in
Canada, new provisions on user-generated content reflect this. These provisions allow remixing so
long as the purpose is non-commercial in nature and does not have a substantial adverse effect on
the copyright holder. However, it should be noted that remixing involves activities that may not
satisfy these criteria. This has prompted some to propose alternative means of compensating
creators while allowing pervasive copying. For instance, the European-based Right2Remix.org
argues that remix rights should be granted by default as they are a form of creative expression with
lump-sum compensation being paid to the copyright owners for any losses incurred as a result of
this.
In economics, Boldrin and Levine (2010) argue for a permissive regime that essentially
removes copy-protection, claiming that incentives for creators will be adequate in their absence.
Lessig also argues that the regulation of small scale technical copyright infringement does not
outweigh the legal and transactional costs involved. This is a pervasive theme. When economists
looked at the desirability of a fair use exemption they emphasised the transaction costs involved in
securing permissions for derivative works (Landes and Posner, 1989), in particular, when those
works involve combinations of work by diverse copyright holders (Depoorter and Parisi, 2002).
However, to date, economists have not considered copyright protection from a perspective where
the costs of transacting come from potential hold-up -- either by content creators (when copyright
protection is strong) or users who remix (when copyright protection is weak).3 That is the
contribution of this paper.
This paper examines the impact of remixing and the various rights regimes that have been
proposed. As a benchmark, we consider how different regimes impact on the overall quality of
creative works generated -- both original content and remixing -- and also on whether a regime can
leave incentives to create original content no lower than what would arise it remixing were
technically infeasible.
The modelling innovation is to move beyond the simple view of copyright protection as
protecting the original content creator from competition from copies (see Novos and Waldman,
3

Halonen-Akatwijuka and Regner (2009) consider the optimal ownership of copyright itself between music artists and
publishers/distributors. However, they do not examine the optimal copyright law as is done here.

4

1984; Johnson, 1985; and Landes and Posner, 1989, for a classic treatments). Instead, as with the
incomplete contracts literature in the theory of the firm (Hart, 1995) and also its application to law
(Pitchford and Snyder, 2003), I consider, carefully, how different rights regimes specifying residual
control and return rights impact on negotiations between original content creators and users who
remix for public consumption. In effect, I bring the cumulative innovation framework beyond
patent matters (Green and Scotchmer, 1995) to copyright matters. This not only allows us to
examine remix rights and their impact but also to consider more carefully the impact of traditional
copyright protection as it currently exists on the amount of remixing that occurs. As a consequence,
it explicitly considers hold-up as a transaction cost in the copyright area.4
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section II, I introduce a baseline model involving the
interactions between an initial content creator and a follow-on remixer of that content. These agents
undertake non-contractible investments in the quality of their (potentially) published works and
then negotiate in the shadow of copyright regimes that might exist. In order to focus on the
interesting case, the model makes the assumption that, in the absence of permission remixing harms
the copyright owner, although, in reality, it is possible that, in some instances, the owner may
receive benefits from remixing. Section III considers the outcomes when there are traditional rights
regimes of either no copyright protection or traditional copyright protection. In the former, followon remixers have a right to remix and publish their work while in the latter, initial content creators
have a right to block the publication of remixed work. In each case, the rights determine the
bargaining position of each agent in negotiations over whether remixed work is actually published
or not. The significant result is that traditional copyright protection enhances the incentives of initial
content creators to invest in their content -- something that is intuitive -- but also the actual amount
of remixing that occurs and is published -- a result that is counter-intuitive at first glance. That latter
result comes from the incentives of initial content creators in the absence of copyright protections to
lower their own quality enough to discourage remixing from taking place and cannabilising their
own returns. Under copyright protection, there is no such restraint and so socially superior
outcomes -- in terms of the welfare of initial content providers and follow-on remixers -- arise.
Section IV looks at ‘fair use’ exemptions. While in many legal studies these have been
envisaged as allowing copy protected work to be used for specific purposes (e.g., parody), here I
consider fair use as a safe harbour based on the ‘quantity’ of a copy protected work that is used. For

4

A related paper by Miceli and Adelstein (2006) looks at fair use exemptions as involving a minimum standard of
copying by horizontally differentiated competitors to the copyright holder. It derives a socially optimal fair use standard
under those assumptions but does not consider the underlying bargaining game as I do here.

5

example, artists may be able to lift samples of music and incorporate them without permission or
payment but not entire pieces of content. Here, it is found that fair use only binds when some
remixing will be desired in equilibrium and will often involve additional payments to copyright
owners. This reinforces the finding that no copyright protection is sub-optimal but also the notion
that if the share of original content returns is heavily dependent on a lack of sampling, then it is
socially optimal not to have a fair use exemption. This mirrors, in part, the notion that fair use
should be accompanied by non-commercial follow-on use.
Section V then considers remix rights as outlined by some advocacy groups. Such rights
change the defaults of blocking by copyright holders to allow remixers to engage in such activities
but also being under an obligation to compensate copyright holders for potential losses. It is
demonstrated that such a regime can encourage second best investments in remixed content without
reducing initial content investment beyond that would arise if remixing was blocked. Moreover,
remix rights avoid the need for negotiations between the original content provider and the remixer
prior to remixing and, perhaps, altogether. In other words, remix rights can minimize transaction
costs. That said, because traditional copyright protection can lead to actual remixing, it is not
always the case that remix rights generate a higher level of remixed content being created and
published. Overall, from a welfare perspective, it is not possible to clearly rank remix rights over
traditional copyright protection. In an extension, a remix regime similar to that currently provided
by YouTube is examined which has some superior elements but also some mitigating effects
compared with other copyright regimes considered.

II. Baseline Model
We model a content creator, A, and a user/remixer, B. There are two time periods (Figure 1).
In period 1, a copyright regime is established which is known to all. Also in that period, A creates
content by expending effort (or other resources) of measure, x. The cost of x is C(x) which is
increasing and convex. In period 2, B takes A’s content and chooses whether to remix it. As a simple
measure, suppose that s is the share of A’s content that B uses in remixing. (s could stand for
‘sample’). In addition, B expends their own effort, y, in taking s and transforming it into their own
content. Again, the cost of y is C(y) which is increasing and convex. Once B has made their choice,
A and B bargain over s that can be ultimately released to others as B’s content and any payment (t)
from A to B in return for this. The outcome of that bargain is then implemented and payoffs are
realized. The timing of this game mirrors a standard incomplete contracts framework where x and y

6

are non-contractible (that is, observable but not verifiable choices) while s and payments are
contractible.
A note on timing
Of course, a key assumption here is that A and B cannot negotiate prior to A creating their
content. There are a couple of reasons for this. As noted already, x is reasonably assumed to be noncontractible in many creative settings. Second, A may not be aware of the “B’s” out there prior to
creating that content and so could not negotiate with them (see Pitchford and Snyder, 2003). Either
way, this prevents an ex ante deal that would otherwise generate an optimal outcome regardless of
the regime in place. Third, negotiation over s takes place after y has been chosen. The reason for
this is that, as y is non-contractible, even if s is agreed upon, once y is realized and observed there is
an incentive to renegotiate s.
The timing assumption that s is negotiated after y has been chosen is worthy of additional
discussion. As is familiar from the literature on property rights (Hart, 1995), when a key variable, in
this case y, is non-contractible, this means that even signed formal contracts over other variables
will be subject to renegotiation. A formal contract’s terms can be amended if both parties to the
contract agree. Thus, suppose that, for example, A and B agree, prior to y being chosen, that B can
sample sc. They also agree on a payment, tc, from B to A for that right. B then chooses a y such that
if the chosen sample were greater than sc, its own payoff would be higher. Consequently, B may
offer A an amount greater than tc, for that additional sample. A could refuse but it is also
conceivable that A may prefer the higher compensation over any perceived losses from the
increment to the sample used by B. This, of course, makes modelling the outcomes of the game a
challenge. How property rights theory resolved this issue, was to leave the negotiation of variables
like s and t until after y is chosen. In this model, A and B would form rational expectations
regarding whether an agreement might be reached ex post and also the terms of that agreement. The
theory would then look for an equilibrium where those expectations were met. This is the approach
we follow here. So while s and t, in reality, can be negotiated prior or after y being chosen, the
model’s outcome based on ex post negotiation of these terms generates the same equilibrium
prediction.
Payoffs and bargaining
The payoffs to each agent are as follows. It is assumed that the payoff A receives exclusive of
creation costs is π(x, s) + t which is assumed to be increasing and concave in x and non-increasing

7

in s with ! π (0, s) = 0 . B’s payoff is u(x, y, s) - C(y) - t which is assumed to be increasing, concave
and supermodular in (x, y, s). We assume that u(0, y, s) = u(x, y, 0) = 0 (that is, content from A and
access to original content is required for B to earn a positive payoff).
Below I will often rely on the following functional form assumptions -- consistent with the
above assumptions -- to derive more precise predictions and show the possibility of various
outcomes. Specifically I will assume that ! C(x) = 12 x 2 , ! C(y) = 12 y 2 , ! π (x, s) = β x + x(1− s) and
! u(x, y, s) = θ xys . The latter assumptions are of particular interest as they allow for the possibility
that each ‘unit’ of content remixed reduces the direct revenue to A; indeed, for s = 1, ! π = β x ; the
revenue independent of sampling. Consequently, it allows for the more dire predictions from
copyright advocacy groups (especially if ! β = 0 ). In addition, the parameter, θ, is, in many respects,
a proxy for the remix ‘opportunity.’ This will be useful in considering the impact of digitisation on
the optimal copyright regime as it may be associated with a general rise in θ.
However, it should be emphasised that much remixed content does not involve s = 1. Instead,
it may involve some amount less than 1 with anything beyond that amount not increasing B’s utility.
In that respect, one should consider s = 1 as a normalised amount to the maximum B could possibly
value. This interpretation is not innocuous, however, as in the specific functional form, it may be
enough to remove A’s direct profits from their content; although it will still receive a remixindependent amount of β.
In negotiations over (s, t), it is assumed that A and B use the Nash bargaining solution
assigning asymmetric bargaining power to A of ! α ∈(0,1) . This solution implies that:
! s * ∈arg max s π (x, s) + u(x, y, s)
! t * = α ( u(x, y, s * ) − oB (x, y)) − (1− α ) (π (x, s * ) − oA (x, y))
where oA and oB are A and B’s respective outside options. Anticipating this, A and B will set their
effort levels according to:

(

)

! x * ∈arg max x α π (x, s * ) + u(x, y* (x), s * ) − oB (x, y* (x)) + (1− α )oA (x, y* (x)) − C(x)
! y* (x * ) ∈arg max y (1− α ) (π (x * , s * ) + u(x * , y, s * ) − oA (x * , y)) + α oB (x * , y) − C(y)
Thus, each agent internalizes a fraction of the surplus generated (π + u) but also takes into account
the impact of their effort on the various outside options. In addition, A acts as a Stackelberg leader
when expending effort and takes into account the impact of their decision on B’s choices.
Importantly, as the negotiated s only enters into the joint surplus term, by the envelope theorem,

8

both A and B take it as given when choosing their own efforts. To see this, observe that A and B’s
first order conditions are:
!α

(

∂π
∂x

+ ∂∂sπ

(

ds*
dx

*

+ dsdx

dy*
dx

)+

*

dy
∂u
+ ∂u
∂ y dx + ∂s

∂u
∂x

! (1− α )

(

∂π
∂y

ds*
dy

+ ∂∂sπ

(

ds*
dx

dy*
dx

*

+ dsdx

∂u
+ ∂u
∂ y + ∂s

ds*
dy

)−

∂oB
∂x

− ∂o∂ yB

)

− ∂o∂ yA + α

dy*
dx

∂oB
∂y

) + (1− α )(

≤

∂C
∂y

∂oA
∂x

+ ∂o∂ yA

dy*
dx

)≤

∂C
∂x

C(y)

Note that the first order condition for s in the Nash bargaining solution implies that ! ∂∂sπ + ∂u
∂s = 0 ,
thus, these first order conditions simplify to:
!α

(

∂π
∂x

*

∂oB
∂oB
∂u dy
+ ∂u
∂ x + ∂ y dx − ∂ x − ∂ y

! (1− α )

(

∂π
∂y

dy*
dx

) + (1− α )(
)

∂oA
+ ∂u
∂y − ∂y + α

∂oB
∂y

≤

∂oA
∂x

∂C
∂y

+ ∂o∂ yA

dy*
dx

)≤

∂C
∂x

C(y)

As those actions do impact on the realised s*, we will look for a fixed point outcome (i.e., rational
expectations equilibrium) in what follows.

III. Traditional Rights Regimes
I now examine the two traditional rights regimes. First, where there is no copyright
protection. Second, where there is copyright protection that gives control over copying to the
content creator (consistent with current law).
No copyright protection (NC)
As a first step, consider what happens when there is no copyright protection. In this case,
absent an agreement, B would be free to remix as much of A’s content as they would like. As u is
increasing in s, this would lead to a choice of ! sNC = 1 . Thus, in this situation, ! oA = π (x,1) and
! oB = u(x, y,1) .
The immediate consequence of this is that the negotiated t must be negative if ! sNC < 1 :
! t NC = α ( u(x, y, sNP ) − u(x, y,1)) − (1− α ) (π (x, sNC ) − π (x,1))
!###
#"####
$
!###"###
$
<0

>0

so that A is paying B in return for it not using its whole content in a remix. Of course, this depends
on the negotiated s actually being strictly less than 1. The following proposition summarizes the
possible equilibrium outcomes.
Proposition 1. If $ ∂π∂(0,1)
> C ′(0) , then, in equilibrium, $ x NC > 0 . If $ ∂π∂(0,1)
≤ C ′(0) , then a necessary
x
x
condition for an equilibrium with $ sNC < 1 and $ x NC > 0 to exist is that there is an x and s < 1 such
that $ π (x, s) + u(x, y* (x, s), s) > π (x,1) + u(x, y* (x,1),1) and $ π (x, s) ≥ C(x) .

9

The intuition for this result is as follows. Clearly, if there is a positive net marginal return to x even
if s = 1, then a positive investment by A will occur in equilibrium. On the other hand, if this isn’t the
case, then A will choose effort that, if feasible, will cause a negotiated s less than 1. Specifically, it
will choose x such that with B’s response to that x, the joint surplus weighing A’s revenues is higher
than those weighing B’s. As x and y are complements for B, this will be a relatively low value of x.
If A chose an x that was too high, then in negotiations, B will insist upon a level of s = 1 and A
would earn a negative return. Consequently, under NC, A restrains its investment in content to
ensure the content is not too attractive to B.
To see this more clearly consider what happens under the specific functional form
assumptions stated above. First, if s is negotiated:
⎧ 1
yθ > 1
if
! sNC = ⎨
yθ ≤ 1
⎩ 0
Working backwards ! yNC = θ x ( (1− α )s + α ) . A takes this into account when choosing x, resulting in:
! x NC =

β + α (1− s)
1+ 2 (1− s )α ( s (1− α ) + α )θ 2

Note that xNC is decreasing in B’s value (as parameterized by θ); that is, the choice of x by A is a
strategic substitute with y. Given this, the equilibrium outcomes are characterized by the following
proposition.
Proposition 2. If $ β > θ 21α + 2 − α , then $ sNC = 1 , $ x NC = β and $ yNC = θβ . Otherwise, $ sNC = 0 ,
$ x NC = 1+2β α+α2θ 2 and $ yNC =

( β +α )αθ
1+2 α 2θ 2

.

The proof of the proposition is in the appendix. It is instructive to note that, consistent with
Proposition 1, if ! β = 0 , then ! sNC = 0 and no remixed content is published. However, even when
! β > 0 is positive the negotiated ! sNC can equal 0 while ! yNC > 0 . So remixing, as a creative activity,
takes place and, moreover, an improvement in A’s bargaining position increases that activity.
However, from a welfare perspective, B’s investment is purely wasteful and is only made to
improve their bargaining position in negotiations with A. A’s bargaining power does not play a
direct role as the regime shifts to one where B can use all of A’s material. However, that regime is
more likely to arise when A has more bargaining power as it appropriates more of the value B
creates.

10

At a first glance, this result reaffirms a standard approach to copyright in that, in the absence
of protection, content creators will only have an incentive to create if they would not be harmed too
much by remixing. However, regardless, it demonstrates that a content creator will take into
account the impact their creation has on incentives to remix and hence, the amount they might have
to pay to prevent such remixing from occurring. Because content creators can create with an eye to
how their works might be remixed, in the absence of copyright protection, they have an incentive to
produce works that are hard to remix. There are many ways this might manifest themselves. For
instance, Landes and Posner (1989) argue that writers would hold off releasing content until they
themselves had produced a translation to other languages. The point here being is that the absence
of copyright protection does not so much diminish the incentives to create content but the type of
content that is created and the room it offers others to build upon.
Copyright protection (CP)
Standard copyright protection gives the content creator the right to prevent any copying of
their material. In the notation expressed here, A can set s and, in the absence of an alternative
agreement, will set s = 0. Consequently, in negotiations over (s, t), ! oB = 0 while ! oA = π (x,0) .
Given the general form of payoff functions here, it is difficult to characterize how copyright
protection changes the equilibrium choices of A and B. A first insight is that while no copyright
≤ C ′(0) . This is
protection ruled out s = 1 in equilibrium, it is possible that ! sCP = 1 even if $ ∂π∂(0,1)
x
because, under CP, the equilibrium payment from B to A, t, is positive. Thus, A shares in u(x,y,s)
whereas under NC, A’s interests are in minimizing u(x,y,1) - u(x,y,s) which because s and y are
complements, causes A to choose an x that ensures y is low.
Second, the direct impact of moving from NC to CP on agent’s incentives are exactly what
one would expect. Holding y fixed, the marginal return to x for A increases under CP. Similarly,
holding x fixed, B’s marginal return to y decreases under CP. However, because these impacts
conflict, when A and B’s efforts are strategic complements, we cannot say, in equilibrium, what the
overall impact of a move from NC to CP is. Nonetheless, it is possible that y under NC is a strategic
substitute for A. In this case, x will be higher in equilibrium under CP than under NC.
Given this ambiguity, it is useful to return to specific functional forms. Note that the
negotiated s will be determined by the same formula as this is an ex post efficient choice, however,
the precise value will depend on the value of y realized. In this case, ! yCP = θ x(1− α )s while

11
−sα
! xCP = 1−2 s1+2αβ(1−
which is positive so long as A’s objective function is concave. Note that, unlike the
α )θ 2

case for NC, here, an increase in B’s value (as parameterized by θ) increases x in equilibrium.
The following proposition compares the equilibrium outcomes under CP to those under NC.
1
− 1− α ) that gives rise to remixed
Proposition 3. The threshold level of $ β (i.e., $ β > βCP = θ 2 (1−
α)

content being published in equilibrium under CP is lower than under NP. For any parameters,
$ xCP > x NC , while, $ yCP > yNC when $ sCP = 1 .
Once again, the proof is in the appendix. $ xCP > x NC always (even for a range of parameters whereby
$ sCP = 1 and ! sNC = 0 ) but when $ sCP = 0 , ! yCP = 0 and is, therefore, less than ! yNC . However, this
remix is not published (rendering any positive y socially inefficient) and thus, π + u is always higher
under CP than under NC. Intuitively, under CP, A appropriates a greater return from their own effort
(as per standard theories of copyright protection) but, in addition, the negotiated s is more likely to
be permissive to follow-on remixing precisely when such activities are highly valuable socially.
This demonstrates there is considerably more subtlety that operates with copyright regimes
than is commonly expressed. In particular, this model demonstrates that, in an environment where
remixing can be very damaging to the profits of the content creator, the assignment of copyright
protection to that creator can result in more remixing than when such rights are not present. The
reason for this is that assigning copy protection rights to the content creator allows that creator to
appropriate some of the returns from remixing. Consequently, they are more open to such remixing
even at the sacrifice of profits from the original work. This demonstrates that a potential unintended
consequence of removing copyright protection in order to remove barriers to remixing is, in fact, to
create conditions whereby remixing does not occur.

IV. Fair Use Regime
This section turns to consider fair use. Here fair use is not interpreted with respect to the
precise use the copyrighted work is put to but to the extent of that use. This gives us some sense as
to the optimality of providing a regime that is somewhat intermediate to the two traditional regimes
considered thusfar.
Following Miceli and Adelstein (2006), here, fair use is modelled as a minimum ‘amount,’ s,
set by the policy-maker, that B can use without A’s permission. Thus, should A and B fail to reach
an agreement otherwise, A will receive ! π (x, s ) while B will receive ! u(x, y, s ) . Clearly, from this
perspective, fair use is a regime weakening copyright protection from a full copy protected regime
but is stronger than no copy protection.

12

The following proposition characterizes the optimally chosen fair use regime for our specific
functional form.
Proposition 4. For β sufficiently low, fair use is not optimal. For β sufficiently high, fair use is
optimal (i.e., the policy-maker will set s > 0) but never involves s = 1.
This result is an extension of Proposition 3 that found that CP generated higher surplus than NP.
However, it also demonstrates that CP may not be optimal when the share of A’s profits that varies
with use of the work by B is low. In this case, providing B with some rights improves their
bargaining position and leads to higher surplus being generated part of which is redistributed to A as
payment for a negotiated s > s. Specifically, whenever fair use is optimal, it is also efficient to
negotiate s = 1. Thus, in this situation, fair use is a mechanism that allows A to appropriate some
share of B’s payoff, and thus gives them an incentive to improve content quality.
An interesting aspect of the equilibrium outcome here is that fair use is never used as a
weapon on the optimal regime. Of course, the model here considers the regime dependent upon the
particular characteristics of A and B. More generally, optimal fair use should apply regardless of
those characteristics. This might generate a concern that a fair use option could be used by potential
follow-on content users to threaten the destruction of original content holder rents. However, here
the optimal regime should not involve that threat and, if there are negotiations, it would be to extend
use beyond fair use and certainly not involve any payments from A to B. This suggests that there is
some rationale for the notion that fair use can apply subject to a ‘harm to the original content
provider’ test; the idea being that A would be able to prevent remixing if harmed, thus,
endogenously setting their bargaining positioning while allowing remixing to occur in cases where
there is no harm to A.

V. Remix Rights with Compensation
We now consider an alternative rights regime. Whereas under both NC and CP, a particular
agent is given the right to choose s in the absence of an agreement here that right is de-coupled from
a right to receive compensation for that choice.
The Remix Right regime proposed by Right2Remix.org involves granting all users:
• Transformative usage rights: “the right to change works during usage and publish the
results” (e.g., background music in mobile phone videos);
• Remix rights: “the right to create and publish remixes of existing works” (e.g., a fake
trailer for a TV series);

13

• Remix Commercialization rights: “the right to commercialize remixes” (e.g., selling
music mash-ups on iTunes);
• ... in exchange for lump-sum compensation (or appropriate compensation for
commercialization)
In the language of the model presented thusfar, this amounts to giving B the right to choose s but
if B exercises that right, B must pay A compensation. This leaves open the precise form of the
compensation and also the amount. We will consider some variants in what follows. We note here
that these are proposed rights rules that we explore in order to determine whether giving B the right
to remix without permission from A may be superior to other rights regimes already considered
above.
Lump-Sum Compensation (RR)
A natural contender for lump-sum compensation that is potentially measurable is
compensation equal to the amount A would have expected to receive if A had unilaterally made
their preferred choice with regard to remix rights. Given the assumptions stated thusfar, A’s
preferred choice is to set s = 0. In this case, if B set s, B would have to pay A ! π (x,0) − π (x, s) .
In this situation, given x and y, B will choose s to solve:
! max s u(x, y, s) + π (x, s) − π (x,0)
Thus, s will be set to maximise joint surplus (as it would in the negotiations considered in the
previous section). Here, however, B’s payoff is as if bargaining power, ! α = 0 , under a CP regime.
Note that because of this and because negotiations are otherwise ex post efficient, B has no
incentive to negotiate an alternative arrangement with A. Consequently, there are no transaction
costs associated with bargaining over s because no bargaining over s takes place. B implements the
efficient outcome unilaterally. Thus, the significance of a remix rights regime is precisely that it
obviates the need for ex post negotiations over the use of A’s content.
Given this, B chooses y to solve:
! max y u(x, y, s * ) + π (x, s * ) − π (x,0) − C(y)
which yields a value of y consistent with the first best holding x fixed. For A, it receives ! π (x,0)
regardless of whether B chooses s or leaves the choice to A. Thus, it solves:
! max x π (x,0) − C(x)
This is not consistent with the first best as it fails to take into account any positive externality on B.
However, compared to a copyright protection regime without negotiation, A is no worse off.

14

While a remix rights regime appears to have some favourable efficiency properties, it is
important to compare it more closely with conventional copyright regimes. The following
proposition characterises that comparison for the specific functional forms assumed above where
RR denotes the remix rights regime.
Proposition 5. For θ and β sufficiently low (i.e, $ θ <
Specifically, if $ θ < min[
$ θ ≥ max[

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

), RR is (weakly) optimal.

,1] , the equilibrium outcomes under RR and CP are identical; if

,1] , $ sRR = sCP = 1 , $ xCP > x RR and $ yCP > yRR ; if $

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

> θ ≥ 1 (which can

arise if $ β ≤ 1−α α ), $ sRR = 1 > sCP = 0 , $ x RR = xCP > x NC and $ yRR > yCP = 0 ; and if $ 1 > θ ≥
2

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

(which can arise if $ β > 1−α α ), $ sCP = 1 > sRR = 0 , $ xCP > x RR and $ yCP > yRR = 0 .
2

The significance of this result is that remix rights allow remixing to occur without negotiation over
a permission to remix. Figure 2 depicts the optimal outcomes. Moreover, it is demonstrated that, in
some situations, in particular, where β and θ are high, CP will, in fact, be more permissive of
remixing than RR. This is because in those cases, the returns to both original content provision and
remixing are sufficiently high that A has an incentive, ex post, to negotiate for high levels of
remixing.
Proposition 5 demonstrates that there is no simple comparison between RR and CP.
Nonetheless, it is never the case that A’s effort under RR exceeds its effort under CP. This is
because under RR, A’s effort is based solely on a situation that would arise if remixing were not
possible. There are times, however, where total value created is higher under RR than under CP (if
the former involves remixing while the latter does not) as B’s incentives are efficient conditional on
x. However, in other cases, total value created is higher in this case under CP than RR.
What is driving this outcome is that CP gives A a stake in the value generated by remixing
whereas RR does not. As A’s effort increases that value, there is a direct incentive to increase x
precisely when remixing is more valuable. In this particular case, despite the fact that B’s incentives
to choose y under CP are not, ceteris paribus, as strong as its incentives under RR, y is higher
because it is complementary with x. It could, of course, under an alternative specification for the
value created by original content and remixing have been the case that y under RR was higher than
y under CP and, indeed, because of complementarity, x may also be lower. Nonetheless, by
construction, under CP, both A and B potentially can have an interest in increasing the value
realized under remixing whereas under RR only B has that incentive while A is ambivalent.

15

Revenue Sharing Compensation (RC)
The lump-sum compensation approach suggests that B might have an interest in allowing A to
share some of their remix value (or revenue) in order to increase effort expended on x beyond that
focussed on original content revenue alone. Given this, here I consider an alternative approach to
remix rights and compensation based on the system implemented by YouTube.
YouTube allows copyright holders to identify when their content has been remixed for use on
YouTube videos (their Content ID system). When a match is made, the copyright holder can do
various things. It can block content and YouTube will pull the video. It can track the usage of its
content. And, finally, it can monetise that content. Under this last option, YouTube shows ads on the
content and the copyright holder receives revenue from those ads. At present, YouTube pays out
half of the ad revenues to the copyright holder and the performer.
The key feature of this system is that the platform permits users to remix and publish copy
protected works. However, it also commits, upfront, to compensation based on a share of revenues
accruing to the remixed endeavours. While this is not a remix right per se, it is permissive and
encouraging of remixing. What it does, essentially, is ask copyright holders to ‘opt out’ of revenue
sharing and, in the process, potentially block the remixed work. Consequently, it is useful to
compare what this does to remixing and overall efficiency.
To do this, we move the platform to the background and assume it does not take a cut itself
but merely serves as a commitment mechanism for upfront revenue sharing. In the context of the
model here, it is as if A could announce and pre-commit to a revenue share, r, of u(x,y,s) that it will
require from B.5 For the moment, it will be assumed that this transfer takes place if B chooses s > 0
and that if B does not agree to this, the remix is blocked.
With this mechanism, A and B’s problems become:
! x * ∈arg max x π (x, s * (x)) + ru(x, y* (x), s * (x)) − C(x)
! {y* (x * ), s * (x * )} ∈arg max y,s (1− r)u(x * , y, s) − C(y)
From this, it is clear that ! sRC = 1 as, ex post, B has no incentive to restrict usage. Thus, B chooses y
on this basis where ! yRC ≤ yRR as the latter is determined without a share of u appropriated by A. For
A, it has an incentive to increase u as it receives a share of that and unlike under CP, this is not

5

YouTube used to only pay a share of revenue to the owner of copy-protected material in a video with the remixer
being unable to earn revenue. However, recently, YouTube has relaxed this approach — for instance, for cover songs —
and has moved towards a model closer to the one that is specified here.

16

diminished by B’s bargaining power. Thus, whether A’s choice of x is higher or not depends on
comparing r to α.
As has been the case throughout this paper, it is instructive to examine the outcomes under the
specific functional form assumptions. Here, ! yRC = (1− r)θ x , while, taking this into account,
β
! x RC = 1−2(1−r
. Given this, it is easy to demonstrate that A’s ex ante expected payoff, ! rθ yRC and
)rθ 2

! x RC are all maximized if ! r = 12 . Thus, I will use this as a benchmark for comparison although it
should be noted that B, if facing an unconstrained choice, would choose a lower r. Thus, ! x RC = 1−β1θ 2
2

and ! yRC =

θβ
2−θ 2

.

This set-up does not lead to an easy comparison between copyright regimes. For instance,
note that:
β −α
! xCP > x RC ⇒ 1−21+
> 1−β1θ 2 ⇒
α (1−α )θ 2
2

1− 21θ 2

βθ

2

>

1
2 −2 α (1−α )

1−α

so long as ! θ > θ CP . Otherwise,
! xCP > x RC ⇒ 1+ β > 1−β1θ 2 ⇒ 1− 12 θ 2 > 1+ββ
2

This occurs because remixing always occurs under RC but only sometimes under CP (and RR).
While a high α decreases incentives in remixing and overall profits, under CP, in this case, no
remixing will be permitted for precisely that reason.
This suggests that perhaps an alternative (softer) version of RC is warranted. Suppose that ex
ante, A nominates a share r if sampling takes place but can also choose not to make that offer and
block remixing as a default. Thus, A commits ex ante whether to allow remixing or not in contrast
to CP where it is a negotiation or RR where it is B’s discretion. If remixing occurs, this leads to the
2

same outcomes as above where A expects a payoff of ! (2−βθ 2 )2 θ 2 . However, if remixing is not
permitted, A’s profits are: ! 12 (1+ β )2 . Thus, A will choose to permit remixing if ! (2−θθ 2 ) ≥

1 1+ β
2 β

. This

suggests that for high levels of β and ! θ this regime will encourage more remixing than what would
arise under CP; precisely because in cases where such remixing benefits A, A can commit for it to
occur.

VI. Conclusion
This paper has provided the first characterisation of copyright regimes in a framework where
copy-protected material can be used for remixed content creation and where negotiations over the

17

extent of such activity take place using a property rights approach. In so doing, new rationales in
support of traditional copyright protection regimes (where rights reside with the original content
creator) have been provided. However, it has also been demonstrated how fair use regimes can
improve social welfare and how remix rights regimes can do this as well as minimising transaction
costs, if any, associated with negotiation of content reuse.
Empirically, the impact of digitisation provides an opportunity to test the broad theory
proposed here. Specifically, digitisation increases the incentives for remixing and consequently the
reuse of content in a way that may harm the original content provider’s incentives. However, the
opportunity to negotiate over the extent of that harm provides a Coasian-route to improved
efficiency. Thus, while no copyright protection may lead to worse outcomes for original content
provider incentives as digitisation progress, traditional copyright protection may improve the
opportunities for remixing as there are more rents to be shared with those original content creators.
Interestingly, traditional copyright protection may fail precisely where the returns to remixing
afford by digitisation are least. In that situation, a remix rights regime that is more permissive of
remixing without negotiation may prove more efficient and lead to higher incentives to create
content by both original content creators and remixers. Of course, the extent of that improvement is
obviated by the share of original content creator rents that may be dissipated by remixing.

18

Figure 1: Timeline
A and B
negotiate
over (s,t)

Rights
regime
set
A chooses x

Payoffs
realised

B chooses y

Figure 2: Optimality of Remix Rights

θ

RR >
CP

RR = CP

CP > RR

CP > RR

β

19

VII.Appendix

Proof of Proposition 2
Note first that:
( β + α (1− s))( s (1− α ) + α )θ 2
! θ yNC =
< 1 ⇒ ( β + (α − 2)(1− s)) ( s (1− α ) + α )θ 2 < 1 .
1+ 2 (1− s ) ( s (1− α ) + α )αθ 2
Consider first an equilibrium where $ sNC = 0 . In this case, ! x NC = 1+2β α+α2θ 2 and ! yNC =

( β +α )αθ
1+2 α 2θ 2

. A

necessary condition for this to be an equilibrium outcome is ! ( β + α − 2 )αθ 2 < 1 . This clearly holds
if $ β ≤ 2 − α . Otherwise, the equilibrium will require that ! θ 2 < ( β +α1−2)α .
Now consider a possible equilibrium where $ sNC = 1 . In this case, ! x NC = β and ! yNC = θβ . A
necessary condition for this to be an equilibrium is ! θ 2 ≥ β1 .
To examine whether these are equilibrium outcomes. We consider two cases depending upon
whether $ β ≤ (>)2 − α . First, if $ β ≤ 2 − α , then ! β1 > ( β +α1−2)α and, as noted above, $ sNC = 0 is an
equilibrium outcome. But what happens if ! θ 2 > β1 > ( β +α1−2)α ? Then A by choosing $ x NC = 1+2β α+α2θ 2 or
$ x NC = β can determine whether the negotiated s equals 0 or 1. A’s payoff for a choice of s = 0 is
$ 1+2β α+α2θ 2 β + α

(

β +α
1+2 α 2θ 2

) (

β +α )αθ
− θ (1+2
− 12
α 2θ 2

)

2
β +α
2 2
1+2 α θ

while its payoff for a choice of s = 1 is $ β − 12 β 2 . It is

easy to show that the former exceeds the latter. Thus, if ! θ 2 > β1 > ( β +α1−2)α , the unique equilibrium
outcome involves $ sNC = 0 .
Second, if $ β > 2 − α , then note that it can never be the case that ! β1 > ( β +α1−2)α as this implies
that ! (β + α − 2)α > β ⇒ (α − 2)α > β (1− α ) which can never hold as the LHS is negative. Thus,
! ( β +α1−2)α ≥ β1 . Thus, either (i) ! θ 2 > ( β +α1−2)α ≥ β1 ; (ii) ! ( β +α1−2)α > θ 2 ≥

1
β

or (iii) ! ( β +α1−2)α > β1 > θ 2 . For

case (i), $ sNC = 1 is the unique equilibrium outcome. For case (ii) we have already noted that this
allows A to choose whether remixing occurs or not and A will find it optimal to choose x so that it
does not occur. Finally, for (iii), $ sNC = 0 or $ sNC = 1 is the unique equilibrium outcome.
Finally, note that ! θ 2 > ( β +α1−2)α and $ β > 2 − α implies $ β > θ 21α + 2 − α .

Proof of Proposition 3
First, consider the negotiated choice of s. Observe that:
s (1− α ) (1+ β − sα )θ 2
θ yCP =
>1
1− 2s 2 (1− α )αθ 2

! ⇒ s (1− α ) (1+ β − sα )θ 2 > 1− 2s 2 (1− α )αθ 2
1
⇒ β > θ 2 (1−
− 1− α
α)

β −α
1
Thus, if ! β is sufficiently high (specifically, ! β > θ 2 (1−
− 1− α ), ! sCP = 1 . In this case, ! xCP = 1−21+
α)
α (1−α )θ 2
(1−α )(1+ β −α )
and ! yCP = θ1−2
. Otherwise, ! sCP = 0 with ! xCP = 1+ β and ! yCP = 0 .
α (1−α )θ 2

20

! xCP

Comparing these to the equilibrium choices under NC, it is easy to demonstrate that
> x NC and that if ! β ≥ βCP , then ! yCP > yNC as well.

Proof of Proposition 4
First, note that if the negotiated s is 0, then surplus is:
! π (x * (0),0) + u(x * (0), y* (x * (0)),0) − C(x * (0)) − C(y* (x * (0))) =

(1+ β − s (1−α ))(1+ β + s (1−α )+ s 2α 2 ( 3+3β + s (1−α ))θ 2 )

(

2 1+2 s 2α 2θ 2

)

2

which is decreasing in s. Thus, in this case, it is optimal to set s = 0 with resulting surplus of
! 12 (1+ β ) . On the other hand, if the negotiated s is 1, then surplus is:
2

! π (x * (1),1) + u(x * (1), y* (x * (1)),1) − C(x * (1)) − C(y* (x * (1))) =

(

( β +(1− s )(1−α )) β + β (1−(1− s )α )(1−3(1− s )α )θ 2 −(1− s )(1−α )(1−(1−(1− s )2 α 2 )θ 2 )

)

(
)
and becomes negative for low β. If we take the derivative of this with respect to s and then look at
the limit as s goes to 1, we have ! − βθ 2 (1− α + 2 βαθ 2 ) < 0 . Note that, if s = 1, then the surplus
2 1−2(1− s )α (1−(1− s )α )θ

2 2

(when s = 1) becomes: ! 12 β 2 (1+ θ 2 ) which exceeds ! 12 (1+ β ) (the surplus when s = 0) as β becomes
2

large.

Proof of Proposition 5
In this case, ! x RR = β + 1 while ! yRR = θ s . Consequently, ! sRR = 1 if ! θ > θ RR = 1 and 0 otherwise.
For comparisons, note first that when ! sCP = 0 , then ! x RR = xCP > x NC and ! yRR = yCP = 0 . Note that for
CP, this occurs when ! θ < θ CP =

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

where ! θ RR > θ CP ⇒ 1 >

When ! θ ≥ θ RR ,θ CP , ! sRR = sCP = 1 and it can be seen that:
β −α
> 1+ β ⇒ θ >
! xCP > x RR ⇒ xCP = 1−21+
α (1−α )θ 2
Note that ! θ CP >

1
(1+ β )2(1−α )

1
(1−α )( β +1+α )

⇒ β > 1−α α .
2

1
(1+ β )2(1−α )

, and thus, this relationship holds. By contrast,
(1−α )(1+ β −α )
>θ ⇒θ2 >
! yCP > yRR ⇒ θ1−2
α (1−α )θ 2

− β +αβ −α 2
2 α (1−α )

which always holds.
When ! θ RR > θ > θ CP (which can arise if ! β > 1−α α ), ! sRR = 0 while ! sCP = 1 and it is clear that
both ! xCP > x RR and ! yCP > yRR .
2

Finally, if ! θ CP > θ > θ RR (which can arise if ! β < 1−α α ), ! sRR = 1 while ! sCP = 0 . In this case,
= xCP > x NC while ! yRR > yCP = 0 .
2

! x RR

21

VIII. References

Boldrin, M. and D.K. Levine (2010), Against Intellectual Monopoly, Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge.
Depoorter, B., & Parisi, F. (2002). Fair use and copyright protection: a price theory explanation.
International Review of Law and Economics, 21(4), 453–473.
Green, J. and Scotchmer (1995), On the division of profit in sequential innovation. RAND Journal
of Economics, 26 (1), 20-33.
Hart., O.D. (1995), Firms, Contracts and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press: Oxford.
Halonen-Akatwijuka, M. and T. Regner (2009), Digital Technology and the Allocation of
Ownership in the Music Industry. Jena Economic Research Paper, No.96, Max Planck.
Johnson, W. R. (1985). The Economics of Copying. Journal of Political Economy, 93(1), 158–174.
Katz, A. (2013). Copyright and competition policy, in R. Towse and C. Handke (eds.), Handbook of
the Digital Creative Economy, Edward Elgar: Cheltenham, 209-21.
Landes, W. M., & Posner, R. A. (1989). An economic analysis of copyright law. The Journal of
Legal Studies, 18(2), 325–363.
Lessig, L. (2008), Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy, Penguin: New
York.
Miceli, T. J., & Adelstein, R. P. (2006). An economic model of fair use. Information Economics and
Policy, 18(4), 359–373.
Novos, I. E., & Waldman, M. (1984). The Effects of Increased Copyright Protection: An Analytic
Approach. Journal of Political Economy, 92(2), 236–246.
Pitchford, R., & Snyder, C. M. (2003). Coming to the Nuisance: An Economic Analysis from an
Incomplete Contracts Perspective. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 19(2), 491–
516.

