PATERNALISM AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY:
AN OVERVIEW
Hunt Allcott
WORKING PAPER 20363

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATERNALISM AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY:
AN OVERVIEW
Hunt Allcott
Working Paper 20363
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20363

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

I particularly thank Dmitry Taubinsky for helpful feedback and important ideas. I also thank other
collaborators on related projects (Michael Greenstone, Chris Knittel, Sendhil Mullainathan, Cass
Sunstein, Rich Sweeney, and Nathan Wozny), colleagues including Doug Bernheim, John
Beshears, Severin Borenstein, Meghan Busse, Lucas Davis, Stefano DellaVigna, Ken
Gillingham, David Laibson, Jim Sallee, Josh Schwartzstein, Dick Thaler, Catherine Wolfram,
seminar participants at the Environmental Protection Agency, Princeton, the Harvard “Evaluating
the Energy Efficiency Gap” conference, and the 2014 Behavioral Economics Annual Meeting
(BEAM), and many others for thoughtful discussions. I am grateful to the Sloan and MacArthur
foundations for financial support. Code to replicate the empirical analyses is available from my
website. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20363.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hunt Allcott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Paternalism and Energy Efficiency: An Overview
Hunt Allcott
NBER Working Paper No. 20363
August 2014
JEL No. D03,D12,D83,H21,L51,L94,Q41,Q48
ABSTRACT
This review paper provides an overview of the application of behavioral public economics to
energy efficiency. I document policymakers' arguments for “paternalistic” energy efficiency
policies, formalize with a simple model of misoptimizing consumers, review and critique
empirical evidence, and suggest future research directions. While empirical results suggest that
policies to address imperfect information and internalities may increase welfare in some cases,
some existing policies may be mistargeted or miscalibrated.

Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Governments frequently intervene to protect citizens from our own choices. For example, the
U.S. and many other countries tax or ban hard drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes. Motorcycle helmet
and automobile seat belt laws are common, as are safety standards for food and other products.
Usury laws and other regulations protect consumers from their own financial decisions. “Life-cycle
myopia” is one potential justification for mandatory retirement savings programs (Feldstein and
Liebman 2002).
Without models of imperfect information or misoptimization, economics would have little useful
to say about these policies: with perfect information and optimizing consumers, any restriction of
consumer choice mechanically reduces consumer welfare, essentially by assumption. Information
economics and behavioral public economics provide the tools to formalize and test hypotheses about
“mistakes” and to evaluate the welfare effects of “paternalistic” policies.1 I use the word “mistakes”
to cover any reason why our decisions don’t maximize our own welfare, including that we don’t
know or don’t properly value the consequences. In a world with mistakes, “paternalistic” is not a
pejorative word - instead, it is a descriptive term that clarifies policy goals and defines empirical
hypotheses.
This paper is an overview of the application of behavioral public economics to energy efficiency
policy. Along with externality reduction, which of course would be best achieved through Pigouvian
taxes, consumer mistakes are offered as an important justification for policies such as subsidies for
energy efficient goods and minimum energy efficiency standards.2 I begin by reviewing the policy
argument and formalizing it in a simple consumer choice model. I use the model to characterize
three categories of empirical tests for mistakes: comparing demand responses to prices vs. energy
costs, measuring effects of nudges, and belief elicitation. These tests have direct analogies in other
domains such as consumer finance and health, and the categorization draws on similar discussions
in DellaVigna (2009) and Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012). I then discuss tests
between different behavioral models, outline emerging policy implications, and suggest directions
for future research.
This review does not cover the literature on how energy conservation marketing campaigns,
social norm information, goal setting, and other tools from applied psychology affect energy use.3
1

In the past ten years, a growing number of papers have made empirical or theoretical contributions to behavioral
public economics, including Baicker, Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein (2015), Bernheim and Rangel (2004, 2009),
Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2009), Chetty (2015), Gabaix and Laibson (2006), Grubb (2014),
Grubb and Osborne (2015), Gruber and Koszegi (2004), Gul and Pesendorfer (2007), Gruber and Mullainathan
(2005), Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012), O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006), and others.
2
See Allcott and Greenstone (2012), Gerarden, Newell, and Stavins (2015), Gillingham, Newell, and Palmer (2009),
and Gillingham and Palmer (2014) for broader reviews of energy efficiency policy. Allcott and Sunstein (2015) discuss
regulation of internalities with a focus on energy efficiency.
3
Recent work includes Allcott (2011a), Allcott and Rogers (2014), Asensio and Delmas (2015), Ayres, Raseman,
and Shih (2013), Costa and Kahn (2013), Delmas and Lessem (2014), Dolan and Metcalfe (2015), Harding and Hsiaw
(2014), Ito, Ida, and Tanaka (2015), Sudarshan (2014), Yoeli, Hoffman, Rand, and Nowak (2013), and many others.

2

Many of these interventions could act through persuasion instead of correcting consumer mistakes,
so the regulatory policy implications are unclear unless one can distinguish between these two
channels and develop a model of socially-optimal persuasion.4

2

Background

2.1

Why Energy Matters

Expenditures on energy and energy-using durables represent a significant share of the economy
in industrialized countries. In 2011, US households purchased $361 billion worth of energy-using
durable goods such as cars and air conditioners and another $570 billion on gasoline, electricity,
natural gas, and fuel oil (BLS 2014). Even relatively small inefficiencies in such large markets could
quickly add up to large welfare losses.
There is also increased policy interest due to environmental externalities from energy use, including greenhouse gas and local pollution emissions and national security concerns related to oil
imports. US household energy use imposes $40 billion in carbon pollution externalities, plus additional externalities from local air pollution.5 Any systematic consumer mistakes that increase
energy use would also increase externalities.

2.2

Energy Efficiency Policies

The United States has a number of policies that encourage energy efficiency, many of which were
introduced as energy prices rose in the 1970s. Table 1 presents the most significant US policies,
organized into three categories. Many other industrialized countries and large developing countries
have similar policies.
The first category is standards. The Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975 called for
minimum energy efficiency standards for home appliances. The first meaningful nationwide standards were finally implemented in 1990, and since then the standards have been strengthened and
additional products included. The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 set minimum
lighting efficiency standards that banned most traditional incandescent lightbulbs between 2012
and 2014 and will be tightened further in 2020. Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China,
Cuba, the European Union, Israel, Malaysia, Russia, and Switzerland have also banned some or
all incandescent light bulbs. Many states have building codes that mandate minimum insulation
levels and other energy efficiency measures. Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards
4

See Allcott and Kessler (2015) for one initial step in this direction.
This number is the product of the $38 social cost of carbon for 2013 estimated by the Interagency Working Group
on Social Cost of Carbon (2013) and total household carbon emissions from energy use estimated by the US Energy
Information Administration (2014).
5

3

require that each auto manufacturer’s fleet of new cars and trucks meet a minimum average mile
per gallon (MPG) rating.
The second category is price policies, i.e. taxes and subsidies. There were federal income tax
credits of up to $3,400 for hybrid vehicles from 2006 to 2010, and credits of up to $7,500 are currently available for plug-in hybrids and electric vehicles. There are federal “gas guzzler taxes” range
from $1,000 to $7,700 on the sale of low-MPG passenger cars. The Weatherization Assistance Program grants $250 million for improved insulation, air sealing, and other weatherization measures
at approximately 100,000 low-income homes each year. Electricity bill surcharges fund billions
of dollars of utility-implemented “demand-side management” programs, which include subsidized
home energy audits, energy efficiency information provision, and subsidies for energy efficient appliances, weatherization, and other investments. The 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act included substantial increases in energy efficiency subsidies. In total, that legislation and related economic stimulus bills included $17 billion in energy efficiency spending, including additional
weatherization subsidies and automobile and appliance cash-for-clunkers programs.
The final category is information and marketing. The US government requires all new vehicles
to have fuel economy information labels, and appliances must be labeled with informational “yellow
tags.” Furthermore, the Environmental Protection Agency runs the Energy Star labeling and marketing program. Although cost data are not available for all programs, information and marketing
are cheap compared to the fiscal cost of subsidies or the production costs of energy efficient goods.

2.3

The Paternalistic Rationale for Energy Efficiency Policy

Energy efficiency policies can address several different market failures, including environmental
externalities and spillovers of returns to innovation. Imperfect information and misoptimization,
however, are central to the policy discussion. This section documents that with several examples.
Some of the earliest behavioral language is from Jerry Hausman’s (1979) seminal analysis of
the implied discount rates that rationalize consumers’ tradeoffs between purchase price and energy
efficiency in air conditioner purchases. On page 51, Hausman writes:
This finding of a high individual discount rate does not surprise most economists. At
least since Pigou, many economists have commented on a “defective telescopic faculty.”
A simple fact emerges that in making decisions which involve discounting over time,
individuals behave in a manner which implies a much higher discount rate than can be
explained in terms of the opportunity cost of funds available in credit markets. Since this
individual discount rate substantially exceeds the social discount rate used in benefit-cost
calculations, the divergence might be narrowed by policies which lead to purchases of
more energy-efficient equipment.
The next year, the U.S. Department of Energy relied heavily on this argument in its Regulatory
4

Impact Analysis (RIA) of the first appliance energy efficiency standards. Using engineering analyses
of appliance costs and energy savings, the RIA found that the proposed standards would generate
large net private benefits for consumers. Of course, regulation can only generate private net benefits
if consumers’ original choices did not maximize their utility, i.e. if they were making what I
call “mistakes.” Given this realization, the Department of Energy and other federal agencies
debated whether consumers were “uninformed” and “myopic”; see Regulatory Analysis Review
Group (1980).
Engineering cost calculations in subsequent RIAs have consistently found that further strengthened energy efficiency standards generate large net private benefits. For example, the RIA for
the 2012-2016 CAFE standard (NHTSA 2010) found that $15 billion per year in consumer welfare
gains will accrue to consumers who would be induced to buy higher-fuel economy vehicles. Without
these private gains, the regulation is likely to be welfare-reducing - such stringent CAFE standards
cannot be justified by externalities alone. The RIA states (page 2):
Although the economy-wide or “social” benefits from requiring higher fuel economy represent an important share of the total economic benefits from raising CAFE standards,
NHTSA estimates that benefits to vehicle buyers themselves will significantly exceed the
costs of complying with the stricter fuel economy standards this rule establishes. [...]
This raises the question of why current purchasing patterns do not result in higher average fuel economy, and why stricter fuel efficiency standards should be necessary to
achieve that goal. To address this issue, the analysis examines possible explanations for
this apparent paradox, including discrepancies between the consumers’ perceptions of the
value of fuel savings and those calculated by the agency.
Similarly, the RIA for Australia’s phase-out of traditional incandescent lightbulbs (DEHWA 2008)
argues that internalities and information failures justify the policy, as well as asymmetric information in housing markets. Page vii states:
[Incandescent lightbulbs] continue to sell remarkably well because, if their energy costs
are ignored, they appear cheap ... There are significant information failures and split
incentive problems in the market for energy efficient lamps. Energy bills are aggregated
and periodic and therefore do not provide immediate feedback on the effectiveness of
individual energy saving investments. Consumers must therefore gather information
and perform a reasonably sophisticated calculation to compare the life-cycle costs of
tungsten filament lamps and CFLs. But many lack the skills. For others, the amounts
saved are too small to justify the effort or they do not remain at the same address long
enough to benefit fully from a long lived energy saving lamp.
Using similar arguments, lightbulb manufacturers and environmental groups lobbied together for
the US lighting efficiency standards. In congressional testimony, the National Electrical Manufac5

turers Association argued, “New standards-setting legislation is needed in order to further educate
consumers on the benefits of energy-efficient products” (US GPO 2007).6 The Natural Resources
Defense Council (2011) writes:
Some in Congress are considering repealing the new efficiency standards before they
even take effect. That would take away $12.5 billion in consumer savings—something
none of us can afford.
The RIA for the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007, which included the lighting
efficiency standards, argues that after accounting for incremental production costs, the lighting
standards will save consumers a net present value of $27 to $64 billion over 30 years (DOE 2009). As
with CAFE standards, private net benefits are considerably more important than carbon externality
reduction, which the EISA RIA values at no more than $16 billion over 30 years.
Gayer (2011) succinctly summarizes the argument:
Energy-efficiency regulations and fuel economy regulations are therefore justified by
[cost-benefit analyses] only by presuming that consumers are unable to make market
decisions that yield personal savings, that the regulator is able to identify these consumer mistakes, and that the regulator should correct economic harm that people do to
themselves.
Additional academic articles have followed Hausman (1979). Fischer, Harrington, and Parry (2007)
and Parry, Evans, and Oates (2010) use simulation models to analyze whether mistakes might
justify energy efficiency policies. In a review of fuel economy policies in the Journal of Economic
Literature, Parry, Walls, and Harrington (2007) conclude that:
Higher fuel economy standards significantly increase efficiency only if carbon and oil
dependence externalities greatly exceed the mainstream estimates . . . or if consumers
perceive only about a third of the actual fuel economy benefits.
Unfortunately, there is little in the way of solid empirical (as opposed to anecdotal)
evidence on this hotly contested issue ...
The rest of this paper formalizes these policy assertions in a model and provides an overview of
recent empirical evidence. Such empirical evidence is crucial: an alternative explanation for the
RIAs’ findings of large private net benefits is that their engineering cost calculations are overly
optimistic. If this is true, then energy efficiency policies based on these RIAs might actually be
welfare reducing.
6

US Senator Rand Paul has strong views on this argument. During congressional testimony by Kathleen Hogan,
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency at the Department of Energy, Paul said (ABC 2011), “You’re really
anti-choice on every other consumer item that you’ve listed here, including light bulbs, refrigerators, toilets – you
name it, you can’t go around your house without being told what to buy. You restrict my choices, you don’t care
about my choices.” Paul continues, “This is what your energy efficiency standards are. Call it what it is. You prevent
people from making things that consumers want.”

6

3

Model

3.1

Setup

This section formalizes policy assertions about consumer mistakes in a very simple model. It
roughly follows Allcott and Taubinsky (2015, “AT”) and Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky
(2014, “AMT”), but it also draws on work by Heutel (2011), Sallee (2014), and the frameworks in
DellaVigna (2009) and Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012).
Consumers have unit demand and choose between two energy-using durable goods, indexed
j ∈ {E, I}. Good E is more energy efficient than good I, with energy requirement rE < rI per unit
of usage. The goods are produced at marginal cost cj , and markets are perfectly competitive, with
pj = cj in the absence of a subsidy. Time is indexed by t, and the durables have fixed lifetime T .
Consumers have exogenous utilization of m units per unit time, the energy cost is e, and consumers
use discount factor δ. Predicted total lifetime energy costs for good j are thus:

gj ≡

T
X

δ t mrj e.

(1)

t=0

Consumers receive usage utility vj from owning good j. I define differences p ≡ pE − pI ,
v ≡ vE − vI , and g ≡ gI − gE . Notice that this defines g ≡ gI − gE instead of g ≡ gE − gI , so g > 0,
and g is energy cost savings.7

3.2

Specific Behavioral Models of Mistakes

Fully informed and optimizing consumers purchase good E if and only if the net benefits (usage
utility difference plus energy cost savings) outweigh the relative purchase price, i.e. if v + g > p. By
contrast, a biased consumer might misperceive energy cost savings by amount b, purchasing good
E if and only if v + g − b > p. Bias b could be positive. negative, or zero. As defined, b > 0 implies
that a consumer undervalues energy cost savings and is thus less likely to buy good E, while b < 0
implies the opposite. In the language of Herrnstein, Loewenstein, Prelec, and Vaughan (1993), b is
an “internality”: an externality that decisionmakers impose on themselves by not correctly valuing
all consequences of a decision.
Mistakes might arise through the following mechanisms:
Present bias. If consumers are present biased with β, δ preferences as in Laibson (1997), and
if they cannot save or borrow between periods, they downweight the future energy cost savings g
by factor β < 1, purchasing good E if v + βg > p.
Bias toward concentration. In Koszegi and Szeidl (2013), consumers underweight future
cash flows that, like energy bill savings, accrue in small amounts over many future dates. While
7

I assume here that g is certain and that the choice between E and I cannot be delayed. See Hassett and Metcalf
(1993) for a model of these issues.

7

many predictions differ from those of the present bias model, the implication is the same in this
simple framework: consumers downweight energy cost savings by β < 1.
Biased beliefs. Consumers’ beliefs about energy costs could be biased by factor φ. For
example, they could perceive that energy prices are ee = φe, or that the total energy cost difference
is ge = φg. In this case, they purchase good E if v + φg > p.
Costly information acquisition. Consumers might learn gE and gI only by incurring some
cost. Otherwise, they remain imperfectly informed. In some rational expectations models, consumers might assume that gE and gI both equal their average, purchasing good E if v > p.
Exogenous inattention. Similar to Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009), share λ of the population could be attentive to energy costs g, while share 1 − λ are exogenously fully inattentive,
purchasing E if v > p.
Endogenous inattention. In rational inattention models such as Gabaix (2014) and Sallee
(2014), consumers are more likely to pay attention to an attribute if it is more likely to matter in
their purchase decision. A simple way to capture this is to allow λ = λ(g), with

∂λ
∂g

> 0.

With present bias and bias toward concentration, b = (1 − β)g. In the biased beliefs model,
b = (1 − φ)g. Uninformed or inattentive consumers have b = g.

3.3

Policy Implications of Mistakes

If factors such as these can cause mistakes, the first-best policy would be some “nudge” that
eliminates the distortion. For example, if consumers are imperfectly informed or have biased
beliefs, one natural policy is to provide information. In practice, however, the ideal nudge may
not be feasible, and the policymaker must resort to a price or quantity instrument. The logic of
O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006) suggests that a tax or subsidy could increase welfare by offsetting
the bias, even if the first best is not achieved.
To see this, define F as the cumulative density function (CDF) of true valuations v+g, G(b|v+g)
as the CDF of b conditional on v + g, and H as the CDF of perceived valuations v + g − b. Let
DB (p) = 1 − H(p) denote the market demand curve for good E, and assume that F (·) and H(·)
are both smooth and strictly increasing. Also assume quasi-linear utility, which is reasonable if p
and g are small relative to total expenditures, and assume that there are no distortions other than
consumer mistakes.8
Consider a social planner that sets subsidy s for good E using public funds raised from lumpsum taxation, so p = c − s, and denote Z(s) as consumers’ after-tax income. The social planner
8

AT, AMT, Heutel (2015), and Tsvetanov and Segerson (2013, 2014) consider the case with both internalities and
externalities. In these models, the optimal policy is a combination of product subsidies and energy taxes, although
the energy tax will not necessarily equal the externality. One result of these models is that externality taxes can
actually increase consumer welfare (even without including externality benefits) if they also reduce internalities; AMT
call this the “internality dividend.”

8

maximizes social welfare
ˆ
W (s) = Z(s) + vI − gI − pI +

(v + g − p)dF dG.

(2)

v+g−b≥p

If all consumers have homogeneous bias b† , then subsidy s = b† causes consumers to purchase
good E if and only if v +g −b† > c−s. The s and b† cancel, and the first best is achieved: consumers
make the same purchase that they would make if they were rational and perfectly informed and
had to pay marginal cost. Thus, the welfare-maximizing subsidy is s∗ = b† : a subsidy that exactly
offsets the bias.
When consumers have heterogeneous bias, AT show that the average marginal bias function
B(p) is a sufficient statistic for the optimal subsidy. Formally, B(p) is the average b of all consumers
that are marginal at price p: B(p) = EG (b|v + g − b = p). The welfare change from a marginal
change in the subsidy is
0
W 0 (s) = (s − B(p))DB
(p)

(3)

Relative to no subsidy, the welfare effect of a subsidy of amount s is approximately:
∆W (s) ≈

s2 0
DB (p)
|2 {z }

0
− sDB
(p) · EH (B(x)|p − s ≤ x ≤ p)
|
{z
}

(4)

Internality reduction

Harberger distortion

Using this equation, AT highlight the two effects of a corrective subsidy. First, the subsidy
increases allocative efficiency through internality reduction, which is the product of the change
0 (p) and the average marginal bias E (B(x)|p − s ≤ x ≤ p). Secin quantity demanded −sDB
H

ond, however, it distorts consumers’ perceived optimal decisions, generating a standard Harberger
deadweight loss triangle.
Setting the welfare derivative in Equation (3) equal to zero gives that the optimal subsidy s∗
equals the average marginal bias:
s∗ = B(c − s∗ )

(5)

AT, AMT, Baicker, Mullainathan, and Schwartzstein (2015), and Mullainathan, Schwartzstein,
and Congdon (2012) derive this basic result that the optimal internality tax equals the average
marginal internality. This directly parallels Diamond (1973), who shows that the optimal externality tax equals the average marginal externality.
Although this framework is highly stylized, it generates insights for a broad class of policies: at
least in simple models, the most important policies listed in Table 1 are isomorphic to a subsidy
s. Subsidies for Energy Star appliances and weatherization can be analyzed directly, although
typically it would be necessary to extend the model to incorporate more than two products. With
9

unit demand and lump-sum taxation or revenue recycling, a gas guzzler tax or analogous tax on
good I is isomorphic to a subsidy, and a minimum energy efficiency standard is an infinite tax on
good I. CAFE standards impose a shadow cost on vehicle sales that can be approximated as a
subsidy for high-MPG vehicles.
Equations (4) and (5) emphasize the importance of empirical work that can identify B(p). Some
issues matter for welfare analysis, while others do not. First, B(p) could naturally be heterogeneous
at different p, and different types of consumers could be marginal to different policies. Thus, to set
and evaluate subsidies and standards, it is insufficient to know just the population average bias.
Second, B(p) is a “reduced form” description of the behavioral models described above in Section
3.2. Once we know B(p), the optimal subsidy and welfare evaluation does not depend on whether
consumers are present biased, inattentive, or biased in some other way.

4

Empirical Tests

This section discusses three empirical tests: comparing demand responses to prices vs. energy
costs, measuring effects of nudges, and belief elicitation. These tests are directly analogous to the
three empirical studies in Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) and are parallel to categories of tests
described in Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012). The first two tests also parallel
two of DellaVigna’s (2009) proposed methods of testing for inattention, although as we shall see,
they are joint tests of inattention and other behavioral models.

4.1

Comparing Demand Responses

A general test for systematically misperceived costs is to compare demand response to a correctlyperceived cost vs. a potentially misperceived cost. This is the approach followed by Abaluck and
Gruber (2011), Barber, Odean, and Zheng (2005), Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009), Finkelstein
(2009), Hossain and Morgan (2006), and others when studying sales taxes, shipping and handling
charges, highway tolls, and other potentially shrouded costs.
The energy efficiency version of this test is to compare demand response to price vs. energy
cost. Consumers should care only about the total lifetime cost of using a car, not the individual
components of that cost. Thus, consumers should be indifferent between a dollar of upfront price
and a present discounted dollar of energy costs. Many papers have implemented this test, including
Dubin (1992), Dubin and McFadden (1984), Goldberg (1998), Grigolon, Reynaert, and Verboven
(2014), Hausman (1979), and Houde and Spurlock (2015). A simple representation of the approach
is to imagine cross-sectional data on market shares and product attributes in a logit model. Define
sj , Xj , and ξj as the market share, observed characteristics, and unobserved characteristic of
product j. In the representative consumer logit model, the market share equation is

10

ln(sj ) = −η(pj + γgj ) + αXj + ξj .

(6)

If the estimated γ̂ is smaller (larger) than one, this implies that consumers undervalue (overvalue) one dollar of energy cost gj relative to purchase price pj .
A crucial part of the approach is estimating gj . This requires expectations of future energy
costs, utilization patterns, and discount rates.9 Of course, estimating the “implied discount rate”
that gives γ = 1 does not eliminate the need to take a stand on discount rates, as once an implied
discount rate is estimated, it must be compared to some benchmark rate to determine if consumers
are behaving according to some benchmark model. The need to make assumptions to calculate
gj makes it more complicated to implement this test with energy efficiency relative to sales taxes,
shipping and handling fees, or other costs that are easily quantified and are paid at the time of
purchase. On the other hand, many other product attributes - a car’s horsepower, the sweetness
of strawberry jam, etc. - cannot be monetized, and this test could not be implemented at all.
One immediate problem with the cross-sectional test is the endogeneity of both pj and gj .
As Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) and others have pointed out, prices are likely to be correlated with unobserved characteristics ξj . Furthermore, energy efficiency, which generates the
cross-sectional variation in gj , is also likely to be correlated with ξj . For example, an “economy”
car both has high fuel economy and fewer amenities, and not all amenities are observed by the
econometrician. Allcott and Wozny (2014) show that fuel economy is highly negatively correlated
with price in a cross section of vehicles, suggesting the low-fuel economy vehicles have more observed
and unobserved amenities.
To address these issues, Allcott and Wozny (2014, “AW”), Busse, Knittel, and Zettelmeyer
(2013, “BKZ”), and Sallee, West and Fan (2016, “SWF”) exploit variation in g and p from panel
data on used auto markets. Allow jat to index a model j of age a at time t, for example a threeyear-old Honda Civic DX in 2006. In used markets, sja is fixed over time by definition because
vehicles of a given model year have already been produced.10 Defining ξja as a model fixed effect
and including time indicators τt , Equation (6) can be re-arranged as:
pjat = γgjat + ξja + τt + jat .

(7)

Figure 1 gives graphical intuition for the identification, using data from AW. It is constructed by
9

See Allcott (2011), Allcott and Wozny (2014), and Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013) for evidence on consumers’ energy price predictions. Anderson, Kellogg, and Sallee (2013) use Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC)
data from 1993-2010 to show that on average, consumers believed that the future real price of gasoline would equal
the current price. However, both oil futures markets and MSC consumers believed that the price shocks of 2008
were temporary. Allcott and Wozny (2014) show that used vehicle prices move as if consumers’ forecasts are some
combination of current and futures prices.
10
AW exclude vehicles older than 15 years, as they reject that scrappage is exogenous to gasoline prices for these
older vehicles.

11

grouping above-median and below-median fuel economy vehicles into composite groups, analogous
to goods E and I. Each point on the graph is a month of the sample, from 1999 through the end
of 2008. The y-axis plots the mean price difference pI − pE = −p, while the x-axis plots the mean
gas cost difference gI − gE = g. Notice that low-MPG cars are both more expensive and have
higher gj , so −p and g are both positive. This graph plots raw data, before removing fixed effects
or including other controls. The graph shows that the line slopes downward: as gas prices increase,
the relative gas costs of good I increase, and relative prices drop in response. Thus, consumers are
clearly highly responsive to gas prices. The more responsive are relative prices to gasoline costs,
the more that we infer that consumers value fuel economy.
AW estimate a 15 percent implied discount rate, meaning that γ = 1 when they assume δ =

1
1.15 .

They calculate consumers’ weighted average intertemporal opportunity cost of capital based on used
car loan interest rates from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) and returns to the S&P 500,
and weight these two by the share of consumers that pay with loans vs. cash. This weighted
average is 6 percent, which gives δ =

1
1+6% .

At this δ, the γ̂ in AW’s primary specification is 0.76.

They also estimate γ̂ for a range of alternative assumptions and specifications.
Using an analogous approach that compares vehicles in different quartiles of the MPG distribution, BKZ report a range of implied discount rates from -6.8 percent to 20.9 percent, depending on
the assumptions used to calculate g and the quartiles being compared. When using assumptions
that correspond most closely to AW’s primary specification (vehicle-miles traveled and survival
probabilities from the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration), the average implied discount rate for used vehicles is 13 percent. At δ =

1
1+6% ,

this gives γ̂ = 0.78. However,

BKZ’s implied discount rates drop under alternative estimates of vehicle miles-traveled, and the
auto loan interest rates in BKZ’s data appear to be higher than in the SCF, so their benchmark
δ is different. Thus, BKZ conclude that they find little evidence that auto consumers undervalue
future gasoline costs.
SWF have a slightly different empirical specification: they include separate model-age fixed
effects for every month in their sample, as well as flexible controls for each transacted vehicle’s
odometer reading. Autos with less past mileage have a longer future life, and so their transaction
prices should be more responsive to changes in gas prices. SWF are thus testing a different hypothesis than AW and BKZ: whether consumers recognize that gas price changes should differentially
affect older vs. newer vehicles, instead of high-MPG vs. low-MPG vehicles. Although the AW and
BKZ question is one step closer to the policy question of how consumers value fuel economy, SWF
can include a larger set of controls, and their test is plausibly a nested test: if consumers fully
value how gas prices differentially affect vehicles of the same model and model year with different
odometer readings, it’s likely that they fully value how gas prices differentially affect models with
different MPG ratings. SWF’s baseline model gives robust estimates consistent with full valuation,
but they emphasize that different assumptions around the construction of gj can shift the coefficient

12

estimate in either direction.
As I discuss more in Section 6.2 below, while these three papers differ, their results are consistent
in showing that consumers are highly responsive to gas prices, and they can rule out the magnitude
of mistakes that would be required to justify the stringency of the current CAFE standard.
Houde (2014a) estimates a model of the refrigerator market that can also be categorized as
“comparing demand responses.” He first estimates an analogue to Equation (6) with model fixed
effects, identifying the γ parameter using the fact that consumers in different counties and states pay
different electricity prices. This variation consistently identifies γ as long as geographic variation
in models stocked and consumer preferences is not correlated with electricity prices. The base
specification gives an implied discount rate of 62 percent. Houde then posits a structural model
in which some consumers are fully inattentive to electricity costs, some are fully attentive, and a
third group forms expectations of electricity costs using only the Energy Star label. The model
is identified by changes in the choice set over his 2007-2011 sample: models enter and exit, prices
change, and some models lost their Energy Star certification due to the discovery of a testing error.
The share of consumers that substitute equally to models regardless of electricity use represents
the share of inattentive consumers, and the share that substitute equally to all Energy Star models
regardless of electricity use, but prefer Energy Star to not Energy Star, is the share that attend
only to Energy Star. Consistent with his high implied discount rate, Houde finds that the modal
consumer is fully inattentive, and many other consumers are attentive only to the Energy Star label
and not the exact level of electricity use.
4.1.1

What Parameter Do the Used Vehicle Market Studies Identify?

dp
AW, BKZ, and SWF all estimate the γ̂ = − dg
from Equation (7) using the “comparing demand

responses” identification strategy. In the choice models from Section 3, what does this γ̂ represent?
AMT’s Section 4.3 shows that if the bias is exogenous to gas price changes, γ̂ can measure the
average marginal bias. When bias is endogenous, however, as in the endogenous attention and costly
information acquisition models, relative prices move more than would be predicted in exogenous
bias models. Intuitively, as gas prices increase, the relative prices of high-MPG vehicles increase
both because they are more valuable to attentive consumers and because more consumers become
attentive and thus are willing to pay for fuel economy. Thus, when attention or information
acquisition is endogenous, the comparing demand responses identification strategy will overstate
the share of attentive consumers λ at initial prices. This is an issue not just for AW, BKZ, SWF,
and other energy papers, but for papers in other domains such as Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009)
that use an analogous approach to identify the magnitude of inattention.11
11
AT also show that even when each consumer’s attention or bias is exogenous, comparing demand responses only
approximates the average marginal bias B(p) when b is heterogeneous across consumers and not independent of v.
They show that the approximation can be highly inexact, which provides a further challenge to this approach.

13

4.2

Estimating Effects of Nudges

Building on Thaler and Sunstein (2008), AT define a “pure nudge” as an intervention that eliminates bias but has no other effects. For example, providing information on energy costs can cause
consumers who were previously uninformed or inattentive to make privately-optimal decisions. In
theory, pure nudges can identify the average marginal bias function. To see this, consider the set
of consumers who have baseline willingness-to-pay (WTP) of v + g − b = p and are thus marginal
at price p. Since the pure nudge causes consumers to make the same decisions they would make
if they were informed and rational, their average WTP after being given a pure nudge is just the
average of their (v + g). Thus, τ (p), the average WTP change from a pure nudge for consumers
marginal at price p, equals the average marginal bias:
τ (p) = EG ((v + g) − (v + g − b)|v + g − b = p) = EG (b|v + g − b = p) = B(p)

(8)

Carrera and Villas-Boas (2014), Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009), Choi, Laibson, and Madrian
(2010), Kling et al. (2012), and others measure the effects of information in choices between
generic and branded drugs, sales taxes, retirement savings, health insurance, and other domains.
DellaVigna (2009) points to Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) as an example of how treatment
effects from experimentally-provided information can be a measure of bias from inattention. Of
course, nudges only identify the magnitudes of the specific biases they target: information provision
can eliminate imperfect information and inattention, but it does not affect or identify present bias.
Offering state-contingent commitment contracts could identify present bias for sophisticates, but
this does not affect or identify imperfect information.
In the context of energy efficiency, the nudge identification strategy might take the form of
measuring effects of durable good energy cost information. Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) run two
informational field experiments with lightbulb buyers. The AT study is motivated by the fact that
only 28 percent of light sockets in American homes that could accommodate compact fluorescent
lightbulbs (CFLs) actually had them as of 2010, despite the fact that a standard 60-watt-equivalent
CFL saves $40 in electricity and bulb replacement costs over its rated eight-year life relative to
traditional incandescent bulbs. Is this low market share due to preferences, i.e. the distribution of
v in the model above? Or is this due to imperfect information or inattention?
Only very specific experimental designs can plausibly use Equation (8) to identify B(p). First,
experimental or quasi-experimental designs are obviously needed to consistently identify a treatment effect τ . Second, one needs a design that allows the measurement of τ (p) at different p. To
do this, one must observe consumers’ WTP before being given a pure nudge to know which consumers are marginal at a given p and then measure the nudge’s effect on WTP for these marginal
consumers. Third, the treatment must be a pure nudge, without affecting consumers through persuasion, demand effects, or other mechanisms. This highlights perhaps the crucial drawback of

14

this identification strategy: it is difficult to design interventions that plausibly approximate a pure
nudge, and it is not clear how such an assumption could be decisively tested.
The AT experiment using Time-Sharing Experiments for the Social Sciences (TESS) attempts
to satisfy these three criteria. A crucial feature is the within-subject design. All consumers in
the experiment were given a $10 shopping budget and asked to make choices between CFLs (good
E) and incandescents (good I). Each consumer made baseline choices using a 15-part multiple
price list. The treatment group was then given hard information about cost savings from CFLs,
while the control group received information that was parallel in form but vacuous in content.
Each consumer then made endline lightbulb choices on an identical 15-part multiple price list.
Consumers’ decisions were incentive-compatible: one of the 30 choices was randomly selected to be
the consumer’s “official purchase,” and consumers were shipped the lightbulbs that they had chosen
at that relative price and given the remainder of their $10 shopping budget. This within-subject
design identifies τ (p) by measuring the average treatment effect on WTP for consumers at each
level of baseline WTP. In this context, WTP refers to incremental willingness-to-pay for the CFL
relative to the incandescent.
The information treatment was designed to plausibly approximate a pure nudge. It provided
only hard information on lightbulb costs, without persuasive cues such as social comparisons or
environmental framing. Care was taken to avoid demand effects, where experimental subjects might
be more or less likely to purchase energy efficient goods not due to new information but because they
wish to comply with (or perhaps defy) the perceived wishes of the experimenter. In addition, AT
take steps to ensure and document that treated consumers understood, believed, and internalized
the information. Despite this, they view their information treatments as only approximations to a
pure nudge, and they carry out analyses under alternative assumptions.
Figure 2 gives the intuition for AT’s main results. The graph presents a discrete version of
Equation (4) above. The dashed line is the demand curve from the baseline multiple price list.
Because the CFL and incandescent lightbulb packages were chosen to have the same unsubsidized
retail price, the unsubsidized market equilibrium is at a relative price of $0. At this price, the CFL
market share is about 70 percent. The shaded rectangle above the x-axis is the average treatment
effect for consumers whose baseline relative WTP for the CFL is between $0 and $-1. By the
assumptions for Equation (8), this treatment effect equals the average marginal bias B(p). The
triangle below the x-axis is the “Harberger distortion” from a $1 subsidy, in which the subsidy moves
consumers away from their perceived private optima. A subsidy of $1 moves CFL market share to
about 0.82, generating internality reduction equal to the rectangle but Harberger distortion equal to
the triangle. Subtracting the triangle from the rectangle, it is clear that this $1 subsidy increases
welfare. Incremental increases in the subsidy increase welfare until the incremental internality
reduction above the x-axis is larger than the incremental Harberger trapezoid below the x-axis.
Using this logic, AT find that the optimal subsidy to address imperfect information and inattention

15

is $3.
In the model with unit demand and lump sum revenue recycling, a ban on good I is equivalent
to subsidy s = ∞. Any incremental subsidy increases beyond $3 decrease welfare, and the ban
on incandescent lightbulbs is so stringent as to fully reverse the possible welfare gains from the $3
subsidy. This result is driven by the fact that there are a large group of consumers who strongly
prefer incandescent lightbulbs, even after being informed about the CFL’s cost advantages.
This nudge-based identification strategy has several important advantages. First, the nudge
approach provides a consistent estimate of the baseline level of bias even if the bias is endogenous
or heterogeneous. As discussed above, this is not necessarily true for the comparing demand
responses approach. Second, the nudge approach requires none of the assumptions on discount
rates, energy price forecasts, and utilization that are required to calculate gj in order to compare
demand responses. Third, when paired with the multiple price lists and within-subject design of
the lightbulb experiment, the nudge approach allows the analyst to infer the joint distribution of
baseline demand and B(p), which is required both for setting the globally-optimal subsidy and
for evaluating the welfare effects of a ban. An important future research area would be to design
a natural field experiment that has the conceptual advantages of the AT experiment without the
artefactual setting.
Because their nudge identifies only the effects of imperfect information and inattention, AT
cannot rule out that other mistakes might justify a ban on incandescent lightbulbs. Indeed, there
are two interesting results that suggest other potential mistakes. First, AT point out that the
demand curve in Figure 2 is highly elastic around zero relative price. What’s interesting about
this is that g is typically very large and positive, because CFLs can save significant amounts of
money on electricity costs. For v + g to have significant mass around zero, the distribution of v
must be closely symmetric to the distribution of g, i.e. typically very large and negative. While
many people dislike CFLs, the required symmetry of this disutility might not be plausible. One
alternative explanation is that there is some alternative bias, such as bias toward concentration
with β close to zero, such that the distribution of WTP largely reflects a distribution of v centered
close to zero.
The second result comes from the fact that the AT survey participants are a nationallyrepresentative sample with at least one person in every state other than Alaska. There is substantial variation in electricity prices across states: using data from the U.S. Energy Information
Administration, the mean across states is 12.7 cents per kilowatt-hour, with a standard deviation
of 4.3. Using Equation (1), I calculate gs = gEs − gIs for CFLs versus incandescents in each state
s using a six percent discount rate over the eight-year rated life of a CFL; this averages $39. If
v⊥gs , then the coefficient on gs in a regression of WTP on gs should be one. In other words, as
long as people’s non-monetary preferences for lightbulbs are not correlated with state electricity
prices, people should be willing to pay $1 more for a CFL if their state electricity prices imply an

16

additional $1 savings.
Table 2 presents results. Regardless of whether or not I control for additional covariates that
might be correlated with v and electricity prices, the coefficient is statistically indistinguishable
from zero and easily distinguishable from one. This is again consistent with the idea that there
is some additional bias that would not be addressed by an information provision nudge, such as
bias toward concentration with β close to zero. Using state-by-year panel data, Jacobsen (2015)
similarly shows that electricity prices have an economically and statistically insignificant impact
on market shares of Energy Star appliances.

4.3

Belief Elicitation

Starbucks customers tend to overestimate the calories in drinks and underestimate the calories in
food (Bollinger, Leslie, and Sorensen 2011). People signing up for gyms are overconfident about
their future attendance and about their likelihood of canceling automatically renewed memberships
(DellaVigna and Malmendier 2006). More than 70 percent of seniors choosing between Medicare
plans underestimate potential cost savings from switching (Kling et al. 2012). Spinnewijn (2015)
shows that the unemployed overestimate how quickly they will find work. Could consumers have
systematically biased beliefs about the financial benefits of energy efficiency?
There is some evidence of misperceived energy costs from the psychology literature. Attari et
al. (2010) show that consumers underestimate the energy use from heating, cooling, and other
large energy uses relative to the energy use of a lightbulb. Larrick and Soll (2008) document MPG
Illusion: people intuitively think as if automobile fuel costs scale linearly in miles per gallon (MPG),
whereas they in fact scale linearly in gallons per mile. Turrentine and Kurani (2007) show that
even well-educated auto owners with quantitative jobs have trouble with the net present value
calculations required to estimate gj .
While these results are interesting and important, this evidence that consumers misperceive
energy costs does not directly test whether consumers systematically overestimate or underestimate the value of energy efficiency, i.e. whether B(p) is non-zero. The Vehicle Ownership and
Alternatives Survey (VOAS) (Allcott 2011b, 2013) is a nationally-representative survey on TESS
platform, designed to test whether consumers systematically underestimate the fuel cost savings
from higher-MPG vehicles. The VOAS asks consumers what vehicle they currently drive, how
much they spend on gasoline, and how much they would spend on gasoline if they had bought their
second-choice vehicle or another “replacement vehicle” with randomly-selected MPG difference.
These questions are used to construct “valuation ratios”: the share of true fuel cost differences that
consumers perceive. This was denoted φ in the model in Section 3. Indexing the current vehicle as
j = o and an alternative vehicle as j = a, the valuation ratio for consumer i is

17

φia =

geia − geio
.
gia − gio

(9)

Consumers were told to assume that they drove the alternative vehicles the same amount as
their current vehicle, which allows m to be assumed constant. To measure and limit potential
confusion, various response frames were randomized across consumers. For example, some were
told to report annual gasoline cost estimates, while others were told to report estimates over the
full vehicle life. Some consumers were asked for absolute levels of gasoline costs, while others were
told to report cost savings or additional costs relative to their current vehicle.
Figure 3 plots the distribution of valuation ratios between current vehicles and second choice
vehicles. If all consumers were perfectly informed and reported correctly on the survey, the distribution would have point mass at φ = 1. In fact, the figure shows that valuation ratios are quite
dispersed, likely reflecting a combination of truly dispersed beliefs and reporting error. The large
mass at zero represents consumers who incorrectly report that their current vehicle and second
choice vehicle have “exactly the same” fuel economy. Allcott (2013) shows that on average, consumers correctly estimate or perhaps slightly underestimate the financial benefits of higher-MPG
vehicles.
There are two concerns with the belief elicitation approach to measuring bias. The first is that
because the goal is to measure beliefs as they existed at the time of purchase, the survey must
induce accurate recall without additional calculation. Making the belief elicitation fully incentive
compatible could induce survey respondents to look up fuel economy ratings and calculate answers
on a calculator or spreadsheet. On the other hand, providing no incentives could lead to thoughtless
answers. The VOAS offered moderate incentives (up to $10) with a vague criteria for payout: if
an answer “makes sense” given answers to other questions. Allcott (2013) shows that results are
indistinguishable between consumers randomly assigned to be offered incentives vs. not offered
incentives.
The second concern is that stated beliefs have wide variance, and it is not clear whether this
reflects true variation in beliefs or reporting error. The average marginal φ represents an estimate
of B(p), but the standard error on the estimated mean can be large. Allcott (2013) also estimates
median regressions as an alternative measure of central tendency.
One benefit of belief elicitation is that it provides a direct measure of biased beliefs, whereas the
comparing demand responses approach could estimate a combination of biases, and the informational nudge could estimate effects of biased beliefs, costly information acquisition, and inattention.

5

Testing Between Behavioral Models

Section 3 proposed several behavioral models, and the three empirical approaches discussed in
Section 4 identify different subsets of these models. This section provides additional evidence for
18

and against two of the proposed models.

5.1

Evidence of Endogenous Attention

Sallee (2014) describes reasons to believe that auto buyers might be rationally inattentive to gas
costs. First, he argues that some cognitive cost is required to calculate the lifetime present discounted value of gas costs, both because fuel economy information labels can be incomplete and
inaccurate, and because the labels provide average cost information that consumers must then
adjust to their own energy costs and usage patterns. Second, he shows that in many cases, fuel
economy may not be worth paying attention to. The variation in lifetime gas costs across vehicles
is dwarfed by the variation in prices, and only about 10 percent of new vehicle buyers would change
their decisions if they ignored vs. fully attended to within-class fuel economy differences, generating
a welfare loss of only about $100 to $200 per purchase.
Below, I provide three pieces of empirical evidence in support of endogenous attention models.
I use the phrase “endogenous attention” as shorthand - these tests measure both endogenous
information acquisition and endogenous attention to that information. I use the word “endogenous”
instead of “rational” because these tests do not necessarily imply that attention responds optimally.
In rational attention models such as Gabaix (2014) and Sallee (2014), consumers are more likely
to pay a cost to attend to an attribute if it is more likely to affect their decisions. In the context
of the model in Section 3, this implies that λ is increasing in energy price e and utilization m.
Furthermore, attention might vary across consumers due to variation in cognitive costs, not just
gains from attention. These models guide the evidence below.
The first piece of evidence comes from the VOAS survey, originally reported in Allcott (2011b).
The median completion time for this survey was ten minutes. The final question was: In this
survey, we asked you to calculate fuel costs fairly mathematically and precisely. Think back to the
time when you were deciding whether to purchase your vehicle. At that time, how precisely did you
calculate the potential fuel costs for your vehicle and other vehicles you could have bought? There
were five possible responses, ordered from “I did not think about fuel costs at all when making my
decision” to “I calculated more precisely than I did just now during this survey.” Forty percent
of Americans reported that they did not think about fuel costs at all during their most recent
purchase. I construct a measure of calculation effort by coding the five responses as integers from
1 to 5 and normalizing to mean zero, standard deviation one.
Table 3 reports regressions of calculation effort on potential explanatory factors available in the
VOAS. “Gas Price at Purchase” is the US average retail gasoline price in the month that the vehicle
was purchased from the US Energy Information Administration, inflated to 2014 dollars. Implied
miles/year is backed out from self-reported gasoline expenditures using the current vehicle MPG
rating and gasoline prices. Environmentalist is the consumer’s response to the question, “Would
you describe yourself as an environmentalist?” “Yes, definitely,” “Yes, somewhat,” and “No” are
19

coded as 1, 1/2, and 0, respectively.
Column 1 shows that a $1 increase in gasoline prices is associated with a 0.148 standard deviation
increase in calculation effort. Consumers that drive more miles per year also calculate more. These
two results are consistent with a model in which consumers pay more attention to fuel economy
when it has larger financial implications, either because they drive more miles or because gas prices
are higher. Column 2 repeats the regression with the addition of the interaction between gas
prices and miles per year. As the same model would predict, gas prices have an especially large
association with calculation effort for consumers who drive more. Calculation effort is also positively
associated with education, which is consistent with a model in which education is correlated with
lower cognitive costs. Self-described environmentalists also are more attentive to fuel costs, a result
that I return to in Section 6.1.
A second category of evidence for endogenous attention comes from the used vehicle markets
studied by AW, BKZ, and SWF. As gas prices rose between 2003 and 2008, endogenous attention
predicts that the estimated γ parameter should increase. Figure 1 from above shows graphical
evidence of this using data from AW. From 1999-2003, gasoline prices were relatively low, and the
slope of

dp
dg

is relatively flat. From 2004-March 2008, gasoline prices were at a higher average, and

the slope becomes steeper. From April-December 2008, as gas prices reached almost unprecedented
highs, the slope of

dp
dg

is close to -1. More formally, AW show that the estimated γ is larger when

excluding 1999-2003 and smaller when excluding April-December 2008.
A third piece of evidence comes from direct observation of information acquisition: internet
search volumes for terms related to fuel economy and page visits to the fueleconomy.gov informational website. This analysis parallels Hoopes, Reck, and Slemrod (2015), who show that Google
searches for tax-related terms respond to stock market activity, policy changes, and news events.
For search volume data, I use Google Trends, which provides weekly data beginning in January
2004. I consider searches for five fuel economy-related phrases (gas mileage, fuel economy, fuel
efficiency, miles per gallon, and mileage calculator) in the Vehicle Shopping category.12 Search
counts are normalized by total Vehicle Shopping category search volume in order to control for
time variation both in the number of consumers currently in the auto market and in the use of
web search. To corroborate the Google Trends data, I also acquired monthly counts of visits
to fueleconomy.gov, the official U.S. government fuel economy information website, beginning in
October 2002. A “visit” is as defined by Google Analytics: a series of one or more page views by a
unique visitor which ends after 30 minutes of inactivity or when the browser is closed. There are
an average of 2.3 million visits per month.
Panel A of Figure 4 plots weekly Google searches for fuel economy on the left axis and gas prices
12

These search terms were chosen to measure information acquisition, not product demand. While one could also
show that search terms like “hybrid vehicles” and “Toyota Prius” covary positively with gasoline prices, this effect
could be driven by informed consumers searching for information about vehicles already known to have higher MPG,
instead searches motivated by determining which vehicles have higher MPG.

20

on the right axis. Search volumes track gas prices extremely closely. Panel B plots the monthly
data on visits to fueleconomy.gov, which also closely track gas prices. Unlike the Google Trends
data, fueleconomy.gov visits are not normalized by any measure of web traffic or vehicle consumers
in the market, and there is a general upward trend over time. Both graphs show a sharp uptick in
search volume in June-August 2009, as the Cash for Clunkers program made government subsidies
conditional on fuel economy ratings.
To formally test the relationship, I regress search volume in week t (or website visits in month
t) St on gasoline price as et , controlling for a cash-for-clunkers indicator for June-August 2009 Ct ,
linear time trend Lt , and week-of-year (or month-of-year) indicators µt :
ln St = η ln et + ψCt + ζLt + µt + εt .

(10)

Table 4 presents results, with Newey-West standard errors allowing for one year of lags (52
weeks or 12 months). Columns 1 and 3 show that information acquisition is highly statistically
significantly correlated with gas prices in both the Google Trends and fueleconomy.gov data, with
very similar elasticities of approximately 1.9. Column 2 shows that Google searches for four alternative vehicle attributes (horsepower, torque, warranty, and safety ratings) are not correlated
with gas prices, suggesting that attention to gas costs may not draw attention away from other
attributes, but instead may increase total decisionmaking effort.

5.2

Is Present Bias a Plausible Model?

Across many non-energy domains, there is strong evidence consistent with present bias and temptation models. Heutel (2015) and Tsvetanov and Segerson (2013, 2014) theoretically model the
welfare effects of energy efficiency policy in present bias and temptation models, respectively. I
suggested the possibility of a present bias model above, as do AT, AMT, Gillingham and Palmer
(2014), and others. Is there empirical evidence consistent with such models?
There is one theoretical reason to question the relevance of present bias models for choices of
energy-using durables. Taken literally, agents in these models are present biased over consumption,
not cash flows. Because consumers in developed countries often can save and borrow to buy energyusing durables, paying additional money for an energy efficient good does not affect consumption
in the present. Instead, it affects consumption over many future periods - perhaps the same future
periods in which energy cost savings accrue. Similarly, the actual consumption value from energy
using durables, by which I mean the enjoyment of driving a large SUV or a sporty car with lots
of torque, also accrues over many future periods. Home buying is a clear example: because of
mortgages, the purchase price, home energy costs, and consumption value of the home are all
flows that occur in the future. Thus, while present bias might cause consumers to delay the effort
of buying a home or car, it should not cause consumers to underweight energy costs relative to

21

purchase prices. This suggests that any mistakes in this domain would be more likely driven by
imperfect information, inattention, or bias toward concentration.
One might propose an alternative present bias model where agents are present biased over cash
flows. Bradford, Courtemanche, Heutel, McAlvanah, and Ruhm (2014) estimate time-consistent
discounting and present bias parameters using multiple price lists that trade off cash flows at different times. They find that the present bias parameter β is statistically associated in the predicted
direction with driving a fuel-efficient car, having a well-insulated home, and the temperature setting
on one’s thermostat, along with other non-energy behaviors such as smoking, binge drinking, and
savings. Interestingly, however, both Bradford et al. (2014) and AT find no correlation between
the β from multiple price lists and demand for energy efficient lightbulbs.
Present bias and temptation models both predict that sophisticated agents will want to restrict
their choice sets, perhaps by taking up commitment devices. Casual observation suggests that
this is uncommon: many people seem to want to get their future selves to lose weight or quit
smoking, but one rarely hears someone saying that he hopes to be able to get his future self to
buy an Energy Star air conditioner. There are two ways to corroborate this observation with data.
First, one highly-publicized commitment device is stickK.com, which allows people to individually
tailor commitment contracts. stickK.com shared with me their data through mid-2014. Only 0.3
percent of their commitment contracts are categorized as “Green Initiatives,” while 0.8 percent are
“Home Improvement and DIY” and 3 percent are “Money & Finance.” Energy efficiency contracts
are likely to be a small subset of these three categories. By contrast, other categories are much
more popular, such as weight loss (35 percent), exercise (21 percent), other health and wellness (17
percent), career (8 percent), and education and knowledge (7 percent).
A second piece of evidence can be found in Harding and Hsiaw (2014), who study a program
that invited electricity consumers to set energy conservation goals and also provided conservation
information and usage feedback. In the Harding and Hsiaw (2014) model, failing to reach a goal
imposes a utility cost due to reference-dependent preferences, and present-biased consumers thus
view the program as a commitment device. While it is difficult to measure takeup rates conditional
on being aware of the program, the authors present two statistics that suggest that these rates
are low. First, while the program was marketed throughout the greater Chicago metropolitan
area, only 2487 households enrolled. Second, when the authors took a random sample of 10,000
households in the zip codes where there was any enrollment, only 36 had actually enrolled.
In summary, commitment device takeup rates from stickK.com and Harding and Hsiaw (2014)
suggest that few consumers are sophisticated in a present bias or temptation model. Unless the
ratio of sophisticates relative to naifs is somehow very large for energy conservation, this suggests
that these models are not very relevant for energy-using durables. While this does not say that
low-cost commitment devices should not be offered, it does imply that present bias and temptation
are unlikely to justify energy efficiency subsidies and standards.

22

Notwithstanding, present bias may be relevant through an indirect channel: through effects on
household finances. Specifically, present bias leads households to hold savings disproportionatedly
in illiquid retirement accounts and home equity (Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman 2003, 2007).
The resulting liquidity constraints might keep consumers from buying higher-cost durables, even
those that would increase present discounted utility at their long-run discount rates. Put simply,
when you have little money in the bank and lots of credit card debt, buying a $1100 refrigerator is
much harder than buying an energy inefficient $900 refrigerator. If this is quantitatively important,
one way to address it would be to provide credit to present-biased consumers for investments such
as energy efficient durables.

6

Policy Implications

6.1

Targeting

Mistakes, when they occur, are almost certainly heterogeneous. For example, Figure 3 suggests
that some consumers overestimate the private value of energy efficiency, even as other consumers
underestimate. The optimal subsidy to address heterogeneous bias would be consumer-specific subsidies tailored to each consumer’s bias b. Given that consumer-specific subsidies are not practically
feasible, Equation (5) shows that the optimal uniform subsidy s is a compromise between (i.e.,
the average of) the optimal consumer-specific subsidies for the marginal consumers. However, this
uniform subsidy distorts decisions of less biased consumers even as it improves decisions by more
biased types.
A “well-targeted” policy approximates a pure nudge by preferentially affecting decisions by
biased types without affecting the already-optimal decisions of rational types. A poorly-targeted
policy, by contrast, preferentially affects decisions by less-biased types. At best, poorly targeted
subsidies are disadvantageous because they might address only a small share of the total allocative
inefficiency caused by consumer mistakes. At worst, a poorly-targeted subsidy could reduce welfare
if s > 0 but the marginal consumers have B(p) < 0. Bernheim and Rangel (2004) give an intuitive
example: if addicts are more biased but are highly inelastic to sin taxes, then a sin tax addresses
little of the welfare losses from addiction. Furthermore, if rational types are relatively elastic, then
a sin tax of any non-trivial magnitude might reduce welfare by inducing many rational types to
underconsume the sin good.
Allcott, Knittel, and Taubinsky (2015, “AKT”) provide suggestive evidence on the targeting of
energy efficiency subsidies. They propose two mechanisms that might cause some energy efficiency
efficiency subsidies to be poorly targeted. First, many consumers are unaware of subsidies such as
the weatherization incentives offered by local utilities, and the consumers who are most aware of
and attentive to energy costs should also be more likely to be aware of energy efficiency subsidies.
Because consumers won’t respond to a subsidy if they are unaware of it, this mechanically makes
23

the marginal consumers better informed and more attentive. Second, some energy efficiency investments are niche goods, such as hybrid cars and weatherization, with small market shares and
only environmentalists near the margin. Thus, environmentalists are more likely to be marginal
to anything other than a large subsidy, and environmentalists might have less bias against energy
efficiency (i.e. lower b).
AKT first confirm that environmentalism is correlated with lower b. Environmentalist consumers believe that energy efficient lightbulbs and water heaters save more money, and as shown
in Table 3, they pay more attention to fuel costs when buying autos.13 AKT also show that
environmentalists are more likely to be aware of energy efficiency subsidies offered in their area.
AKT then test what observable characteristics are correlated with takeup of major energy
efficiency subsidies: the federal Residential Energy Credit, hybrid vehicle subsidies, and energy
efficiency subsidies from a major utility. They find that environmentalism (as measured by self
reports, owning a home solar energy system, and voluntarily paying for green energy) and the
calculation effort variable from Table 3 are correlated with takeup, which strongly suggests that the
average adopter is less biased against energy efficiency (i.e. has lower b) than the average consumer.
They also show that wealthy people and homeowners are more likely to take up subsidies, which
suggests that these policies are also not well-targeted to address credit constraints and landlordtenant information asymmetries.14 Using much more extensive tax microdata, Borenstein and Davis
(2015) fully develop this result that high-income people are more likely to take up the Residential
Energy Credit.
These results suggest that some energy efficiency subsidies may not target the market failures
they were designed to target. Instead, they primarily pay wealthy environmentalists to become
even more green. Notwithstanding, this empirical evidence is only suggestive. In particular, AKT’s
regressions show that the average (instead of marginal) subsidy adopters have characteristics likely
to be correlated with lower b. It would be an interesting and important contribution to (1) convincingly identify biased consumers and (2) convincingly test whether consumers marginal to a policy
are more or less biased.15
13

The differences in beliefs are interesting per se, because energy cost savings are a factual issue, not an ideological
viewpoint, and the lightbulb and water heater survey instruments were apolitical. This finding relates to earlier work
by Kahn (2007), Costa and Kahn (2013), and Gromet, Kunreuther, and Larrick (2013) showing political differences
in energy efficiency behaviors.
14
Davis (2012), Gillingham, Harding, and Rapson (2012), and Myers (2014) study the landlord-tenant information
asymmetry.
15
This point about optimal targeting is different than the point made by Boomhower and Davis (2014), Joskow
and Marron (1992), and Ito (2015) about additionality. These papers argue that a policy’s cost effectiveness (subsidy
disbursed per kilowatt-hour saved) is worse if the subsidy has many inframarginal consumers. Thus, from a costeffectiveness perspective, it is better if marketing or program design can target a subsidy at consumers who are more
likely to be marginal. By contrast, in the simple framework from Section 3, inframarginal consumers do not matter
for welfare because subsidy funds are raised through non-distortionary lump-sum taxes.

24

6.2

Calibrating Magnitudes

Sections 3 and 4 walked through the process of defining a socially-optimal policy and calibrating
it using data. By contrast, the processes that most utilities and government agencies undertake
when setting subsidies for weatherization or energy efficient goods bear little resemblance to this
theoretically-grounded process. Instead, the subsidies are often set to exhaust the available budget
or to maximize effects per subsidy dollar spent. As a result, the subsidies in effect are almost
certain to be inefficiently large or small.16
As a stark example of the importance of calibration, notice that ∆W (s) < 0 in Equation (4)
whenever s > 2EH (B(x)|p − s ≤ x ≤ p), i.e. whenever the subsidy is more than twice the average
marginal bias. In other words, even if the policymaker correctly infers the sign of consumer bias, a
subsidy can easily be worse than no policy if the subsidy is not optimally calibrated. This highlights
the importance of not only measuring market failures, but also ensuring that policymakers correctly
use the estimates.
A large set of papers (AMT, Fischer, Harrington, and Parry (2007), Heutel (2011), and Parry,
Evans, and Oates (2010)) use different models to show that CAFE standards are much more
stringent than can be justified by the largest estimates of consumer bias from multiple papers
(AW, BKZ, SWF, and Allcott (2013)). This poses a significant challenge to CAFE standards: the
RIAs have relied heavily (although not exclusively) on consumer mistakes to justify the policy,
so they will likely have to come up with some alternative explanation for why the engineering
models predict such large consumer welfare gains from regulation. One potential explanation is
that the engineering models understate the development and manufacturing costs and/or vehicle
performance tradeoffs of fuel economy improvements.17

6.3

Information Provision

As discussed in Section 3, the US has several major information provision programs: “yellow tags”
for appliances, MPG labels for autos, and the Energy Star marketing campaign. There are now
a number of papers on energy cost information provision for durable goods, largely in artefactual
settings with stated preference, but some in field settings. What are we learning from a policy
perspective?
First, while it is hard to object to the basic idea information provision, existing policies can
16

By contrast, the Department of Energy sets energy efficiency standards so as to equate the marginal cost of more
energy efficient (lower ej ) goods with the marginal reduction in Gj . While this is non-trivial to implement in practice,
at least the process is theoretically optimal in a simple model.
17
One scenario that would be useful to see in future RIAs is to adjust the fuel economy cost curves upward
until the models correctly predict the current market equilibrium. This explicitly loads the discrepancy between
model predictions and market equilibrium onto modeling error instead of an unknown market failure. Then the
adjusted engineering model would be used to predict the socially-optimal CAFE standard to address uninternalized
externalities. The optimal CAFE standard under these assumptions would be much less stringent.

25

be improved. Regulatory implementation costs and firms’ compliance costs are low relative to
subsidies and standards, so as long as some consumers benefit, it is plausible that benefits outweigh
costs. Notwithstanding, Davis and Metcalf (2016) point out one way that energy information labels
could be improved: because electricity costs vary substantially across states, presenting national
average costs could mislead many consumers. In an stated choice experiment, they find that better
information leads to better choices: consumers in high (low) energy cost states are more (less) likely
to choose an energy efficient air conditioner with state-specific energy cost information relative to
the national average. Larrick and Soll’s (2008) finding of MPG Illusion is another example of how
information can be presented more clearly and understandably, and fuel economy labels have since
been redesigned to include information in gallons per mile.
A second lesson is that while some have argued that information provision programs are sufficient
to address consumer mistakes, this may not be true. Gayer and Viscusi (2013) write,
How can it be that consumers are leaving billions of potential economic gains on the table
by not buying the most energy-efficient cars, clothes dryers, air conditioners, and light
bulbs?... If the savings are this great, why is it that a very basic informational approach
cannot remedy this seemingly stunning example of completely irrational behavior? It
should be quite simple to rectify decisions that are this flawed.
Similarly, Mannix and Dudley (2015) argue that energy efficiency policies should be designed to
address only what they call “classical” market failures. They then write,
Information asymmetry is an example of such a market failure, and we have long had
fuel economy and energy-efficiency labels on cars and appliances to remedy it. This is
a reasonable policy “nudge,” and ought to be sufficient to the task.
In other words, Gayer and Viscusi (2013) and Mannix and Dudley (2015) argue first that imperfect information is the primary (or only) consumer mistake that merits regulatory intervention,
and second that existing information provision regulations should completely address this. These
arguments are hard to square with the results of Houde (2014a), who estimates that large shares of
refrigerator buyers do not value electricity costs despite having both yellow tags and Energy Star labels. Houde’s evidence implies that either some non-informational mistake causes these consumers
to undervalue electricity costs or the existing information provision regulations do not completely
address imperfect information. This second possibility is consistent with casual observation - in
some appliance showrooms, the yellow tags are hidden inside washing machines or not posted, and
when buying online, energy cost information often requires extra clicks that many consumers might
not make.
A third potential lesson is that regulators should think carefully about the distinction between
“information provision” and “persuasion.” One view is that regulators should only be involved
26

in the former. But the psychology literature provides many examples of how people respond
differently to subtly-different variations that would all be classified as “hard information” in a
neoclassical model. For example, Camilleri and Larrick (2014) point out that presenting fuel
economy information in gallons per 100,000 miles increases preferences for high-MPG vehicles
relative to providing information in gallons per 100 miles. They suggest that policymakers should
use the metric that induces more demand for high-MPG vehicles, but it is not clear that this
increases allocative efficiency.
Indeed, two recent papers find that some energy information labels cause consumers to overvalue
energy efficiency. Houde (2014a) estimates that the implied value that refrigerator buyers place on
the Energy Star label is 15 to 83 percent larger than the true average electricity cost savings from
Energy Star models. Newell and Siikamaki (2014) find that showing the Energy Star label causes
50 percent overvaluation of energy savings for water heater purchases in a stated choice experiment,
when discounting future savings at individual-specific discount rates. They also find that a letter
grade similar to the European Union’s energy cost labels causes similar or greater overvaluation.
These findings reinforce that policymakers should carefully consider whether current and future
information labels are and should be used for marketing and persuasion instead of to help consumers
minimize monetary costs. Glaeser (2006,2014) expresses concern about using persuasion as a policy
tool, pointing out that many nudges are in fact “emotional taxes” that decrease consumer utility
but do not raise revenues.

7

Open Research Questions

Many research questions remain. In this section, I sketch five of them.
First, what discount factor δ should be used in the “comparing demand responses” empirical
tests? Many empirical papers, such as AW, BKZ, and SWF, use market average discount rates
inferred from different estimates of the opportunity costs of capital. These approaches ignore
consumer heterogeneity and may not reflect the correct opportunity cost of the marginal dollar,
given that many consumers have savings, car loans, and credit card debt with widely-varying
interest rates. Newell and Siikamaki (2015) make progress on this issue by eliciting preferences
over hypothetical cash payments of $1000 in one month vs. larger amounts in in 12 months.
They show that the elicited discount rates vary significantly across consumers and strongly predict
stated preference for energy efficiency. Ideally, this approach could be extended to be incentive
compatible, perhaps by paying respondents with some small probability, and to cover a longer time
horizon relevant for most energy-using durables.18
Second, if consumers misoptimize, how does this affect firms’ incentives to develop, offer, and
18

Laibson, Repetto, and Tobacman (2007) estimate that consumers use much higher discount rates over shorter
horizons, which also poses a challenge to the idea of using one time-consistent δ.

27

price energy efficient goods? Gabaix and Laibson (2006) study firms’ incentives to debias consumers
about add-on costs like energy use, but a key feature of that model is that the firm selling the base
good also sells the add-on at some profit. By contrast, retailers of durable goods do not sell
energy, so depending on markups, they may have stronger incentives to debias compared to the
Gabaix and Laibson (2006) “curse of debiasing.” There is a growing literature on firms’ incentives
in marketing energy efficiency. Allcott and Sweeney (2016) use a field experiment to study one
retailer’s ability to inform consumers about energy efficiency. Houde (2014b) shows how firms
bunch product characteristics around the minimum Energy Star eligibility cutoffs, and Houde and
Spurlock show how energy efficiency standards can increase welfare by increasing competition (and
thus decreasing markups) among products that comply with the standard. Fischer (2010) studies
how internalities interact with market power in firms’ decisions to provide higher-fuel economy
vehicles and how this affects the optimal determination of minimum standards and gasoline taxes.
Third, could bias toward concentration be relevant for some energy efficiency decisions? Because
the benefits of energy efficiency come in small flows every time an electricity bill is paid or the gas
tank is filled, this is a natural application of the Koszegi and Szeidl (2013) model. Even a lab
experiment framed in an energy use context would be interesting if it measured and distinguished
between bias toward concentration from other potential mistakes.
Fourth, many utilities have “on-bill financing” programs that essentially offer a loan to consumers for energy efficiency upgrades, which they pay back monthly on their energy bills. In theory,
such a program could address present bias, bias toward concentration, and credit constraints. How
effective are these programs, and why?
Fifth, in an endogenous inattention model, how do consumers form initial beliefs about the
importance of energy efficiency when deciding whether to attend to this attribute? In Sallee
(2014), for example, consumers have beliefs about the variance of energy costs across products,
and in Gabaix (2014), consumers must have analogous initial beliefs about how much any attribute
matters. Conlisk (1996), Gabaix, Laibson, Moloche, and Weinberg (2006), Lipman (1991), and
others provide insight from other contexts.

8

Conclusion

As documented in Section 2.3, paternalism is an important factor used to justify energy efficiency
policies. In recent years, models like the one in Section 3 have formalized this rationale, and three
categories of empirical tests from Section 4 have been used to estimate consumer bias. Although
the results are far from ironclad or comprehensive, there is some evidence that some consumers
make systematic mistakes when purchasing some energy-using durables. In cases such as the vehicle
market, however, the weight of the evidence suggests that if there are any systematic mistakes, they
are small. In the absence of other market failures, the estimated consumer bias cannot justify the

28

stringency of the current CAFE standards, and other energy efficiency subsidies and standards may
also be miscalibrated. Furthermore, some existing policies do not appear to effectively target the
market failures that they were designed to address. There is much work still to be done, and as
rigorous evidence grows, it will be crucial to bring these results to policymakers.

29

References
[1] ABC (2011). Rand Paul’s Toilet Tirade. http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2011/03/rand-paulstoilet-tirade/
[2] Allcott, Hunt. 2011a. Social Norms and Energy Conservation. Journal of Public Economics. 95(910):1082-1095.
[3] Allcott, Hunt. 2011b. Consumers’ Perceptions and Misperceptions of Energy Costs. American Economic Review . 101(3):98-104.
[4] Allcott, Hunt. 2013. The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations from
the Automobile Market. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 5(3):30-66.
[5] Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2012. Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap? Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 26(1):3-28.
[6] Allcott, Hunt, and Judd Kessler. 2015. The Welfare Effects of Nudges. NBER Working Paper No.
21671.
[7] Allcott, Hunt, Christopher Knittel, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. Tagging and Targeting of Energy
Efficiency Subsidies. American Economic Review . 105(5):187-191.
[8] Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2014. Energy Policy with Externalities
and Internalities. Journal of Public Economics. 112:72-88.
[9] Allcott, Hunt, and Todd Rogers. 2014. The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral Interventions: Experimental Evidence from Energy Conservation. American Economic Review . 104(10):30033037.
[10] Allcott, Hunt, and Cass Sunstein. 2015. Regulating Internalities. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 34(2): 698-705.
[11] Allcott, Hunt, and Richard Sweeney. 2016. Information Disclosure through Agents: Evidence from a
Field Experiment. Management Science, forthcoming.
[12] Allcott, Hunt, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experimental
Evidence from the Lightbulb Market. American Economic Review , 105(8):2501-2538.
[13] Allcott, Hunt, and Nathan Wozny. 2014. Gasoline Prices, Fuel Economy, and the Energy Paradox.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(10):779-795.
[14] Anderson, Soren, Ryan Kellogg, and James Sallee. 2013. What Do Consumers Believe about Future
Gasoline Prices? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 66(3):383-403.
[15] Asensio, Omar, and Magali A. Delmas. 2015. Nonprice Incentives and Energy Conservation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 112(6):E510-E515.
[16] Attari, Shahzeen, Michael DeKay, Cliff Davidson, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin. 2010. Public Perceptions
of Energy Consumption and Savings. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107(37):1605416059.
[17] Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. 2013. Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments that
Peer Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization. 29(5):992-1022.
[18] Baicker, Kate, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2015. Behavioral Hazard in Health
Insurance. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 130(4):1623-1667.
[19] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2004. Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Processes.
American Economic Review . 90(5):1558-1590.

30

[20] Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2009. Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic
Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(1):51-104.
[21] Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium.
Econometrica. 63(4):841-890.
[22] Boomhower, Judson, and Lucas W. Davis. 2014. A credible approach for measuring inframarginal
participation in energy efficiency programs. Journal of Public Economics. 113(C):67–79.
[23] Borenstein, Severin, and Lucas Davis. 2015. The Distributional Effects of U.S. Clean Energy Tax
Credits. NBER Working Paper No. 21437.
[24] Bradford, David, Charles Courtemanche, Garth Heutel, Patrick McAlvanah, and Christopher Ruhm.
2014. Time Preferences and Consumer Behavior. NBER Working Paper No. 20320.
[25] Busse, Meghan, Christopher Knittel, and Florian Zettelmeyer. 2013. Are Consumers Myopic? Evidence
from New and Used Car Purchases. American Economic Review . 103(1):220-256.
[26] Camerer, Colin, Samuel Issacharoff, George Loewenstein, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003.
Regulation for Conservatives: Behavioral Economics and the Case for Asymmetric Paternalism. University of Pennsylvania Law Review . 151:1211-1254.
[27] Camilleri, Adrian R., and Richard P. Larrick. 2014. Metric and Scale Design as Choice Architecture
Tools. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing. 33(1):108-125.
[28] Chetty, Raj. 2015. “Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective.” American
Economic Review . 105(5):1-33.
[29] Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.
American Economic Review . 99(4):1145-1177.
[30] Conlisk, John. 1996. Why Bounded Rationality? Journal of Economic Literature. 34(2):669-700.
[31] Costa, Dora, and Matthew Kahn. 2013. Energy Conservation “Nudges” and Environmentalist Ideology: Evidence from a Randomized Residential Electricity Field Experiment. Journal of the European
Economic Association. 11(3):680-702.
[32] Davis, Lucas W. 2012. Evaluating the Slow Adoption of Energy Efficient Investments: Are Renters
Less Likely to Have Energy-Efficient Appliances? In The Design and Implementation of U.S. Climate
Policy, Don Fullerton and Catherine Wolfram, Eds. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
[33] Davis, Lucas W., and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2016. Does Better Information Lead to Better Choices?
Evidence from Energy-Efficiency Labels. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource
Economists, forthcoming.
[34] DEHWA
(Australian
Department
of
the
Environment,
Water,
Heritage,
and
the
Arts).
2008.
Regulatory
Impact
Statement:
Proposal
to
PhaseOut
Inefficient
Incandescent
Light
Bulbs.
http://www.energyrating.gov.au/wpcontent/uploads/Energy Rating Documents/Library/Lighting/Incandescent Lamps/200808-risphaseout.pdf
[35] DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field. Journal of Economic
Literature. 47(2):315-372.
[36] Delmas, Magali A., and Neil Lessem. 2014. Saving Power to Conserve Your Reputation? The Effectiveness of Private versus Public Information. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
67:353:370.
[37] Dolan, Paul, and Robert Metcalfe. 2015. “Neighbors, Knowledge, and Nuggets: Two Natural Field
Experiments on the Role of Incentives on Energy Conservation.” Working Paper, University of Chicago
(April). Available from http://media.wix.com/ugd/fe9abe bd09ded18b584eaf9230678e24d7cd4e.pdf.

31

[38] Dubin, Jeffrey, and Daniel McFadden. 1984. An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric Appliance
Holdings and Consumption. Econometrica. 52(2):345-362.
[39] Feldstein, Martin, and Jeffrey Liebman. 2002. Social Security. In Auerbach, Alan, and Martin Feldstein,
Eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[40] Finkelstein, Amy. 2009. E-ZTAX: Tax Salience and Tax Rates. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
124(3):969-1010.
[41] Fischer, Carolyn. 2005. On the Importance of the Supply Side in Demand-Side Management. Energy
Economics. 27(1):165-180.
[42] Fischer, Carolyn. 2010. Imperfect Competition, Consumer Behavior, and the Provision of Fuel Efficiency in Light-Duty Vehicles. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 10-60.
[43] Fischer, Carolyn, Winston Harrington, and Ian Parry. 2007. Do Market Failures Justify Tightening
Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) Standards? The Energy Journal . 28(4):1-30.
[44] Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
Suppression in Competitive Markets. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 121(2):505-540.
[45] Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, Guillermo Moloche, and Stephen Weinberg. 2006. Costly Information
Acquisition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model. American Economic Review .
96(4):1043-1068.
[46] Gayer, Ted. 2011. A Better Approach to Environmental Regulation: Getting the Costs and Benefits
Right. Hamilton Project Discussion Paper 2011-06.
[47] Gayer, Ted, and Kip Viscusi. 2013. Overriding Consumer Preferences with Energy Regulations. Journal
of Regulatory Economics. 43:248-264.
[48] Gerarden, Todd D., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2015. Assessing the Energy Efficiency
Gap. Resources for the Future Discussion Paper No. 15-07.
[49] Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew Harding, and David Rapson. 2012. Split Incentives and Household
Energy Consumption. The Energy Journal . 33(2):37-62.
[50] Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2009. Energy Efficiency Economics and
Policy. Annual Review of Resource Economics. 1(1):597–620.
[51] Gillingham, Kenneth, and Karen Palmer. 2014. Bridging the Energy Efficiency Gap: Policy Insights
from Economic Theory and Empirical Evidence. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy.
8(1):18-38.
[52] Glaeser, Edward. 2006. Paternalism and Psychology. University of Chicago Law Review . 73:133-156.
[53] Glaeser, Edward. 2014. The Supply of Environmentalism: Psychological Interventions and Economics.
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy. 8(2):208-229.
[54] Goldberg, Pinelopi. 1998. The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards in the US.
Journal of Industrial Economics. 46:1-33.
[55] Grigolon, Laura, Mathias Reynaert, and Frank Verboven. 2014. Consumer Valuation of Fuel Costs and
the Effectiveness of Tax Policy: Evidence from the European Car Market. Working Paper, University
of Leuven.
[56] Gromet, Dena M., Howard Kunreuther, and Richard P. Larrick. 2013. Political Ideology Affects EnergyEfficiency Attitudes and Choices. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110(23):9314-9319.
[57] Grubb, Michael. 2014. Consumer Inattention and Bill-Shock Regulation. Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.

32

[58] Grubb, Michael, and Matthew Osborne. 2015. Cellular Service Demand: Biased Beliefs, Learning, and
Bill Shock. American Economic Review . 105(1):234-271.
[59] Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi. 2004. Tax Incidence when Individuals are Time-Inconsistent:
The Case of Cigarette Excise Taxes. Journal of Public Economics. 88:1959-1987.
[60] Gruber, Jonathan, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier? B.E.
Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy. 5(1).
[61] Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2007. Harmful Addiction. Review of Economic Studies.
74(1):147-172.
[62] Harding, Matthew, and Alice Hsiaw. 2014. Goal Setting and Energy Conservation. Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization. 107:209-227.
[63] Hassett, Kevin A., and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1993. “Energy Conservation Investment: Do Consumers
Discount the Future Correctly?” Energy Policy. 21(6):710-716.
[64] Hausman, Jerry. 1979. Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of Energy-Using
Durables. Bell Journal of Economics. 10(1):33-54.
[65] Heutel, Garth. 2015. Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods under
Present Bias. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, forthcoming.
[66] Herrnstein, R. J., George Loewenstein, Drazel Prelec, and William Vaughan, Jr. 1993. Utility Maximization and Melioration: Internalities in Individual Choice. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making.
6:149-185.
[67] Hoopes, Jeffrey L., Daniel H. Reck, and Joel Slemrod. 2015. Taxpayer Search for Information: Implications for Rational Attention. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 7(3):177-208.
[68] Hossain, Tanjim, and John Morgan. 2006. ...Plus Shipping and Handling: Revenue (Non)Equivalence
in Field Experiments on eBay. Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy. 6.
[69] Houde, Sebastien. 2014a. How Consumers Respond to Environmental Certification and the Value of
Energy Information. Working Paper, University of Maryland.
[70] Houde, Sebastien. 2014b. Bunching with the Stars: How Firms Respond to Environmental Certification. Working Paper, University of Maryland.
[71] Houde, Sebastien, and C. Anna Spurlock. 2015. Do Energy Efficiency Standards Improve Quality?
Evidence from a Revealed Preference Approach. Working Paper, University of Maryland.
[72] Ito, Koichiro. 2015. Asymmetric Incentives in Subsidies: Evidence from a Large-Scale Electricity Rebate Program. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy. 7(3):209-37.
[73] Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2015. The Persistence of Moral Suasion and Economic
Incentives: Field Experimental Evidence from Energy Demand. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
[74] Jacobsen, Grant D. 2015. Do Energy Prices Influence Investment in Energy Efficiency? Evidence from
Energy Star Appliances. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 74:94-106.
[75] Jessoe, Katrina and David Rapson. 2014. Knowledge is (Less) Power: Experimental Evidence from
Residential Energy Use. American Economic Review . 104(4):1417-1438.
[76] Joskow, Paul L., and Donald B. Marron. 1992. What Does a Negawatt Really Cost? Evidence from
Utility Conservation Programs. Energy Journal . 13(4):41–74.
[77] Kahn, Matthew. 2007. Do Greens Drive Hummers or Hybrids? Environmental Ideology as a Determinant of Consumer Choice. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 54(2):129-145.

33

[78] Kling, Jeffrey, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian Wrobel. 2012. Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
127(1):199-235.
[79] Koszegi, Botond, and Adam Szeidl. 2013. A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice. Quarterly Journal
of Economics. 128(1):53-107.
[80] Laibson, David. 1997. Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
112(2):443-477.
[81] Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2003. A Debt Puzzle. Pages 228-266 in
Aghion, Philippe, Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, Knowledge, Information,
and Expectations in Modern Economics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[82] Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2007. Estimating Discount Functions with
Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle. NBER Working Paper No. 13314.
[83] Lipman, Barton. 1991. How to Decide How to Decide How To ... : Modeling Limited Rationality.
Econometrica. 59(4):1105-1125.
[84] Mannix, Brian F., and Susan E. Dudley. 2015. The Limits of Irrationality as a Rationale for Regulation.
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 34(3):705-712.
[85] Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J. Congdon. 2012. A Reduced-Form Approach to Behavioral Public Finance. Annual Review of Economics. 4:17.1-17.30.
[86] Myers, Erica. 2014. “Asymmetric Information in Residential Rental Markets: Implications for the
Energy Efficiency Gap. Working Paper, UC Berkeley (January).
[87] Newell, Richard, and Juha Siikamaki. 2014. Nudging Energy Efficiency Behavior: The Role of Information Labels. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. 1(4):555-598.
[88] Newell, Richard, and Juha Siikamaki. 2015. Individual Time Preferences and Energy Efficiency. American Economic Review . 105(5):196-200.
[89] NHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Administration). 2010. Final Regulatory Impact Analysis:
Corporate Average Fuel Economy for MY 2012-MY 2016 Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. Office of
Regulatory Analysis and Evaluation, National Center for Statistics and Analysis.
[90] O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. Optimal Sin Taxes. Journal of Public Economics.
90:1825-1849.
[91] Parry, Ian, David Evans, and Wallace Oates. 2010. Are Energy Efficiency Standards Justified? Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 10-59.
[92] Regulatory Analysis Review Group. 1980. Department of Energy’s Proposed Energy Efficiency Standards for Consumer Appliances. http://cwps.mercatus.org/wp-content/uploads/161501.pdf
[93] Sallee, James. 2014. Rational Inattention and Energy Efficiency. Journal of Law and Economics.
57(3):781-820.
[94] Sallee, James, Sarah West, and Wei Fan. 2016. Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel Economy? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations. Journal of Public Economics,
forthcoming.
[95] Spinnewijn, Johannes. 2015. Unemployed but Optimistic: Optimal Insurance Design with Biased Beliefs. Journal of the European Economic Association. 13(1):130-167.

34

[96] Sudarshan,
Anant. 2014. Nudges in the Marketplace:
Using Peer Comparisons
and
Incentives
to
Reduce
Household
Electricity
Consumption.
Working
Paper.
http://www.anantsudarshan.com/uploads/1/0/2/6/10267789/nudges sudarshan 2014.pdf.
[97] Sunstein, Cass and Richard Thaler. 2003. Libertarian Paternalism is not an Oxymoron. University of
Chicago Law Review . 70(4):1159-1202.
[98] Thaler, Richard, and Cass Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. New York: Penguin Books.
[99] Tsvetanov, Tsvetan, and Kathleen Segerson. 2013. Re-evaluating the Role of Energy Efficiency Standards: A Behavioral Economics Approach. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
66:347-363.
[100] Tsvetanov, Tsvetan, and Kathleen Segerson. 2013. The Welfare Effects of Energy Efficiency Standards
When Choice Sets Matter. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists.
1(1/2): 233-271.
[101] US GPO (Government Printing Office). 2007. Testimony on the Status of Energy Efficient
Lighting Technologies. http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110shrg39385/html/CHRG110shrg39385.htm
[102] Yoeli, Erez, Moshe Hoffman, David G. Rand, and Martin A. Nowak. 2015. Powering Up with Indirect
Reciprocity in a Large-Scale Field Experiment. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
110(2):10424-10429.

35

Tables
Table 1: Major US Energy Efficiency Policies
Policy

Years
Magnitude
Standards
Appliance efficiency standards
1990$2.9 billion annual cost
Building codes
1978CAFE standards
1978$10 billion annual cost
Prices
Federal Hybrid Vehicle Tax Credit
2006-2010 $426 million annual credit
Gas guzzler tax
1980$200 million annual revenues
Weatherization Assistance Program
1976$250 million annual cost
Demand-Side Management
1978$7.6 billion annual cost
2009 Economic Stimulus
2009$17 billion total
Information and Marketing
Fuel economy labels
mid-1970s
Appliance “yellow tags”
1980
Energy Star program
1992
$50 million annual cost
Notes: Data in this table are primarily from Allcott and Greenstone (2012).

36

Table 2: Correlation of WTP for a CFL with Electricity Cost Savings

(1)
CFL electricity cost savings

(2)

-0.031

-0.025

(0.031)

(0.031)

Income ($ millions)

1.903
(6.167)

Education (years)

-0.032
(0.147)

Age

-0.012
(0.019)

Male

0.707
(0.537)

Liberal

-0.071
(0.385)

Party

0.572
(0.346)*

Environmentalist

1.168
(0.847)

1(Homeowner)

0.262
(0.695)

N
R2

1,229
0.00

1,217
0.01

Notes: The dependent variable is incremental willingness-to-pay for a compact fluorescent lightbulb relative
to an incandescent lightbulb, using data from Allcott and Taubinsky (2015). Liberal and Party are selfreported political variables, normalized to mean zero, standard deviation one, with more positive meaning
more liberal and more Democratic. Environmentalist is the consumer’s response to the question, “Would
you describe yourself as an environmentalist?” “Yes, definitely,” “Yes, somewhat,” and “No” are coded as 1,
1/2, and 0, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *,**, ***: Statistically different from zero
with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

37

Table 3: Correlates of Fuel Cost Calculation Effort

(1)
Gas price at purchase ($/gallon)
ln(Implied miles/year)
Environmentalist
Income ($ millions)
Education (years)
Age
1(Male)
1(Rural)

(2)

0.148

-0.801

(0.046)***

(0.431)*

0.069

-0.205

(0.034)**

(0.124)*

0.254

0.251

(0.115)**

(0.115)**

0.201

0.216

(0.859)

(0.860)

0.051

0.052

(0.015)***

(0.015)***

-0.006

-0.006

(0.002)**

(0.002)***

0.211

0.204

(0.070)***

(0.070)***

-0.132

-0.137

(0.082)

(0.083)*

Gas price x ln(Implied miles/year)

0.106
(0.049)**

N

1,444

1,444

Notes: The dependent variable is a measure of fuel cost calculation effort from the Vehicle Ownership and
Alternatives Survey, normalized to a standard deviation of one. Environmentalist is the consumer’s response
to the question, “Would you describe yourself as an environmentalist?” “Yes, definitely,” “Yes, somewhat,”
and “No” are coded as 1, 1/2, and 0, respectively. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***:
Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

38

Table 4: Fuel Economy Information Acquisition as a Function of Gas Prices

(1)
Google
Trends
ln(Gas price)
1(Cash for Clunkers)
Time (years)
Number of Obs.
Data Frequency:

(2)
Alternative
Attributes

(3)
Fueleconomy.gov
Website

1.925

-0.114

1.905

(0.320)***

(0.116)

(0.409)***

0.398

-0.099

1.615

(0.077)***

(0.048)**

(0.114)***

-0.049

-0.038

0.147

(0.014)***

(0.009)***

(0.023)***

565
Weekly

565
Weekly

144
Monthly

Notes: The dependent variable in column 1 is the natural log of relative popularity of five fuel economyrelated search terms (gas mileage, fuel economy, miles per gallon, fuel efficiency, and mileage calculator)
from Google Trends data. The dependent variable in column 2 is the natural log of relative popularity of
four search terms for alternative vehicle attributes (horsepower, torque, warranty, and safety ratings). The
dependent variable in column 3 is the natural log of the count of visits to the Fueleconomy.gov website.
Columns 1 and 2 include 52 week-of-year indicators, while column 3 includes 12 month-of-year indicators.
Newey-West standard errors, with 52 lags (columns 1 and 2) and 12 lags (column 3), in parentheses. *,**,
***: Statistically different from zero with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.

39

Figures
Figure 1: Comparing Demand Responses: Graphical Results
$6,000

1999-2003
2004-March 2008
April-December 2008
Slope = -1

Price Difference

$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
$2,000

$3,000

$4,000

$5,000

Gas Cost Difference

$6,000

$7,000

Notes: The vertical axis presents the difference in average prices between below-median MPG and abovemedian MPG used vehicles. The horizontal axis presents the difference in average present discounted value
of gasoline costs. Each dot represents a month of the sample, from January 1999 through December 2008.
Data are Year
from Allcott
and Wozny
Month
Price(2014).
GasCost OrigPricePrOrigPrice04OrigPrice08Slope = -1

CFL Relative Price ($)

1999
1
4901.093 2188.148 4860.354 4562.136 5569.139 4811.852
1999
2
4921.221 2182.759 4862.784 4566.235 5574.808 4817.241
Figure 2: Welfare Effects of Compact Fluorescent Lightbulb Subsidies
1999
3
4917.779 2260.314 4827.812 4507.247 5493.228 4739.686
1999
4
5017.132 2336.86 4793.295 4449.027 5412.71 4663.14
10
1999
5
5032.363 2396.757 4766.285 4403.47 5349.705 4603.243
Baseline
Demand
1999
6
5123.821
2414.243
4758.4 4390.17 5331.312 4585.757
Gain:
1999
7
5357.29 2520.688 4710.401 4309.21 5219.343 4479.312
Internality
5
1999
8
5384.274 2615.962 4667.439 4236.745 5119.125 4384.038
Reduction
1999
9
5155.361 2655.438 4649.638 4206.72
5077.6 4344.562
1999
10
5391.369 2787.758 4589.971 4106.079 4938.414 4212.242
1999
11
5523.289 2886.408 4545.487 4031.047 4834.645 4113.592
0
1999 0
12
2975.642 4505.249
3963.176
0.2 5617.765 0.4
0.6
0.8 4740.78 4024.358
1
2000
1
5008.483 2583.473 4682.089 4261.456
5153.3
4416.527
Loss:
2000
2
4859.559 2620.679 4665.312 4233.157
Harberger 5114.163 4379.321
-5
2000
3
4697.355 2676.587 4640.102 4190.634
Distortion 5055.354 4323.413
2000
4
4839.756 2740.281 4611.38 4142.189 4988.355 4259.719
2000
5
4828.533 2728.553 4616.668 4151.11 5000.691 4271.447
CFL Market
Share
-10
2000
6
4998.701
2794.383
4586.984 4101.04 4931.445 4205.617
2000
7
5081.251 2877.083 4549.692 4038.139 4844.453 4122.917
Notes: This figure illustrates welfare effects of a $1 CFL subsidy. Observations are weighted for national
2000
8
4982.358 2933.879 4524.081 3994.941 4784.71 4066.121
representativeness. Data are from Allcott and Taubinsky (2015).
2000
9
4773.724 3014.621 4487.672 3933.53 4699.779 3985.379
2000
10
4751.305 3101.774 4448.372 3867.241 4608.103 3898.226
2000
11
4763.545 3154.757 4424.48 3826.943 4552.371 3845.243
40
2000
12
4820.935 3181.104
4412.6 3806.904 4524.657 3818.896
2001
1
3867.227 2622.373 4664.548 4231.869 5112.381 4377.627
5

Gain: Internality Reduction

Figure 3: Second Choice Vehicle Valuation Ratios
36

Weighted Observations (millions)

32
28
24
20
16
12
8
4
0

<-1.0

0.0

1.0

2.0

3.0

Valuation Ratio φ (Perceived / True Cost Difference)

>4.0

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of valuation ratios for second choice vehicles from the Vehicle
Ownership and Alternatives Survey. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Data are
from Allcott (2013).

Total nonfla 145.890754

phiBucket
<-1.0
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0

Part 3
Final Data
Flagged
19.06845
2.91238
0.620848
0.053893
1.299902
0.06575
1.170558
0.079761
0.450546
0.251141
34.5293
0.2533
4.712415
0.15629
7.465272
0.781449
7.76707
0
8.980747
0.234974
10.63311
0
5.506797
0.114254
3.542932
0.121798
4.951696
0
4.685465
0.049582
5.960574
0
1.344095
0.577734
1.620023
0.153056
2.09321
0
1.314991
0.029102
2.236563
0.278088

Part 4
Final Data Flagged
0 7.095562
0 0.614381
0 0.503362
0 0.284556
0 0.228507
14.96288 0.37078
11.53204
0
18.99085 0.22635
22.07676 0.15306
25.34269 0.18215
27.60512 0.41606
18.67396 0.35354
11.89204
0
9.456079
0
5.381765
0
4.298512
0
3.0137
0
2.024226 0.049582
1.548888
0
41
1.539186 0.038803
1.456189
0

phiBucket
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3

phi3_All
21.98083
0.674741
1.365652
1.250319
0.701687
34.7826
4.868705
8.246721
7.76707
9.215721
10.63311
5.621051
3.66473
4.951696
4.735047
5.960574
1.921829
1.773079
2.09321
1.344093
2.514651

Figure 4: Gasoline Prices and Search Volume

2

2.5

3
3.5
Gas price ($/gallon)

4

4.5

Google searches for fuel economy (2014=100)
0
100
200
300
400
500

(a) Google Searches (Weekly Data)

2004

2006

2008

2010

Google searches

2012

2014

Gas price

0

2

2.5

3
3.5
Gas price ($/gallon)

4

Fueleconomy.gov visits (millions/month)
2
4
6
8
10

4.5

(b) Fueleconomy.gov Visits (Monthly Data)

2003

2005

2007

2009

Fueleconomy.gov visits

2011

2013
Gas price

Notes: Google searches is the relative popularity of five fuel economy-related search terms (gas mileage, fuel
economy, miles per gallon, fuel efficiency, and mileage calculator) from Google Trends data. Fueleconomy.gov
visits is unique sessions as defined by Google Analytics. Gas price is the “U.S. All Grades All Formulations
Retail Gasoline Price” from the U.S. Energy Information
42 Administration.

