                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LEAD EXPOSURE AND BEHAVIOR:
EFFECTS ON ANTISOCIAL AND RISKY BEHAVIOR AMONG CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

                                          Jessica Wolpaw Reyes

                                           Working Paper 20366
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w20366


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2014




  I would like to thank Claudia Goldin, Jun Ishii, Lawrence Katz, Ronnie Levin, Erzo Luttmer, René
  Reyes, Steven Rivkin, Katharine Sims, and seminar participants at Amherst College, Clark˛University,
  Harvard University, RAND, the University of Massachusetts, the University of Delaware, APPAM,
  the University of Rochester, and the Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program in Rochester,
  New York for valuable advice and comments. Many individuals at government agencies and petroleum
  industry companies generously provided information on lead in gasoline, and Jenny Ying shared data
  on teen pregnancy policies. Steve Trask provided excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors
  are my own. This research was supported by Amherst College and the National Bureau of Economic
  Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
  of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2014 by Jessica Wolpaw Reyes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
  may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
  the source.
Lead Exposure and Behavior: Effects on Antisocial and Risky Behavior among Children and
Adolescents
Jessica Wolpaw Reyes
NBER Working Paper No. 20366
August 2014
JEL No. I18,J13,K49,Q53,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

It is well known that exposure to lead has numerous adverse effects on behavior and development.
Using data on two cohorts of children from the NLSY, this paper investigates the effect of early childhood
lead exposure on behavior problems from childhood through early adulthood. I find large negative
consequences of early childhood lead exposure, in the form of an unfolding series of adverse behavioral
outcomes: behavior problems as a child, pregnancy and aggression as a teen, and criminal behavior
as a young adult. At the levels of lead that were the norm in United States until the late 1980s, estimated
elasticities of these behaviors with respect to lead range between 0.1 and 1.0.


Jessica Wolpaw Reyes
Department of Economics
Amherst College
Amherst, MA 01002
and NBER
jwreyes@amherst.edu
                                         Lead Exposure and Behavior



                                               I. Introduction

        A growing body of literature argues that social scientists should cast a wider lens by
considering early life experiences and environments as potentially important determinants of
later life outcomes. Almond and Currie (2010), for example, cite abundant results showing that
events in early childhood can have long-lasting impacts on adult outcomes, largely through
effects on development of cognitive and non-cognitive skills. 1                  Characteristics such as the
ability to learn well, to listen, to cooperate, and to be respectful of others are established early in
life and are foundational elements of human capital. On the other hand, characteristics such as
easy distractability, aggression, and a short temper are counterproductive. There is an emerging
consensus that formative early life influences may substantially shape adult behavior and
outcomes.
        This paper investigates the effect of early childhood lead exposure on a variety of social
and behavioral outcomes from childhood through young adulthood. The central idea is that
children exposed to even moderate amounts of lead, a toxic metal, will be more likely to exhibit
behavior problems in childhood, to engage in risky behavior in the teenage years, or engage in
violent or criminal behavior in young adulthood. More broadly, I argue that environmental
toxicants and social problems may be closely linked, and that elucidating these links may
provide insight both into the understanding of social problems and also the potential of public
health and environmental policy to improve social health.
        Why should lead be considered as a possible factor affecting social behavior at the
societal level? Lead is a hazardous neurotoxicant with a wide range of adverse effects on human
health and behavior, such as decreasing IQ, increasing learning disabilities, behavior problems,
and aggressive behavior, as well as adversely affecting cardiovascular functioning and other
physiological processes.        It is reasonably well established that lead has particularly strong
behavioral effects on young children, and that some of these effects persist as individuals age. It
is also the case that leaded gasoline provided the major source of lead exposure for the U.S.
population through the early 1980s, that individual lead levels were high enough to expect broad
societal effects on health and behavior, and that these lead levels declined drastically as lead was


1
 See also: Case and Paxson (2010), Lochner and Moretti (2004), Heckman et al. (2006), Katz et al. (2001), Graff
Zivin and Neidell (2013).



                                                     Page 1
                                   Lead Exposure and Behavior



phased out of gasoline. Together, these facts indicate that one might expect lead to have had
substantial effects on behavior at the societal level, and substantial effects on temporal changes
in such behavior. Moreover, they suggest that one might be able to discern the effects of lead on
behavior by studying cohorts of children born during the phaseout of lead from gasoline.
       During the late 1970s in the United States, lead was removed from gasoline under the
Clean Air Act. This phaseout of lead from gasoline (primarily between 1975 and 1985) did not
occur in a uniform fashion throughout the country, providing a useful natural experiment. To
measure childhood lead exposure, I employ detailed data on the lead content of gasoline (from a
variety of government sources) as well as individual-level data on children’s blood lead levels
from the second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II). To measure
behavioral outcomes, I use National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data on two cohorts
born during the phaseout of lead from gasoline: a cohort of 3,833 children of the NLSY 1979
sample women (born between 1979 and 1985) and a cohort of 7,889 children from the NLSY
1997 (born between 1980 and 1984). The primary analysis includes these individuals, for whom
gasoline lead content is used as an instrument to predict childhood blood lead in a split-sample
instrumental variables strategy. Outcomes considered include childhood behavior problems, teen
sexual behavior and pregnancy, teen substance abuse, aggression, and crime.
       This investigation of a broad range of adverse effects of lead is distinguished by its scale,
scope, and identification. In scale: I use observations on more than 10,000 individuals, drawn
from nationally representative samples. In scope: I investigate effects on a wide range of
behavioral outcomes, at multiple ages, and with a range of social implications. In identification:
I employ a plausibly exogenous change in childhood lead exposure in order to identify a causal
impact of lead on social behavior. Thus, while many earlier investigations employed smaller
samples or investigated a narrower range of effects, this paper contributes to a growing literature
that uses novel non-experimental methods to investigate broad health and social effects of
environmental exposures.    The specific aim of this paper is to employ careful individual-level
analysis to understand lead’s broad impact on social behavior in the United States.
       The paper proceeds as follows. Section II provides background on social behavior, lead,
and the relationship between the two. Section III sets out a simple theory by which lead may
affect behavior. Section IV outlines the data employed, and Section V describes the empirical
approach. Sections VI and VII discuss the results. Section VIII provides interpretation, and


                                             Page 2
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



Section IX concludes.


                                             II. Behavior and Lead

Behavior
         Problems such as attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), teenage
pregnancy, substance abuse, and crime impose large costs on society and pose challenges to
policymakers. Estimates indicate that approximately 20% of children and adolescents in the U.S.
display symptoms of behavioral and mental disorders, 8% of children have learning disabilities,
and 7% of children have ADHD. 2 Other common disruptions to behavior include aggressivity,
disinhibition, and impulsivity. Moreover, these childhood problems often serve as precursors to
a variety of mental health problems, risky behaviors, and antisocial behaviors in later life.
         The types of adolescent behaviors that may be implicated include early sexual activity,
teenage pregnancy, substance abuse, and juvenile delinquency. Impulsivity has been linked to
teen sex, teen pregnancy, and substance abuse. 3 Loeber (1990) argues that decreased levels of
impulse control by American children are largely responsible for the increasing prevalence of
antisocial and delinquent behavior among juveniles. Richardson (2000) writes that “the ADHD
brain has problems putting on the brakes and controlling actions” and that “rage and violence are
often life-long problems for people with untreated ADHD.” 4                        ADHD, currently the most
common chronic mental health problem among children, has been shown to reduce test scores
and to increase the probability of delinquency. 5 Recent evidence indicates that more than two-
thirds of juvenile delinquents meet diagnostic criteria for one or more psychiatric disorders, 6 and
three independent studies find that children with ADHD are five times more likely to be
delinquent than children without ADHD. 7 More generally, behavior issues in childhood can
substantially impair accumulation of human capital and social capital, leading to a broad range of

2
  U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (1999). National Institutes of Mental Health (1996).
3
  Gruber (2001), Hoffman and Maynard (2008), Maynard (1996), Sweeney et al. (2000).
4
  Fishbein (2000).
5
  Currie and Stabile (2006); Visser et al. (2014).
6
  Teplin et al. (2002).
7
  Studying a group of 678 thirteen-year-olds, Moffitt and Silva (1988) report that, controlling for other factors, 58%
of ADHD children became delinquent, compared with only 10% of non-ADHD children. Satterfield (1987) finds
that ADHD children were six times more likely to be arrested for at least one serious offense as a teenager.
Dalsgaard (2003) finds that children with ADHD are five times more likely to be convicted of any crime by age 30
and twelve times more likely to be convicted of a violent crime.



                                                       Page 3
                                         Lead Exposure and Behavior



effects.
           While the prevalence of many of these behaviors prompts concern, it is their substantial
trends that have particularly puzzled analysts. Child behavior problems appear to have risen in
prevalence and severity in the last twenty or thirty years, although changing attitudes and
definitions make it difficult to track trends accurately or directly. Substance abuse rates show a
different trend, having peaked in the late 1970s, declined until the early 1990s, and risen mildly
since then. 8 Teenage pregnancy rates rose until the early 1990s and declined substantially
thereafter, but trends vary across states and racial groups. 9              Juvenile delinquency, criminal
behavior, and violence show similar trends to that of teen pregnancy, peaking in the early 1990s
and exhibiting sharp declines thereafter. While a number of plausible explanations for these
trends have been posited, understanding these behaviors, their trends, and the role of policy
remain active areas of inquiry. 10

Lead
           Lead is an extremely useful metal but unfortunately has also proved to be a dangerous
toxin, particularly for young children who are at a sensitive stage of their neurobehavioral
development. 11 It is now widely accepted that lead easily crosses the blood-brain barrier 12, that
lead exposure can be detrimental even at extremely low levels 13, and that the adverse
neurological effects of lead persist into older ages. 14 Historically, the main environmental
sources of lead exposure for the average child have been leaded gasoline, lead-based paint, and
lead water pipes.
           While paint is a major source of environmental lead exposure, it is not as readily
absorbed as lead from gasoline nor did it experience drastic changes in the time period under
consideration. The possible danger from lead paint hazards in older housing and in central cities

8
  Johnston et al. (2009); Markowitz et al. (2005).
9
  Hoffman and Maynard (2008).
10
   See, e.g., Levitt and Donohue (2001), Levitt (2004).
11
   Children also absorb lead more efficiently from their environment. Hammond (1988) reports that children absorb
up to 50% of lead they ingest, compared with 8% for adults. Bellinger (2004) provides a good review of the
differences in lead absorption between children and adults.
12
   Costa et al. (2004).
13
   It is important to distinguish between lead exposure and lead poisoning. Lead exposure is simply exposure to
some level of lead. Lead poisoning encompasses a certain set of symptoms and occurs at particularly high levels of
exposure (usually blood lead levels in excess of 25 μg/dL). This paper is primarily concerned with lead exposure,
not lead poisoning.
14
   Bellinger (2008).



                                                    Page 4
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



should not be downplayed; it is just not possible to assess their effects with the empirical strategy
employed in this paper. 15 Likewise, the importance of water mains and pipes as a source of lead
exposure is becoming more evident, but there are few easily-observed drastic changes and
consequently diminished opportunities for identification of these effects. 16
         The current paper will focus on exposure to lead from gasoline sources, taking advantage
of a unique opportunity provided by U.S. environmental history and policy: the phaseout of lead
from gasoline in the 1970s and early 1980s. Lead was first added to gasoline in the late 1920s to
boost engine power, and the lead content of gasoline rose throughout the middle part of the
century, remaining high until the 1970s. As Devra Davis writes, “[f]ormulating gasoline with
liquid lead had indeed created a massive delivery system for spreading an insidious poison into
the lungs, hearts, and brains of millions.” 17              Lead from gasoline can be absorbed into an
individual’s body directly from breathing in gasoline exhaust from the air or indirectly via
contact with lead deposits that have accumulated in soil. During the years when gasoline
contained high levels of lead, gasoline represented “the most ubiquitous source of lead found in
the air, dust, and dirt in urban areas” 18 and blood lead levels were highly correlated with recent
gasoline lead consumption. 19
         In December 1973, under the authorization of the Clean Air Act, the EPA mandated a
timetable for the reduction of lead in gasoline, requiring petroleum companies to meet certain
targets of maximum grams of lead per gallon of gasoline. The average lead content of the
gasoline produced by each refinery was to be reduced from 2.0 grams per total gallon to a
maximum of 0.5 grams per total gallon by 1979. Over the next decade, as scientific, political,
and legal battles played out, the timetable was delayed slightly and further reductions were
                  20
implemented.           The reduction was aided by the advent of catalytic converters, originally
introduced in the early 1970s to limit sulfur emissions, but which coincidentally limited lead


15
   The lead content of paint declined relatively smoothly from 1920 on, with breaks in 1950 when lead-based paint
was banned for interior use and in 1978 when it was banned for all residential uses. The primary danger since 1970
stems from older housing with deteriorating paint; children absorb lead from paint sources directly when they eat
paint chips or indirectly when deteriorating paint creates lead dust.
16
   See Troesken (2006) on the economic history of lead in water pipes.
17
   Davis (2002), p.67.
18
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1973).
19
   Schwartz and Pitcher (1989).
20
   There are several excellent detailed accounts of the history of lead regulation in the United States: Warren (2000),
Markowitz and Rosner (2013).



                                                       Page 5
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



emissions because they were fouled by leaded gasoline. Ultimately, the phaseout was a success:
gasoline lead dropped by 99% between 1975 and 1990. 21 The National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) confirmed that the reduction in lead emissions was closely
associated with corresponding large reductions in the blood lead levels of Americans in all
demographic groups. 22 The entire distribution shifted downward, and the national mean dropped
from 16 μg/dL in 1976 to 3 μg/dL in 1991. 23 This decline in lead exposure from gasoline
sources between 1975 and 1985, resulting from the Clean Air Act, will be the main source of
identification for the current analysis.

Lead and Behavior
         The association between lead exposure during early development and subsequent deficits
in cognitive development and behavior is widely accepted. Neurological research indicates that
exposure to lead impairs brain development (particularly the prefrontal corex, hippocampus,
basal ganglia, and cerebellum) and damages neurotransmitter systems (particularly the
dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and cholinergic pathways) in ways that impair cognition, attention,
and impulse control. 24 Early childhood exposure (before age 6) appears to be most harmful to
psychological and cognitive development, and there is evidence that these effects persist to a
great degree.25
         Increased lead levels are significantly associated with decreased mental skills, including
reduced IQ, reduced verbal competence, increased reading disabilities, and reduced academic


21
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1998). Between 1975 and 1990, all measures of lead exposure (on-road
vehicle emissions, other emissions, air lead, gasoline lead, and blood lead) declined drastically and in concert with
one another. Between 1975 and 1990, total lead emissions declined by 97% and gasoline lead went from the
dominant source of lead (80% of emissions) to a minor source (8% of emissions).
22
   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1991), Brody et al. (1994).
23
   Bodily lead levels can be measured in blood, teeth, or bone. A blood lead level is the concentration of lead in
blood, and is measured in micrograms per deciliter (μg/dL) or micromoles per liter (μmol/L). Blood lead is a good
measure of recent exposure, while dentine and bone lead better reflect cumulative lifetime exposure.
24
   Goodlad et al. (2013), Costa et al. (2004), Cory-Slechta (1995). The EPA’s 2013 Integrated Science Assessment
for Lead provides the following explanation for the biological mechanisms for lead’s effects: “A number of
mechanisms, including changes in neurogenesis, synaptogenesis and synaptic pruning, long term potentiation, and
neurotransmitter function have been identified that provide biological plausibility for epidemiologic and
toxicological findings of persistent cognitive and behavioral effects that result from Pb [lead] exposures during
prenatal and early childhood periods. Furthermore, the normal dynamic and rapid rate of development that occurs
early in life in the CNS [central nervous system] makes insults early in life especially problematic in that they can
permanently change the trajectory of brain development such that there are little or no compensatory pathways to
replace the lost potential for proper brain development (Bayer, 1989).” (EPA (2013) pg. 1-77.)
25
   Banks et al. (1997), Bellinger (2008), Needleman et al. (1996), Environmental Protection Agency (2013).



                                                       Page 6
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



performance. 26 Canfield, Henderson et al. (2003) report an IQ decrement of 0.74 of a point per
1 μg/dL of blood lead for blood lead below 10 μg/dL, and a smaller decrement of 0.25 above 10
μg/dL. 27 To put this in context, this means that the decrease in average blood lead for young
children in the 1980s (from 15 to 4 μg/dL)28 would produce about a 6 point increase in IQ, or
about one-third of a standard deviation. Moreover, the EPA (2013) review of the literature finds
that deficits persist even after blood lead levels decline. Coscia, Ris et al. (2003) argue that by
contributing to weak verbal, reading, and other abilities, lead exposure “deflects such youth’s
development in an antisocial direction.”
        While much research has focused on IQ effects, many studies have also found strong
associations between higher lead levels and aggressive behavior, impulsivity, hyperactivity, and
attention impairment. 29 Early in this literature, Needleman and Bellinger (1981) reported that
children with above-average (but still moderate) lead levels are more than three times as likely to
be distractible, hyperactive, impulsive, and to have low overall functioning. More recently,
Goodlad et al. (2013) perform a meta-analysis of 33 studies showing that lead is significantly
associated with ADHD symptoms (inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity), with correlations
of 0.16 and 0.13 respectively. Similarly, Marcus, Fulton and Clarke (2010) review the literature
on lead and conduct problems, reporting a significant correlation of 0.19 for conduct problems
such as conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, and delinquency from their meta-
analysis. In addition, a number of studies have found higher lead levels among children who are
hyperactive or who have other behavior problems, and among juvenile delinquents and
criminals. 30 Research in psychology and neurotoxicology has also established direct links
between higher childhood lead exposure and a greater likelihood of adult criminal behavior. 31
These studies and the meta-analyses thereof make substantial efforts to control for confounding
factors, but of course are limited in their ability to definitely establish causality. They do,
however, consistently find statistically significant effects in widely varying contexts and at a

26
   Bryce-Smith (1983).
27
   An early meta-analysis by Needleman and Gatsonis (1990) reports a lead-IQ correlation of -0.15, similar to the
correlations reported for ADHD and conduct problems.
28
   U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (1994).
29
   Wilson and Petersilia (1995), Needleman et al. (1990), Needleman and Gatsonis (1991), Banks et al. (1997).
30
   Denno (1990); Needleman (1985). Needleman et al. (2002) show that adjudicated delinquents were four times as
likely to have high lead levels than non-delinquents. Masters et al. (1998) and Bryce-Smith (1983) show that violent
criminals exhibit higher levels of lead in their bodies than non-violent criminals or the general population.
31
   Denno (1990); Needleman et al. (1996); Dietrich et al. (2001); Wright et al. (2008).



                                                     Page 7
                                    Lead Exposure and Behavior



wide range of lead levels.
       In 2013, the Environmental Protection Agency conducted an exhaustive Integrated
Science Assessment for Lead, drawing on thousands of scientific studies to detail lead’s causal
effects on a range of health outcomes. With regard to the outcomes of interest in this paper, they
conclude the following:
       Whether prospective or cross-sectional or previously reviewed or recently
       published, most of the epidemiologic studies found associations between
       childhood blood or tooth Pb levels and attention decrements, impulsivity, and
       hyperactivity (Figure 4-9 and Table 4-11).              EPA (2013), p. 4-187

       Collectively, the evidence from prospective studies indicated associations of
       teacher and parental ratings of aggressive, antisocial, and delinquent behavior
       with biomarkers of cumulative Pb exposure, i.e., age 0-6 year average blood,
       lifetime (to ages 4-5 or 11-13 years) average blood, tooth, and bone Pb level.
                                                                     EPA (2013), p. 4-183

The EPA report also confirms a “common finding” that lead’s cognitive and behavioral effects
are non-linear, with marginal effects that are larger at lower lead levels. However, the report
finds no clear explanation for this particular dose-response shape.
        Recently, a growing literature has employed non-experimental data to establish lead’s
adverse effects. Investigating IQ and cognitive impairment, Ferrie, Rolf and Troesken (2012)
link lead in water to lower intelligence test scores for American army enlistees during World
War II; Rau, Reyes and Urzua (2012) study effects on academic performance in Chile; Nilsson
(2009) studies the cognitive and labor market effects of the removal of lead from gasoline in
Sweden; and McLaine, Navas-Acien et al. (2013) and Reyes (2011) show effects on school test
scores in Rhode Island and Massachusetts respectively. Investigating lead and crime, social
scientists have contributed to the discussion with a variety of identification strategies: Mielke
and Zahran (2012) use a small panel of U.S. cities, Reyes (2007) uses a full panel of U.S. states,
Nevin (2000) uses a single U.S. time series, Nevin (2007) uses a panel of developed countries,
and Masters et al. (1998) use a cross section of U.S. states. (Nevin (2000) also investigates
effects on teen pregnancy.) Overall, the literature suggests that there may be a substantial
elasticity of crime with respect to lead, likely between 0.2 and 0.8.
       In sum, a diverse multi-disciplinary literature reaches the consensus that early childhood
lead exposure negatively affects cognitive development and behavior in ways that increase the



                                              Page 8
                                     Lead Exposure and Behavior



likelihood of aggressive and antisocial acts. These links to behavior pertain even at the moderate
lead levels (5-15 µg/dL) that were common in the U.S. through the early 1980s. I note that,
while the medical or biological science literature makes compelling broad arguments for how
and why lead should affect behavior, a good portion of the work investigating individual
outcomes uses smaller, selected, populations or focuses on relatively narrow sets of outcomes.
This paper aims to add to the literature by using a large nationally-representative dataset to
investigate a broad set of outcomes over a range of ages. The goal is to form a coherent picture
of lead’s full effects on individuals and thereby understand the extent and nature of lead’s broad
consequences for society. Several authors, including Gould (2009), have endeavored to calculate
the full costs of lead by extrapolating from individual scientific papers. The current paper aims to
advance our understanding by establishing lead’s societal effects directly (rather than via
extrapolation). In a sense, this is analogous to moving from in vitro analysis to in vivo analysis,
if the society is the living organism under consideration.


                                            III. Theory

       This paper aims to study a causal link between childhood lead exposure and various
aspects of social behavior. While the details of the underlying physiological mechanism by
which lead impairs neurodevelopment and behavior are beyond the scope of this paper, the broad
outlines of that mechanism can be expressed within the framework of the standard economic
model of individual behavior.
       First, I write the performance outcome P as a function of ability, characteristics, and
environment:
       P = p(A,B,X,F,C) .                                                                    (1)
The variables A and B represent cognitive and behavioral (non-cognitive) ability, respectively.
The variables X, F, and C, respectively represent vectors of individual, family, and community
characteristics. It is assumed that these characteristics will have direct, indirect, and interactive
effects on P. For example, family income would enter directly as a family characteristic but
might also influence other characteristics or ability.
       Lead exposure is modeled as a function of family and community characteristics, and is
also influenced by government policy G and any protective behavior H undertaken by the family:



                                               Page 9
                                     Lead Exposure and Behavior



       L = l(F,C,G,H) .                                                                      (2)
Lead exposure would, in turn, affect both types of ability directly:
       A = a(L,X,F,C)          and     B = b(L,X,F,C).                                       (3)
The inclusion of the various characteristics indicates that those characteristics can modify both
the lead level resulting from a given exposure and the effect of that lead level on ability.
Ultimately, performance is a complex function of characteristics, behaviors, and policies:
       P= p(A,B,X,F,C )                                                                      (4)
          = p ( a(L,X,F,C) , b(L,X,F,C) , X , F , C )
          = p ( a(l(F,C,G,H),X,F,C), b(l(F,C,G,H),X,F,C) , X , F , C ) .
It is apparent that the precise structure of these relationships is too intricate to be determined by
means of a simplified reduced-form model of this type. However, several simple qualitative
hypotheses can be stated. If the performance outcome P is a positive outcome (an economic
good), then:
       ∂P/∂B > 0       Higher ability causes higher performance
       ∂B/∂L < 0       Higher lead level causes lower ability
       ∂P/∂L < 0       Higher lead level causes lower performance
                       (follows via the chain rule from ∂B/∂L < 0 and ∂P/∂B < 0).
       ∂P/∂G > 0       Government policy that reduces lead improves performance
                       (follows via the chain rule from ∂L/∂G < 0 and ∂P/∂L < 0).
       ∂2P / ∂L2 > 0 Marginal effect of lead declines with lead
The middle three are the main hypotheses that will be tested by this paper. The last is suggested
by the results of Canfield et al. (2003) and others, but is theoretically more ambiguous. Lastly,
we note that the foregoing theory describes the effects of an individual child’s lead on that
individual child’s outcome. It is also possible that there may be spillover effects of lead through
peer effects as group behavior deteriorates.


                                               IV. Data

       The National Longitudinal Surveys of Youth (NLSY) provide a rich set of longitudinal
data on two cohorts of individuals born during the phaseout of lead from gasoline. These will
provide the primary data for this analysis. Data from various sources on blood lead and gasoline




                                               Page 10
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



lead will provide measures of lead exposure. Lastly, a variety of other data sources will provide
control variables relevant to specific outcomes.

NLSY 79 Child and Young Adult
        The NLSY 79 surveyed a nationally-representative sample of 12,686 individuals who
were between 14 and 21 years of age in 1978. 32 Individuals in the NLSY79 sample were
surveyed annually or biannually since 1979. Beginning in 1986, the children of the women of
the NLSY79 were interviewed biannually in the NLSY79 Child and Young Adult Surveys
(NLSY79 CHYA). 33 It is estimated that the NLSY79 CHYA surveys include 90% of the
children born to the NLSY79 women. It is important to note that, while the NLSY79 CHYA
sample can be a nationally representative sample of the children of these women, it is not itself a
nationally representative sample of children more generally. The most obvious potential bias,
widely noted in the literature, is that children born in earlier years were born to younger mothers,
many of them teens. Analysis in this paper will include the 3,833 children born between 1979
and 1985, and will address this possible bias with controls for mother’s age at birth and child’s
birth cohort. Together, the Child and Young Adult Surveys provide a rich set of longitudinal
data. Individual observations can be linked to the maternal and family demographics collected in
the main NLSY79.
        The NLSY79 Child Supplement includes additional information on child behavior,
school performance, test scores, sexual activity, and substance abuse.                       Child behavior is
measured using the Child Behavior Problems Index (BPI), which evaluates “the frequency,
range, and type of childhood behavior problems for children age four and over.” 34                               It is
constructed from a set of 32 questions answered by a parent or teacher about child behavior,
including items such as whether a child argues too much, acts impulsively, bullies others, or is
depressed. The answer is given qualitatively, as “never,” “sometimes,” or “often.” Sub-scales of
the BPI can be created by summing groups of items to represent certain aspects of behavior; the




32
   U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2005), Baker et al. (1993).
33
   NLSY79 Child & Young Adult Data User's Guide, Center for Human Research of The Ohio State University
(2004).
34
   Ibid, p.78, Zill (1985), Zill (1990). See also Achenbach and Edelbrock (1979) for a discussion of the BPI’s
predecessor, the more extensive Child Behavior Checklist.



                                                     Page 11
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



Oppositional, Antisocial, Headstrong, and Hyperactive Subscales are employed in this paper. 35
A list of BPI items and subscales is shown in Appendix Table 1.                             The NLSY79 Child
Supplements also contain additional data on risky behavior in the pre-teen years. These include
the use of licit or illicit substances, such as alcohol, cigarettes, marijuana, or hard drugs. The
NLSY79 Child supplements also contain limited data on aggressive behavior, including whether
the individual hurt someone else badly enough that that person needed medical attention.
         The NLSY79 Young Adult Surveys overlap with and extend the NLSY79 Child Surveys.
The Young Adult Surveys start at age 15 or 16. They provide more comprehensive self-reported
data on sexual activity, substance abuse, and criminal activity. The sexual activity data includes
the dates of any pregnancies, but does not include substantial other information about sexual
activity. The substance use data is similar to that in the Child Surveys. The additional data that
is most relevant to the present analysis is the self-reported data on aggressive or criminal
behavior, including whether the teenager hit or threatened to hit someone, hurt someone badly
enough to need a doctor, or was convicted of a crime. 36
         The main strengths of the NLSY 79 CHYA are the detail of the child behavior variables
and the availability of at least some data on teen risky and criminal behavior.                           The main
weaknesses are twofold. First, the sample may not be nationally representative of each birth
cohort, particularly because earlier births are, by construction, to younger mothers. Second, the
data is collected only every two years, and some of the self-reported retrospective teen data may
not be as reliable as we would like. The NLSY97, which I discuss now, addresses some of these
deficiencies but brings others of its own.

NLSY 97
         The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) surveyed a nationally-
representative sample of 8,984 individuals who were born between 1980 and 1984. 37 This


35
   Each behavior problems index or subscale is calculated by assigning, for each behavior problem item, a value of 0
to “never,” 1 to “sometimes,” and 2 to “often”, and summing those values over the relevant set of behaviors.
36
   The NLSY79 Young Adult Surveys contain the following categories for crime convictions: assault, robbery, theft,
fencing stolen goods, destruction of property, other property offenses, possession of marijuana, selling of marijuana,
possession of illicit drugs, sale and manufacture of drugs, major traffic offenses, drinking under age, and
miscellaneous other offenses.
37
   Two subsamples comprise the NLSY97 cohort: a nationally-representative cross-section of 6,748 individuals and
a supplemental oversample of 2,236 Hispanic or Latino and black individuals. See the NLSY97 User’s Guide,
Center for Human Research of The Ohio State University (2005).



                                                      Page 12
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



analysis employs the 7,889 individuals who were born in the United States. Individuals in the
NLSY97 were first surveyed in 1997 (at ages 12 through 17), and were surveyed annually
thereafter. Attrition after 3 rounds was below 10%, and after 7 rounds was below 15%. Like the
NLSY79 CHYA, the NLSY97 provides detailed data on demographics, sexual activity,
substance abuse, and criminal activity. The NLSY97 also provides some limited retrospective
data about childhood behavior, via a scaled ranking of the individual’s behavioral or emotional
problems as a child. Where the NLSY97 adds value is in measuring teen risky behavior,
aggressive behavior, and criminal behavior. There are detailed questions about the age at first
sexual activity, pregnancies, and the use of alcohol, cigarettes, and marijuana. There are also
questions about when and whether the individual attacked someone intentionally with the goal of
hurting or fighting. The crime data include arrests, charges, and convictions with some detail
about particular categories of offenses. 38
         The NLSY97 offers several advantages over the NLSY79 CHYA. First, it provides a
larger and nationally-representative sample. Second, it contains more thorough and annual data
on activity in the teen years. However it also has some disadvantages: it contains only limited
information on the childhood years, some of the teen data is based on recall of events several
years prior, the sample does not include those born in the earliest part of the phaseout of lead
from gasoline, and selective attrition could potentially bias some results. 39
         Thus, used together, these two primary NLS datasets should be able to provide a
reasonably complete, if imperfect, picture of behavior in the childhood and teen years. The
variables from both the NLSY79 CHYA and the NLSY97 are summarized in Table 1. The
demographic characteristics confirm that the NLSY97 sample is closer to nationally-
representative than the NLSY79 CHYA sample, with, for example, a sample that is 71% white
and has an average family income of $51,000. We also get a sense of the prevalence of behavior
problems, with the main index showing that the average child exhibits 9 to 10 problem
behaviors, while the subscales show the average severity of particular aspects of behavior. The

38
   The NLSY97 contains the following categories for crime charges and convictions: assault, burglary, theft,
robbery, destruction of property, possession of drugs, sale of drugs, public order offense, major traffic offense, other
property offense, other offense.
39
   A preliminary investigation reveals that the sample that does drop out appears to have had more behavior
problems in childhood, possibly indicating that those with worse outcomes are more likely to drop out. More
detailed analysis comparing those who do not drop out of the survey with those who do may be warranted, and could
shed light on these issues.



                                                      Page 13
                                       Lead Exposure and Behavior



data on teen risky behavior is as expected, with rates of teen pregnancy around 15 to 25% and
rates of substance use that range from one-quarter to one-half. The data on aggressive behavior
is perhaps most surprising, showing that the likelihood of hitting, attacking, or hurting someone
reaches almost one-third by age 17. Lastly, behavior that rises to the level of officially criminal
is less likely, with a 23% arrest rate, a 13% rate of being charged, and conviction rates around
10% for any type of crime.

Lead
        Data on individual blood lead concentrations comes from the second National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II).                  The NHANES II measured blood lead
concentrations of a nationally representative sample of 9,372 individuals, including 2,322
children under the age of 6, in the years 1976 to 1980. The blood lead concentrations were
obtained through direct physical examination, and measure the actual concentration of lead in an
individual’s blood (in micrograms per deciliter of blood, denoted μg/dL). The NHANES II data
include geographic location, individual demographics (such as age, race, and family income) and
the exact date on which the blood sample was taken. Table 2 shows the distribution of blood
lead over the period 1976 to 1980. It is clear that the entire distribution of blood lead shifted
downward during this time period, with the mean and median dropping by half, or 9 μg/dL. The
NHANES III data, which is not used directly in this analysis, confirms that this swift downward
movement continued in the 1980s.
        Data on gasoline lead concentration at the state-month level is constructed from a number
of government and industry sources. In the period 1975 to 1985, four grades of gasoline were
consumed (regular unleaded, premium unleaded, regular leaded, and premium leaded). The
shares consumed and the lead concentration of the grades differed from state to state. I calculate
the average grams of lead per gallon of gasoline in a given state in a given month by summing
over grades the product of the share of that grade and the grams per gallon of that grade. The
Yearly Reports of Gasoline Sales by States provide data on the shares of the grades of gasoline,
and Petroleum Products Surveys provide data on the lead concentrations. 40
        Table 2 shows the distribution of gasoline lead concentrations over the period under


40
 Ethyl Corporation (1976-1984). National Institute for Petroleum Energy Research and BETC (1947-1989). The
measurement of gasoline lead is discussed at length in Reyes (2007).



                                                 Page 14
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



consideration. Gasoline lead dropped swiftly between 1976 and 1980, and continued to decline
in the early 1980s. The maps in Figure 1 show the geographic variation of gasoline lead in 1979,
1981, and 1983. In each year, a state is colored based on the deviation of its lead concentration
from the national average lead concentration in that year. The figure therefore nets out the
national trend, displaying the remaining substantial variation of gasoline lead across states and
over time. We see that states move at different rates, some leading, some lagging, and some
starting out ahead and then falling behind. It is this variation across states in the timing of the
lead phaseout that will be used to identify lead’s effects.
        These data on lead in blood and lead in gasoline will be used together. The next section
outlines the strategy employed to estimate early childhood blood lead for individual children
born during the phaseout of lead from gasoline.

Other Data
        Control variables are gathered from a variety of other sources, primarily the U.S. Bureau
of the Census and other government agencies. 41 For teen pregnancy, an additional vector of
state-level control variables includes the minimum wage, maximum welfare benefit, and
indicator variables for welfare reform (either via a waiver under AFDC or a TANF reform), a
parental living arrangement requirement in welfare, and parental involvement requirement for
teenage abortion. For crime, an additional vector of state-level covariates includes the state per-
capita income, the poverty rate, the unemployment rate, a concealed weapons law, lagged police
per capita, and lagged prisoners per capita.



41
   Sources for these variables are as follows. Income, Poverty, Minimum Wage, Unemployment, and Population are
from the Statistical Abstract of the United States, published annually by the U.S. Bureau of Census. Income is
converted into 2000 dollars. The unemployment rate represents the percent unemployed among civilian non-
institutional population 16 years of age and older. The poverty rate is the percentage of the state population below
the federal poverty line as defined in that year. Data on gun laws is from Lott and Mustard (1997) and has been
updated appropriately. The variable indicates whether the state had a non-discretionary concealed handgun law in
that year. Such a law requires local law enforcement authorities to grant concealed weapons permits to anyone
meeting certain pre-established criteria. Data on police is from the Uniform Crime Reports for the United States,
published annually by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. It is measured as police per 1000 population and is
lagged by one year. Data on prisoners is from Correctional Populations in the United States, published annually by
the Bureau of Justice Statistics. It is measured as prisoners per 1000 population and is lagged by one year. Data on
Waiver and TANF implementation dates and minor parent living arrangement requirements are from The State
Policy Documentation Project (SPDP). and Crouse (1999) “State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare
Policies, 1992-1998.” Data on parental involvement requirements for teenage abortion are from the Alan
Guttmacher Institute.



                                                    Page 15
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



                                           V. Empirical Approach

         The goal of this paper is to identify a causal effect of childhood lead exposure on
behavior. I model the propensity to exhibit a certain behavioral trait as a function of childhood
blood lead. The basic regression equation is thus:
         Prob (outcome) i = α1 BloodLead i + X i β + ε i .                                                  (5)
where Xi is a vector of individual demographics. While the NLSY provides a rich set of
behavioral outcomes for a nationally representative sample of individuals born during the
phaseout of lead from gasoline, it does not include direct measures of the childhood blood lead
of those individuals. However, this gap can be filled: by employing a straightforward split-
sample instrumental variables strategy, the childhood blood lead of the NLSY individuals can be
estimated using the NHANES II blood lead data.
         I use the gasoline lead data and the NHANES blood lead data to estimate the following
equation on the sample of young children in the NHANES in the period 1976 to 1980:
         BloodLead i = 𝛾 GasLead i + Yi 𝜽 + 𝜀i .                                                            (6)
where Yi is a vector of individual demographics during childhood: age, gender, race, and
income. 42 I then use the data on the relevant gasoline lead concentration for each individual in
the NLSY samples (matched to that individual by age, year, and state), together with the
coefficients estimated from Equation 6, to predict the childhood blood lead concentration for
each of the NLSY individuals:
            � i = 𝛾� GasLead i + Yi 𝜭
         BloodLead                  � .                                                                     (7)
This yields a predicted childhood blood lead concentration for each individual in the NLSY
samples. 43 I can then investigate how this (predicted) measure of childhood blood lead affects
the propensity to exhibit certain behavioral traits later in life, by putting it into Equation 5 in
place of the (unobservable) actual childhood blood lead:
                                  � i + 𝑋i 𝜷 + 𝜀i .
         Prob (outcome) i = α1 BloodLead                                                                    (8)
         This strategy merits some discussion. First I address the choice of the measure of

42
   Income is broken into categories based on the federal poverty line (FPL): less than twice the FPL (low), two to
three times the FPL (middle), and more than three times the FPL (high). This was done in response to the need to
find a common set of demographic variables in the NHANES and NLSY.
43
   Note that the first-stage regression of blood lead on gasoline lead can be varied in a number of ways: it can be
done on the full sample of young children, or on subsets by smaller aging groupings; the variables included as
controls can be changed; fixed effects for state and year can be included or excluded.



                                                     Page 16
                                         Lead Exposure and Behavior



gasoline lead: grams per gallon. Gasoline was a major source of lead exposure circa 1980, and
changes in gasoline lead concentrations were induced by the Clean Air Act. While one could
consider using the share of unleaded gasoline or several other measures, grams per gallon is
well-suited to serve as a measure of gasoline lead exposure in this analysis for several reasons.
First, EPA policy specifically targeted grams per gallon. Second, this policy was imposed on
petroleum companies, not states. Therefore, the changes in grams per gallon at the state level
were induced by national environmental policy but – because they were mediated through
company decisions – were not endogenous to state environmental policy. Consequently, the
cross-state variation in the phaseout is most evident in the cross-state variation in grams per
gallon. Moreover, the variation resulted not from state policy or state-specific EPA policy, but
rather from the interaction between the broad policy application and a variety of features of the
petroleum and auto industries, such as the network of pipelines, setup of gas stations, or age of
the stock of cars. 44 Through the 1970s and 1980s, the lead industry fought aggressively to halt
or slow regulations on lead, and historical accounts depict a fight that took place at the national
level. Markowitz and Rosner (2013) write that “[w]hat had been considered a narrow concern of
local public health officials by the 1980s had become of national interest to more than sixteen
federal agencies…” (p.122). Historians make almost no mention of state- or region-specific
lobbying that might have influenced state or regional trends in the phaseout of lead. For these
reasons, grams of lead per gallon appears to have experienced substantial and largely random
reductions in the period 1975 to 1985, reductions that varied significantly from state to state and
that were induced by EPA policy. 45 The substantial variation in gasoline lead across states and
over time is shown in Figure 1.
        Gasoline lead concentration would not matter, however, unless that lead from gasoline
somehow found its way into children’s blood. Existing work verifies a strong relationship
between gasoline lead and blood lead during the time period in question. 46                         Blood lead

44
   The network of petroleum pipelines delivered gasoline with different lead contents to different regions of the
country. Even within a region, the lead content of different grades of gasoline (regular, midgrade, premium,
superpremium) differed significantly (by as much as 50%). Demand for the different grades of gasoline also varied
with consumer preference and with the age of the stock of cars (which also varied with climate). Even the number
of gasoline pumps available at gas stations affected the path of the introduction of unleaded gasoline, and
particularly the phaseout of high-lead premium gasoline between 1979 and 1980. Sources: Gibbs (1990), Gibbs
(1993), Gibbs (1996) and Gibbs personal communication.
45
   See Reyes (2007) for a detailed discussion of the merits of different ways of measuring lead.
46
   Schwartz and Pitcher (1989), Sweeney et al. (2000), Billick et al. (1980).



                                                    Page 17
                                    Lead Exposure and Behavior



concentration is the best measure of the lead that is present in a child’s body at a young age, and
therefore the best measure of the lead that has the potential to affect an individual’s development
or behavior later in life. By modeling the relationship between gasoline lead and blood lead,
taking account of other possible factors, the methodology just outlined produces a reliable
estimate of a child’s blood lead, incorporating the variation that arises from exposure to lead
from gasoline sources in different contexts and demographic circumstances.
       Several factors make this strategy feasible in the present circumstance.           First, the
NHANES II provides blood lead measures in the 1976-1980 time period, which also happens to
be the first half of the phaseout of lead from gasoline. Second, the NLSY79 CHYA and
NLSY97 provide two cohorts of individuals born between 1979 and 1985, which happens to be
the second half of the phaseout.        Third, various sources provide data on gasoline lead
concentrations for the 1976 to 1985 time period, the entire phaseout. Thus, the proximity and
overlap of these time periods, combined with the availability of detailed geographic codes in all
of the data sets, renders the split-sample instrumental variables strategy a feasible means by
which the NHANES blood lead data and the gasoline lead data can be used to estimate childhood
blood lead for the NLSY individuals.
       The present paper applies this methodology to the NLSY79 CHYA and the NLSY97. I
investigate effects of lead on child behavior problems, teen risky behavior, aggressive behavior,
and criminal behavior. The basic specification is as follows:
       Prob(outcome)ist = 𝛼 PredictedBloodLeadi
                               + 𝑿i 𝜷 + 𝜇i + 𝛾i + 𝜇i × 𝛾i + 𝜌ist + 𝜀ist                      (9)

The outcomes are of various kinds and are measured at various ages – from child behavior
problems at age 8 through to pregnancy at age 18, etc. In contrast, the predicted blood lead is
estimated at a single period in time – the individual’s lead-sensitive early childhood years, age 0
to 3. To be perfectly clear: α, the coefficient of interest, measures the effect of an individual’s
blood lead in early childhood on that individual’s behavior later in life (be it 5 years later at age
8, or 15 years later at age 18.) An α significantly different from zero indicates a significant
effect of early childhood lead exposure on later life behavior.
       The indices identify an individual i, state s, and year t. The vector X includes dummies
for the child’s age, gender, race or ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other), mother having graduated



                                              Page 18
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



from high school, mother being a teen mother, and a continuous variable for real family
income. 47 The µi are categories for the mother’s age at the child’s birth and the γi are categories
for the child’s birth cohort.48 The inclusion of these dummy variables accounts for persistent
differences that might arise between different groups of mothers or different birth cohorts. This
is especially important for the NLSY79 CHYA sample, which has a disproportionate share of
young mothers. The ρist are dummies for census region of residence at the time of the outcome
being considered. 49
         For teen pregnancy, an additional vector of state-level control variables includes the
minimum wage, maximum welfare benefit, and indicator variables for welfare reform, a parental
living arrangement requirement in welfare, and parental involvement requirement for teenage
abortion. For crime, similarly, an additional vector of state-level covariates includes per-capita
income, the poverty rate, the unemployment rate, a concealed weapons law, lagged police per
capita, and lagged prisoners per capita.
         The specification for Equation 9 is chosen to match the outcome under consideration:
ordinary least squares for a continuous variable, probit for a binary variable, ordered probit for
an ordered categorical variable, or Tobit for a censored continuous variable. Because of the
variety of outcomes and these specifications, I will discuss most results as the elasticity of the
outcome under consideration with respect to lead. 50 Standard errors are Huber-White robust and

47
   Family income is measured in year 2000 dollars. For individuals with multiple observations, it is calculated as the
family’s median income during the observed portion of childhood.
48
   Categories for mother’s age at child’s birth are: under 17 years old, 17 to 19, 20 to 22, and 23 or above.
Categories for child’s birth cohort are in two-year groupings for the NLSY79 CHYA and single years for the
NLSY97.
49
   Inclusion of state fixed effects would not leave enough variation for reliable identification. About one-quarter of
the states have fewer than 30 observations, which means they have fewer than 5 observations in a given year.
50
   The ordered categorical model merits particular attention. Individual behavior items are rated in three categories:
“never,” “sometimes,” or “often.” For example: the child never acts impulsively, sometimes acts impulsively, or
often acts impulsively. Linear regression is inappropriate in this situation because the distances between the
categories are unknown. An ordered probit model is appropriate:
          yi * = xi β + εi  (y* is the latent variable)
          yi = m if τm-1 ≤ yi * < τm for m = 1 to J
          Prob(y = m | x) = Φ(τm - xβ) - Φ(τm-1 - xβ)
Such a model requires careful interpretation: the coefficients are not meaningful in isolation. If an independent
variable increases the latent dependent variable, shifting the probability distribution rightward across the outcome
categories, it may shift probability out of the lowest cell (or leave the cell unchanged) and shift probability into the
right-most cell (or leave the cell unchanged). However, its effects on the middle cells are ambiguous, since mass
will shift in and out across the multiple interior cutpoints. Consequently, analysis should examine elasticities across
particular boundaries and changes in probability of different outcomes in response to changes in the independent
variable. For more detail, see Greene (2008) or Long and Freese (2006).



                                                      Page 19
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



clustered on region or state of residence, as appropriate. Standard errors are also adjusted via
bootstrap for the fact that the main independent variable of interest, blood lead, was itself
predicted in the first stage.51 In addition, to investigate possible variation in the functional form
of lead’s effects on outcomes, I estimated results using the level of blood lead, the natural log of
blood lead, and a spline of blood lead with cutpoints at 5 µg/dL and 10 µg/dL. Because
preliminary analysis suggested that the marginal effect of lead was declining in many cases, and
the spline generally did not provide enough improvement to justify its additional complexity, the
log specification will be employed as the primary specification. Results with other specifications
will be discussed as appropriate.


                                     VI. Results: Predicting Blood Lead

         I perform OLS regressions, following Equation 6, of blood lead on gasoline lead on the
sample of children under the age of 6 with blood lead measures in the NHANES II in the 1976-
1980 period. Recall that blood lead and gasoline lead can be linked by state, year, and month.
Table 3 shows these results, where the vector of controls includes age, indicator variables for
gender, race, and income category (income up to two times the federal poverty line, income
between two and three times the federal poverty line, and income above three times the federal
poverty line), as well as state fixed effects. Gasoline lead is a strong predictor of blood lead: one
gram of lead per gallon of gasoline increases blood lead by 4.13 μg/dL. Subsequent columns
show variations on this base specification. The effect of gasoline lead almost doubles when state
fixed effects are included and drops somewhat upon the subsequent addition of year fixed
effects. The coefficient changes slightly when race or income categories are excluded (columns
4 and 5). Supplementary investigations indicate that, while the effect of lead exposure on blood
lead is evident for all age groups, it is strongest for young children. This can be seen in the final
column of the table, showing a coefficient of 7.69 (standard error of 1.93) when the sample is
restricted to children aged 2 to 4 years. Further results also show little sensitivity to functional

51
   Because predicted blood lead is derived using estimated coefficients for equation (6), the traditional standard error
estimated for predicted blood lead in equation (9) would be a lower bound for the true standard error. To correct for
this, I bootstrap the first stage, deriving 100 different estimates for predicted blood lead using 100 different
subsamples of the NHANES, and running the equation (9) regression separately for each of those 100 estimates. I
then integrate the 100 resulting coefficient distributions, and calculate the point estimate and standard error from the
resulting distribution.



                                                      Page 20
                                         Lead Exposure and Behavior



form, for example using the log of grams per gallon instead of the level. Overall, gasoline lead
concentration appears to be a robust predictor of children’s blood lead concentration in the years
1976 to 1980.
        I employ the coefficients obtained via this approach, running Equation 6 on an NHANES
sample matched within a centered 3-year age window, to predict childhood blood lead at each
year of age for the individuals in the NLSY samples. (The specification employed is the one
shown in column 3 of Table 3.) From this, I calculate early childhood blood lead as the average
of predicted childhood blood lead over ages 0 to 3 for each child. For the NLSY79 CHYA
sample, the mean predicted early childhood blood lead is 7.7 µg/dL; the 25th percentile is 4.8, the
median is 7.0, and the 75th percentile is 9.8. For the NLSY97 sample, the mean predicted early
childhood blood lead is 7.7; the 25th percentile is 5.4, the median is 7.0, and the 75th percentile is
9.3. These values can be seen in Table 2. The predictive power of gasoline lead in explaining
blood lead is substantial: gasoline lead is able to explain a decline of 3.4 µg/dL in the average
blood lead between 1976 and 1980, or half of the national change over this time period (even
though year dummies were included in the regression). 52


                                          VII. Results: Behavior

        I now investigate how childhood blood lead is related to childhood behavior problems,
teen risky behavior, and aggressive and criminal behavior. This section discusses the results of
regressing various outcomes on an individual’s predicted early childhood blood lead (age 0 to 3).
Most results will be discussed as elasticities, measured at a blood lead of 7.5 µg/dL, which is
close to the mean and median of predicted blood lead in the sample.                        This enables easy
comparison of the magnitude of effects across different outcomes as well as different
econometric specifications. Results using both the NLSY 79 and 97 will be discussed together,
but it will be noted from which sample specific results derive.

Preliminary Results
        Before discussing the primary regression analysis, it is worthwhile to take a preliminary
look at the relationship between lead and the various outcomes to be considered. Figure 2 graphs
52
   The actual reduction in blood lead between 1976 and 1980 was 6.5 µg/dL. Changes in gasoline lead (from 1.8 gpg
to 0.7 gpg) predict a reduction of 3.4 µg/dL over this time period.



                                                   Page 21
                                     Lead Exposure and Behavior



three composite outcomes for behavior, teen pregnancy, and violence against two measures of
lead (blood lead and gasoline lead). Each datapoint represents a cohort defined by state of birth
and birth year, for the years 1979 to 1985. The graphs show significant positive associations
between lead and these outcomes. While the regression analysis below will control for a wide
variety of fixed effects and other factors influencing these outcomes, it is still helpful to see that
these raw relationships support the hypothesis that lead affects behavior.

Childhood Behavior Problems
       Table 4 shows the full regression results for the total behavior problems index, for
children age 4 to 12 in the NLSY 79. In the linear specification, the coefficient on blood lead is
0.13, highly significant with a standard error of 0.06. This corresponds to an elasticity of 0.07 at
a blood lead of 5, an elasticity of 0.12 at a blood lead of 7.5, and an elasticity 0.15 at a blood lead
of 11. The estimated elasticities are similar for the log and spline specifications, and there is
evidence that the effect of lead is indeed non-linear. Higher lead does appear to cause more
behavior problems in childhood.
       Several of the other covariates in these specifications show the expected effects. Girls
exhibit fewer behavior problems, with approximately 10% better behavior than boys. Having a
mother who finished high school (rather than one who did not finish high school) is associated
with almost 20% fewer behavior problems, ceteris paribus. Higher income groups show slightly
fewer behavior problems as well. These effects are all right-signed and of reasonable magnitude.
To get a sense of the size of the lead effect, I note that an increase of 1 µg/dl of blood lead has
approximately the same effect on behavior as a decrease of approximately $5,000 of family
income. This is substantial.
       However, the effects of black race and teen mother also appear to decrease behavior
problems, which is the opposite sign of what we would expect. The teen mother effect is
explained by the fact that the regression also includes a set of dummies for mother’s age at
child’s birth, child’s birth cohort, and their interactions. I will instead focus on the unexpected
black race result, for which I see two possible interpretations.          First, when blood lead is
appropriately controlled, black race may, in fact, be associated with decreased rather than
increased behavior problems.       In this scenario, the apparent “effect” of black race that is
expected would, in reality, be due largely to higher lead levels among blacks. This seems



                                               Page 22
                                          Lead Exposure and Behavior



unlikely, or at least not a conclusion to be drawn lightly. Second, it could be that blacks happen
to have higher lead levels and also happen to have more behavior problems, though it may not be
causally linked. Since black race is included as an independent variable in the first stage
prediction of blood lead, this odd result could arise due to this confounding. One way to
distinguish between these two possibilities, and to come closer to determining the true effect of
lead and the true effect of black race, is to omit black race from the first-stage prediction of
blood lead but still include it in the second stage. In a sense, this will yield a conservative
estimate of the effect of lead per se, purging the lead coefficient of any racially-mediated effects
(even if those effects are indeed real). When these regressions are run, the coefficient on lead is
reduced by approximately one-third and the coefficient on black race has a modest right-signed
effect on behavior problems. These results indicate that the effect of lead per se on behavior
problems is indeed real: lead is not merely serving as a proxy for race. However, the moderate
drop in the coefficient on lead lends some support to the possibility that lead is responsible for
some portion of the higher levels of behavior problems observed among black children.
         Table 5a shows the elasticities with respect to blood lead of a number of additional
behavior problems subscales. The first row shows the total behavior problems index discussed
above. The second row shows results for a fifteen-item scale of “oppositional action,” as defined
by Cooksey, Menaghan and Jekielek (1997) for use with the NLSY79 Child Sample. The next
three rows show three of the classic BPI subscales for antisocial, hyperactive, and headstrong
behavior. Each includes 5 or 6 behaviors, and they are mutually exclusive. They include
behaviors such as bullying others, breaking things, arguing too much, having a strong temper, or
having difficulty concentrating. Details are shown in Appendix Table 1.                       The last row is the
only one showing results from the NLSY 97 data; it includes the retrospective assessment of
behavioral or emotional problems in childhood (the single child behavior variable available in
the NLSY 97).
         Overall, these results are consistent with those for total behavior problems. For children
age 4 to 12, the elasticities are significant and hover around 0.1.                  For children age 6 to 7 –
between Kindergarten and second grade – the elasticities are insignificant.53 It is possible that


53
  Because the NLSY 79 CHYA are done every other year, children are surveyed either when they are 6 or when
they are 7, but not both. Similarly, they are observed either when they are 11 or 12, but not both. I have therefore
grouped children into two-year age groupings in order to focus on particular ages.



                                                      Page 23
                                            Lead Exposure and Behavior



many of these behaviors – such as cheating, being easily confused, bullying, or obsessive
thinking – are either not yet developed or are less apparent in children so young. In contrast, for
children age 8 to 9 all of the indices show substantial elasticities, and for children age 11 to 12 all
of the indices show right-signed elasticities, with some significant. The estimated elasticities for
children age 8 to 9 – between the 3rd and 4th grades – are generally just over 0.2, with the
significant ones ranging from 0.22 to 0.27. 54 Running these specifications separately for boys
and girls, and I find somewhat stronger effects for boys, who exhibit significant and larger
elasticities in both the 8 to 9 and 11 to 12 age groups, while girls show effects only at age 8 to 9.
Overall, these results imply that a 10% increase in blood lead is associated with a 1% reduction
in child behavior problems. Accordingly, the 50% decline in blood lead that occurred in this
time period would be associated with a 5% decline in behavior problems.
         Beyond investigating general behavior problems, or even specific categories of behavior,
I can try to look for effects on particular behaviors that might be especially influenced by lead.
This is ambitious, placing a large burden on subjective reports of detailed aspects of behavior.
One of the challenges in investigating lead’s effects on behavior is that the scientific literature
does not provide a clear-cut “fingerprint” of lead; there does not appear to be a consensus on
what behaviors lead should or should not affect. Table 5b shows results for three behaviors that
the literature suggests might be particularly affected by lead: being impulsive or acting without
thinking, bullying or being cruel and/or mean to others, and having a very strong temper or
losing one’s temper easily. Note that separate elasticities are shown not only for each behavior
but also for sometimes exhibiting the behavior (rather than never) and for often exhibiting the
behavior (rather than sometimes).
         The results are mixed, but they suggest that lead increases the likelihood of these
behaviors, particularly in later childhood. The estimated elasticities in the log specification are
insignificant and right-signed for “impulsive” and “bully” in the full age sample. On the other
hand, strong temper shows significant and large effects in the full age sample: the elasticity for
moving from “never” to “sometimes” is 0.10, and for moving from “sometimes” to “often” is
0.25. In the spline specification, shown in Appendix Table 2b, the elasticities are significant and

54
  Elasticities from the spline specification are shown in Appendix Table 2a. They confirm effects of lead on child
behavior problems, although the results do differ: estimated elasticities for all ages are about twice as large, those for
ages 6 to 7 are larger (but still insignificant), those for ages 8 to 9 are now insignificant, and those for ages 11 to 12
are much larger and consistently significant.



                                                       Page 24
                                    Lead Exposure and Behavior



large for “impulsive” (0.59 for “often”) and “strong temper” (0.75 for “often”), and larger but
still insignificant for “bully”.
        The next portion of Table 5b breaks this down further into separate age groups, showing
some significant effects for bullying and strong temper among the 8 to 9 age group, and
generally right signed and insignificant effects for the others. (Impulsive behavior among the
youngest age group (ages 6 to 7) shows wrong-signed significant effects, the only such estimates
in the table). For children 8 and up, the elasticity of sometimes bullying other children (rather
than never doing so) is estimated to be between 0.0 and 0.5, while the elasticity for often
bullying other children (rather than sometimes) is estimated to be approximately twice as large,
between 0.2 and 1.0. For strong temper at ages 8 to 9, the estimated elasticities are between 0.0
and 0.4 for “sometimes,” and 0.1 and 1.0 for “often.”
        In the spline specification, shown in Appendix Table 2b, the elasticities are significant
and large in the 11 to 12 age group for all three behaviors on both margins. The estimated
elasticities for the spline range between 0.3 and 1.9; they are highest for “often” exhibiting these
behaviors and for bullying. Further investigation separating boys and girls reveals that for the
most part these individual item results are driven by the boys, who exhibit significant elasticities
for all three behaviors – 0.1 to 0.4 for sometimes, and 0.5 to 1.0 for often – while the girls show
no significant results.
        These results are robust to the use of alternate methods of predicting blood lead. Overall,
they provide supportive evidence that higher lead increases the prevalence of these outwardly
aggressive and antisocial behaviors, particularly as children get older.

Teen Risky Behavior
        Moving on to the teen years, Table 6 shows results for teen risky behavior: sexual
activity, pregnancy, and substance use. In most cases, these variables are available in both the
NLSY79 CHYA and the NLSY97. We see a large and significant elasticity of 4.3 for having sex
by age 13; the estimated elasticity is very similar for both boys and girls. There are also
substantial effects for girls on being pregnant as a teenager, either by age 17 or age 19; the
estimated elasticities are between 0.6 and 1.1, and are reasonably consistent between the two
samples. The last measure of sexual activity is whether males report having gotten a partner
pregnant as a teen, and this shows an elasticity of 1.7. It is important to note that this variable



                                              Page 25
                                           Lead Exposure and Behavior



probably suffers from mis-reporting by males; note the gender gap between these variables in
Table 1. 55 Further sensitivity testing of two different functional forms and the inclusion or
exclusion of additional covariates in the first or second stage indicates that these results are quite
robust. The elasticities are still in the range of 0.5 to 1.0 or more, and almost all remain highly
significant.
         The practical magnitude of the effects on early sex and teen pregnancy can be assessed
by estimating changes in the probability of these outcomes that would be induced by certain
changes in blood lead. To be specific, we can consider the change in probability associated with
a change in blood lead from 15 µg/dl to 5 µg/dl, a change that approximates the population-wide
reduction that resulted from the phaseout of lead from gasoline. This calculation yields a
predicted 12 percentage point decrease in the likelihood of pregnancy by age 17, and a 24
percentage point decrease in the likelihood of pregnancy by age 19 (from a 40% chance to a 16%
chance). This is undoubtedly large: the lead decrease reduces the likelihood of teen pregnancy
by more than half. It is also sizeable when compared to the prevalence of teen pregnancy in the
sample. This suggests that changes in lead could potentially be responsible for some of the
decline in teen pregnancy in the 1990s, a decline which has proved difficult to explain.
         The final rows of Table 6 show results for substance use as a teen: use of alcohol by age
13, cigarettes by age 13, and marijuana by age 17. These are less consistent, but do provide
support for an effect of lead on these behaviors. In particular, early consumption of alcohol
shows an elasticity of 0.2 to 0.6. These results are somewhat stronger for boys, who exhibit
significant elasticities of approximately one-third for early drinking and smoking in both
samples. Given the large and growing literature on the adverse and “gateway” effects of early
alcohol use, these results merit further investigation in future work.




55
  Most of the teen behavior variables in the NLSY are constructed from self-reports. In the absence of other
corroborative reports, one cannot make detailed statements about potential bias from using such self-reports.
However, the gap between male and female reports of teen pregnancy is certainly substantial and worth noting; it is
plausible that it results not only from age gaps but from the greater ability of males, for obvious reasons, to answer
“no” when the true answer may be “yes.” In addition, many of the teen risky behavior results could potentially be
refined by accounting for who is present at the interview – whether the individual youth was alone, or whether he or
she was accompanied by a parent or guardian, sibling, or peer. It has been suggested elsewhere that the presence of
these other individuals influences reporting of teen risky behaviors.



                                                      Page 26
                                             Lead Exposure and Behavior



Aggression, Violence, and Criminal Behavior
           I now turn to consider impacts on aggression, violence, and criminal behavior. Table 7
shows these elasticities, combining results that draw on slightly different questions available in
the two NLSY samples. I first consider effects on aggression and violence: hitting, hurting, or
attacking others. The elasticity of hitting or threatening to hit someone, either by age 15 or by
age 17, is estimated to be 0.4 to 0.5. This appears to translate, though not completely, into
actually hurting someone badly enough that they require medical attention: the elasticity for that
outcome is 0.31. Similarly, the estimated elasticities for attacking someone by ages 13 or 17 are,
respectively, 0.50 and 0.36. Results for other ages are similar but are not shown in the table.
Interestingly, girls show stronger effects for hitting (elasticities of 0.8), while boys exhibit more
consistent and larger effects for the more serious behaviors of hurting and attacking (elasticities
as high as 1.0).
           Next we turn to considering lead’s effects on criminal arrests, charges, and convictions.
It is important to keep two issues in mind when interpreting these results. First, measures of
criminal activity in the NLSY are from individual self-reports which may be subject to
underreporting or misreporting. Second, there is a great deal of leakage in the criminal justice
system from the commission of a criminal act to arrest, charge, and conviction: only a small
percentage of individuals who commit a particular criminal act are actually convicted of having
done so, and that places a heavy burden on a sample that is just shy of 8,000 individuals. (For
any given birth state, there are probably fewer than ten individuals in the sample who have been
convicted of a crime.)
           In Table 7, being arrested or charged with a crime show elasticities of 0.37 and 0.51,
respectively, while being convicted of a crime has an elasticity of 0.64 in the NLSY97 and 0.60
in the NLSY79. These are sizable elasticities, suggesting a substantial effect of early childhood
blood lead on criminal behavior as a teenager.                     To assess effects on more specific crime
categories, I construct two (non-comprehensive) sub-categories: violent crime, comprised of
assault and robbery, and property crime, comprised of theft, burglary, destruction of property,
and other property offenses. 56 For violent crime, the results are insignificant. For property
crime, the elasticity is significant in the NLSY79 sample but not in the NLSY97 sample.


56
     These two categories do not include drug crimes, traffic offenses, and other offenses to public order.



                                                        Page 27
                                    Lead Exposure and Behavior



Alternate specifications, linear or a piecewise linear spline, yield similar results: while the
elasticities are reduced by a third or half, the notable differences are lower standard errors for
violent crime and now statistically significant elasticities for property crime in the NLSY97 in
addition to the NLSY79. Given the questions raised by these sub-category results, further work
will focus more specifically on criminal behavior in order to test the robustness of these crime
results in greater detail.

Robustness
        The above analysis and discussion incorporates a fair number of alternate outcomes, and
also addresses a number of common potential concerns. In this section, I would like to address
several additional queries. First, as a validity check for the methodology of using predicted
blood lead, I test whether the parent’s outcomes are affected by her child’s predicted blood lead.
Using analogous specifications to those above and looking at maternal outcomes available in the
data prior to 1980 (and therefore prior to the child’s birth), I find no significant impact of the
child’s blood lead on: the number of times the mother attacked someone else, the mother having
been stopped by the police for something other than a minor traffic offense, and the mother’s age
of first consumption of alcohol. The point estimates are small and the p-values all exceed 0.50.
This falsification test helps confirm that the child’s blood lead is not merely proxying for
something else about the mother or family. It thereby provides indirect evidence for the split-
sample IV approach employed above.
        Second, to further test the robustness of the IV approach, I try using gasoline lead directly
as the lead measure. As explained above, when a child is exposed to lead from gasoline sources,
that exposure is mediated through a range of environmental and demographic factors. By
accounting for both the initial gasoline lead and this process of exposure, the paper’s main
strategy of using a first stage to predict blood lead should produce a more useful and appropriate
measure of the relevant biological lead level of each child. Consequently, gasoline lead, while a
valuable measure, is also an incomplete one; but it can be useful for testing robustness. Doing
this, I find the results to be mostly robust for child behavior and teen risky behavior, and mostly
not robust for aggression and crime. The results for behavior are similar (though smaller) for
boys; there are fewer results for girls. Results for teen risky behavior are still statistically
significant and robust, though slightly smaller. Results for aggression and crime are smaller and



                                              Page 28
                                         Lead Exposure and Behavior



many become insignificant, with the significance fading as one moves to older ages and more
severe activities. Taken together, while these results show some sensitivity, for the most part
they provide further support for the paper’s main hypothesis.
           Third, we might wonder whether lead contributes to socioeconomic differences in
behavioral outcomes, or whether lead’s effects may differ for different demographic groups. In
the intellectual history of lead, these are fascinating and charged questions. Herbert Needleman
received an especially belligerent response from the lead industry when his 1979 article in the
New England Journal of Medicine suggested that lead was an “equal-opportunity pollutant, the
effects of which were not limited to poor African-American children.” 57
           To investigate these factors in the NLSY data, I perform the above analyses separated by
parental education (less than high school vs. high school vs. college or more), income (less than
twice the poverty line vs. more than thrice the poverty line), and race/ethnicity (black or
Hispanic vs. white). I find that, while all children are harmed by lead, advantaged groups are
harmed more by lead. The estimated effects of lead are larger and more consistently significant
for children whose parents are more highly educated, whose families have higher income, or who
are white. For the education and income breakdowns, this divergence between advantaged
groups and disadvantaged groups is particularly apparent when looking at lead’s effects on child
behavior problems.
           In order to understand this result, recall that lead from gasoline was ubiquitous in the
1980s: it was in the very air children breathed, and everyone was affected regardless of income,
education, or race. While children in more advantaged families might have been protected from
many of the adverse environmental or social influences that children in disadvantaged families
had to contend with, they were not protected from gasoline lead.                    Thus, whereas for the
disadvantaged children lead may have been just one more adverse influence (on top of numerous
others), for many of the advantaged children it was perhaps the only or the primary adverse
influence. In a way, the advantaged children had more to lose. Consequently, gasoline lead may
have been an equalizer of sorts. Note that the story for paint lead may be substantially different,
since paint exposures are likely to follow the familiar pattern whereby the disadvantaged suffer
greater exposure and the advantaged are largely insulated.


57
     Needleman (1979). The quote is from p. 127 of When Smoke Ran Like Water by Devra Davis.



                                                   Page 29
                                     Lead Exposure and Behavior



                                       VIII. Interpretation

       The above analysis indicates that higher childhood lead exposure is associated with
substantial adverse behavioral consequences from childhood through young adulthood. Very
approximately, the key elasticities with respect to blood lead are 0.1 for child behavior problems,
0.8 for teenage pregnancy, 0.4 for teenage aggressive behavior, and 0.5 for teenage criminal
behavior. These estimates are generally robust: to different functional forms and measurements
of lead, as well as to the inclusion of individual characteristics, family characteristics, additional
controls that might affect specific outcomes, and an extensive set of dummy variables to control
for maternal cohort, child cohort, and regional effects. Together, they paint a picture that
exposure to lead in early childhood triggers an unfolding series of adverse behavioral outcomes.
This evidence suggests that, by increasing aggression and other behavior problems, even
moderate exposure to lead in early childhood can have substantial and persistent adverse effects
on individual behavior.
       Why is this relevant, either practically or historically? If lead exposure were rare, this
might be interesting but not particularly germane to our understanding of environmental history
or social behavior. However, moderate exposure at precisely these levels was the norm for all
residents of the United States born between the 1950s and the early 1980s. Consequently, this is
not just an interesting but irrelevant story; rather, it is the reality of U.S. history. These effects
were not estimated on a carefully selected sample of exposed individuals, but rather on
nationally representative (or almost representative) samples of individuals born in the United
States circa 1980. Thus, any societal-level effects on social behavior that are implied by the
above results may have actually taken place in recent decades.
       What then can we make of the behavioral effects of the Clean Air Act’s phaseout of lead
from gasoline? Consider what we know about larger trends in the outcomes under consideration.
Given the difficulties inherent in measuring behavior problems objectively and consistently over
time, I will set aside childhood behavior problems for now. In the 1990s, teen births declined by
one-fifth, teen crime declined by one-third, smoking rose by a third, and marijuana use doubled.
Commenting on these trends, Jonathan Gruber writes that “[f]or smoking and marijuana, the
correlation is perhaps not surprising and provides some credence to the notion of




                                              Page 30
                                       Lead Exposure and Behavior



complementarities between the use of these substances.” On the other hand, Gruber argues that
the co-movement of the first two – teen pregnancy and crime – is harder to explain:
          “… [T]he parallel movements in crime and teen pregnancy are more surprising.
          There is no direct link between these behaviors, one of which is almost
          exclusively the purview of males and the other by definition exclusively the
          purview of females. But there is an implicit link as these are the two most
          “deviant” activities that males and females can pursue as teens.”
                                                Gruber, Risky Behavior Among Youths, p. 16

Gruber goes on to argue that the fact that the two “move so closely together suggests that there
are clear taste shifts among teens regarding the pursuit of very risky activities.” The current
results may present a slightly different yet closely related answer to the puzzle of this co-
movement.           Crime and teen pregnancy are indeed “deviant” activities, but they are also
impulsive. Moreover, crime is often aggressive. Considered in light of a behavioral economics
model of youth risk-taking, it is possible that lead exposure leads teens, whether male or female,
to take these impulsive, aggressive, or risky actions.        It is possible that the “taste shift”
hypothesized by Gruber is a “taste shift” or a “propensity shift” induced by a lead shift in early
childhood.
          Earlier work used the FBI Uniform Crime Report data to investigate the effect of lead on
crime from this macro perspective, 58 and future work will use the Vital Statistics Natality data to
investigate the effect of lead on teen pregnancy from the same macro perspective.         Given the
possibility that lead may affect such a wide range of social behaviors, it will require several
separate analyses, done from different perspectives, to effectively piece together the full picture
of lead’s effects. For now, the current paper suggests that these effects could be substantial.


                                            IX. Conclusion

          This project aims to join and strengthen three different threads from medicine, social
science, and public policy. First, the medical, toxicology, epidemiology, and psychology
literatures show that environmental toxicants can impair neurobehavioral and mental
functioning, in ways that lower IQ and increase the impulsive and aggressive behavior.
Numerous studies investigate a range of exposure levels to many different toxicants, but they

58
     Reyes (2007)



                                               Page 31
                                    Lead Exposure and Behavior



encounter difficulty in studying the possibly sub-clinical effects of low-level long-term
exposures to multiple toxicants among the general population. Second, social scientists struggle
to explain trends in mental health and social behaviors, including learning disabilities, adolescent
violence, teen pregnancy, and substance abuse. The complex variety of factors influencing these
behaviors and conditions presents a challenge to researchers, and they are increasingly looking
more closely at early life influences. Third, policy-makers and public health professionals strive
to understand the role of environmental and public health policy in improving health and welfare
and to design policies that will maximize social welfare. This paper, and the larger research
agenda of which it is a part, aims to join and strengthen these threads.
       The foregoing results suggest that lead – and other environmental toxicants that impair
behavior – may be missing links in social scientists’ explanations of social behavior. Social
problems may be, to some degree, rooted in environmental problems.             As a consequence,
environmental or public health policy aimed at reducing exposure to environmental toxicants
may be effective in reducing the social and economic costs associated with child behavior
problems, teen pregnancy, aggression, and crime.




                                              Page 32
                                   Lead Exposure and Behavior



                                          References

Achenbach, T. M. and C. S. Edelbrock. 1979. "The Child Behavior Profile: II. Boys aged 12-16
and Girls aged 6-11 and 12-16." J Consult Clin Psychol, 47(2), 223-33.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie. 2010. "Human Capital Development before Age Five."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15827.
Baker, Paula C., Canada K. Keck, Frank L. Mott, et al. 1993. "NLSY Child Handbook: A Guide
to the 1986-1990 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Child Data," Columbus, Ohio: U.S.
Department of Labor.
Banks, E.C., L.E. Ferretti and D.W. Shucar. 1997. "Effects of Low Level Lead Exposure on
Cognitive Function in Children: A Review of Behavioral, Neuropsychological, and Biological
Evidence." Neurotoxicology, 18(1), 237-81.
Bellinger, D. C. 2004. "Lead." Pediatrics, 113(4 Suppl), 1016-22.
Bellinger, David C. 2008. "Very Low Lead Exposures and Children's Neurodevelopment."
Current Opinions in Pediatrics, 20(2), 172-77.
Billick, I H, A S Curran and D R Shier. 1980. "Relation of pediatric blood lead levels to lead in
gasoline." Environ Health Perspect, 34, 213–17.
Brody, D.J. , J.L. Pirkle, R. Kramer, et al. 1994. "Blood Lead Levels in the US Population,
Phase One of the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III 1988-
1991)." JAMA, 272(4), 277-83.
Bryce-Smith, D. 1983. "Lead Induced Disorders of Mentation in Children." Nutrition and
Health, 1, 179-94.
Canfield, Richard L., Charles R. Henderson, Deborah A. Cory-Slechta, et al. 2003. " Intellectual
Impairment in Children with Blood Lead Concentrations below 10 mcg per Deciliter." New
England Journal of Medicine, 348(16), 1517-26.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2010. "Causes and Consequences of Early Life Health."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 15637.
Center for Human Research of The Ohio State University. 2004. "NLSY79 Child & Young
Adult Data User's Guide," U.S. Department of Labor.
Center for Human Research of The Ohio State University. 2005. "NLSY97 User's Guide: A
Guide to the Rounds 1-7 Data, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997," U.S. Department
of Labor.
Cooksey, Elizabeth C., Elizabeth G. Menaghan and Susan M. Jekielek. 1997. "Life-Course
Effects of Work and Family Circumstances on Children." Social Forces, 76(2), 637-67.
Cory-Slechta, D. A. 1995. "Relationships between lead-induced learning impairments and
changes in dopaminergic, cholinergic, and glutamatergic neurotransmitter system functions."
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol, 35, 391-415.



                                            Page 33
                                  Lead Exposure and Behavior



Coscia, J. M., M. D. Ris, P. A. Succop, et al. 2003. "Cognitive Development of Lead Exposed
Children from Ages 6 to 15 years: An Application of Growth Curve Analysis." Child
Neuropsychology, 9(1), 10-21.
Costa, L. G., M. Aschner, A. Vitalone, et al. 2004. "Developmental neuropathology of
environmental agents." Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol, 44, 87-110.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2006. "Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
The Case of ADHD." Journal of Health Economics, 25(6), 1094-118.
Dalsgaard, Soren. 2003. "Long-term Psychiatric and Criminality Outcome of Children with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder." Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 47(2).
Davis, Devra. 2002. When Smoke Ran Like Water. New York: Basic Books.
Denno, Deborah W. 1990. Biology and Violence: From Birth to Adulthood. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Dietrich, Kim N., Ris M. Douglas, Paul A. Succop, et al. 2001. "Early Exposure to Lead and
Juvenile Delinquency." Neurotoxicol Teratol, 23(6), 511-18.
Environmental Protection Agency. 2013. "Integrated Science Assessment for Lead," Research
Triangle Park, NC: National Center for Environmental Assessment-RTP Division, Office of
Research and Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Ethyl Corporation. 1976-1984. "Yearly Report of Gasoline Sales by States," Houston, TX: Ethyl
Corporation.
Ferrie, J. P., K. Rolf and W. Troesken. 2012. "Cognitive disparities, lead plumbing, and water
chemistry: Prior exposure to water-borne lead and intelligence test scores among World War
Two US Army enlistees." Economics & Human Biology, 10(1), 98-111.
Fishbein, Diana H. 2000. "Introduction," D. H. Fishbein, The Science, Treatment and Prevention
of Antisocial Behaviors: Application to the Criminal Justice System. Kingston, New Jersey:
Civic Research Institute,
Gibbs, L. M. 1990. "Gasoline Additives - When and Why," International Fuels and Lubricants
Meeting and Exposition. Tulsa, OK: SAE International.
Gibbs, L. M. 1993. "How Gasoline Has Changed," Fuels and Lubricants Meeting and
Exposition. Philadelphia, PA: SAE International.
Gibbs, L. M. 1996. "How Gasoline Has Changed II - The Impact of Air Pollution Regulations,"
International Fall Fuels and Lubricants Meeting and Exposition. San Antonio, TX: SAE
International.
Goodlad, J. K., D. K. Marcus and J. J. Fulton. 2013. "Lead and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder (ADHD) symptoms: a meta-analysis." Clin Psychol Rev, 33(3), 417-25.
Gould, E. 2009. "Childhood lead poisoning: conservative estimates of the social and economic
benefits of lead hazard control." Environ Health Perspect, 117(7), 1162-7.




                                          Page 34
                                 Lead Exposure and Behavior



Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2013. "Environment, Health, and Human Capital."
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 18935.
Greene, William H. 2008. Econometric Analysis. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson
Prentice Hall.
Gruber, Jonathan ed. 2001. Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Hammond, P. B. 1988. "Metabolism of Lead," J. J. Chisholm and D. M. O'Hara, Lead
Absorption in Children. Baltimore: Urban and Schwartzenberg,
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,"
Hoffman, Saul D and Rebecca A. Maynard. 2008. Kids Having Kids: Economic Costs and Social
Consequences of Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Johnston, Lloyd D. , Patrick M. O'Malley, Jerald G. Bachman, et al. 2009. "Monitoring the
Future National Results on Adolescent Drug Use: Overview of Key Findings, 2008," Bethesda,
MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2001. "Moving to Opportunity in
Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
116(2), 607-54.
Levitt, Steven D. 2004. "Undersatnding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain
the Decline and Six that Do Not." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1), 163-90.
Levitt, Steven D. and John J. III Donohue. 2001. "The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI(2), 379-420.
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. "The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from
Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports." American Economic Review, 94(1), 155-89.
Loeber, R. 1990. "Development and Risk Factors of Juvenile Antisocial Behavior and
Delinquency." Clin Psychol Rev, 10, 1-41.
Long, J. Scott and Jeremy Freese. 2006. Regression Models for Categorial Dependent Variables
Using Stata. College Station Texas: Stata Press.
Lott, John R., Jr. and David B. Mustard. 1997. "Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry
Concealed Handguns." Journal of Legal Studies, 26(1), 1-68.
Marcus, D. K., J. J. Fulton and E. J. Clarke. 2010. "Lead and conduct problems: a meta-
analysis." J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol, 39(2), 234-41.
Markowitz, Gerald and David Rosner. 2013. Lead Wars. Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Markowitz, Sara, Robert Kaestner and Michael Grossman. 2005. "An Investigation of the Effects
of Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol Policies on Youth Risky Sexual Behaviors,"



                                          Page 35
                                   Lead Exposure and Behavior



Masters, R., Brian Hone and Anil Doshi. 1998. "Environmental Pollution, Neurotoxicity and
Criminal Violence," J. Rose, Environmental Toxicology: Current Developments. Amsterdam,
Netherlands: Gordon & Breach Science Publishers, 1-61.
Maynard, Rebecca A. 1996. Kids Having Kids: Economic Costs and Social Consequences of
Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
McLaine, Pat, A. Navas-Acien, Rebecca Lee, et al. 2013. "Elevated Blood Lead Levels and
Reading Readiness at the Start of Kindergarten." Pediatrics, 131(6).
Mielke, H. W. and S. Zahran. 2012. "The urban rise and fall of air lead (Pb) and the latent surge
and retreat of societal violence." Environment International, 43, 48-55.
Moffitt, Terrie E and Phil A Silva. 1988. "Self-Reported Delinquency, Neuropsychological
Deficit, and History of Attention Deficit Disorder." Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology,
16(5), 553-69.
National Institute for Petroleum Energy Research and BETC. 1947-1989. "Motor Gasoline
Survey, Summer and Winter," U.S. Department of Energy.
National Institutes of Mental Health. 1996. "Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder,"
Bethesda MD.
Needleman, H and David C. Bellinger. 1981. "The Epidemiology of Low-Level Lead Exposure
in Childhood." Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry, 20, 496-512.
Needleman, H and B Gatsonis. 1991. "Meta-analysis of 24 Studies of Learning Disabilities due
to Lead Poisoning." Journal of the American Medical Association, 265, 673-78.
Needleman, H. , A. Schell, D. Bellinger, et al. 1990. "The Long-Term Effects of Exposure to
Low Doses of Lead in Childhood: An 11 Year Follow-up Report." New England Journal of
Medicine, 322(2), 83-88.
Needleman, H. L. and C. A. Gatsonis. 1990. "Low-level lead exposure and the IQ of children. A
meta-analysis of modern studies." JAMA, 263(5), 673-8.
Needleman, Herbert L. 1985. "The Neurobehavioral Effects of Low-Level Exposure to Lead in
Childhood." International Journal of Mental Health, 14(3), 64-77.
Needleman, Herbert L., C. McFarland, R. B. Ness, et al. 2002. "Bone Lead Levels in
Adjudicated Delinquents. A Case Control Study." Neurotoxicol Teratol, 24(6), 711-7.
Needleman, Herbert L., J. A. Riess, M. J. Tobin, et al. 1996. "Bone Lead Levels and Delinquent
Behavior." Journal of the American Medical Association, 275(5), 363-9.
Needleman, Herbert. L. 1979. "Lead levels and children's psychologic performance." New
England Journal of Medicine, 301(3), 163.
Nevin, R. 2000. "How Lead Exposure Relates to Temporal Changes in IQ, Violent Crime, and
Unwed Pregnancy." Environ Res, 83(1), 1-22.




                                            Page 36
                                  Lead Exposure and Behavior



Nevin, R. 2007. "Understanding international crime trends: The legacy of preschool lead
exposure." Environ Res, 104(3), 315-36.
Nilsson, J Peter. 2009. "The Long-term Effects of Early Childhood Lead Exposure: Evidence
from the Phase-out of Leaded Gasoline." No.
Rau, Tomas, Loreto Reyes and Sergio Urzua. 2012. "Early Lead Exposure and Its Effects on
Academic Achievement and Earnings: Evidence from an Environmental Negligence." No.
Reyes, Jessica W. 2011. "Childhood Lead and Academic Performance in Massachusetts." New
England Public Policy Center Working Paper, 11(3).
Reyes, Jessica W. 2007. "Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood Lead
Exposure on Crime." B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions to Economic
Analysis and Policy, 7(1).
Richardson, Wendy. 2000. "Criminal Behavior Fueled by Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder and Addiction," D. H. Fishbein, The Science, Treatment, and Prevention of Antisocial
Behaviors. Kingston, NJ: Civic Research Institute, Chapter 18: 1-14.
Satterfield, James H. 1987. "Childhood Diagnostic and Neurophysiological Predictors of
Teenage Arrest Rates: An Eight-Year Prospective Study," S. A. Mednick, T. E. Moffitt and S. A.
Stack, The Causes of Crime: New Biological Approaches. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press, 146-67.
Schwartz, Joel and Hugh Pitcher. 1989. "The Relationship Between Gasoline Lead and Blood
Lead in the United States." Journal of Official Statistics, 5(4), 421-31.
Sweeney, P. J., R. M. Schwartz, N. G. Mattis, et al. 2000. "The effect of integrating substance
abuse treatment with prenatal care on birth outcome." J Perinatol, 20(4), 219-24.
Teplin, L. A., K. M. Abram, G. M. McClelland, et al. 2002. "Psychiatric Disorders in Youth in
Juvenile Detention." Arch Gen Psychiatry, 59(12), 1133-43.
Troesken, Werner. 2006. The Great Lead Water Pipe Disaster. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The
MIT Press.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2005. "NLS Handbook," Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Labor.
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 1994. "Blood Lead Levels -- United
States, 1988-1991," MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reports, 43(30), 545-48.
Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. "Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon
General," Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, Center for Mental Health Services, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Mental Health.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1973. "EPA Requires Phase-Out of Lead in All Grades
of Gasoline," Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



                                           Page 37
                                   Lead Exposure and Behavior



U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1991. "Lead Content of Gasoline 1967-1991,"
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. "National Air Pollutant Emission Trends, 1900 to
1998," Research Triangle Park, NC: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air
Quality Planning and Standards.
Visser, S. N., M. L. Danielson, R. H. Bitsko, et al. 2014. "Trends in the parent-report of health
care provider-diagnosed and medicated attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: United States,
2003-2011." J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 53(1), 34-46 e2.
Warren, Christian. 2000. Brush with Death: A Social History of Lead Poisoning. Baltimore and
London: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Wilson, James Q. and Joan Petersilia eds. 1995. Crime. San Francisco: Institute for
Contemporary Studies.
Wright, John Paul, Kim N. Dietrich, M. Douglas Ris, et al. 2008. "Association of Prenatal and
Childhood Blood Lead Concentrations with Criminal Arrests in Early Adulthood." PLoS Med,
5(5), e101.
Zill, Nicholas. 1990. "Behavior Problem Index Based on Parent Report," Washington, DC: Child
Trends, Inc.
Zill, Nicholas. 1985. "Behavior Problem Scales Developed from the 1981 Child Health
Supplement to the National Health Interview Survey," Washington, DC: Child Trends, Inc.




                                            Page 38
                           Figure 1. Gasoline Lead by State and Year.
                      (Deviation of state’s annual average lead from national annual average.)


                                        1979gpg_devfromUSavg in 1979
                             Grams Per Gallon:




    (0.50,0.75]
    (0.25,0.50]
    (0.19,0.25]
    (0.13,0.19]
    (0.06,0.13]
    (0.00,0.06]
    (-0.06,0.00]
    (-0.13,-0.06]
    (-0.19,-0.13]
    (-0.25,-0.19]
    (-0.50,-0.25]
    [-0.75,-0.50]




                                          1981
                             Grams Per Gallon: gpg_devfromUSavg in 1981


                                                                                                                   Legend
                                                                                                                   (0.50,0.75]
                                                                                                                   (0.25,0.50]
                                                                                                                   (0.19,0.25]
                                                                                                                   (0.13,0.19]
                                                                                                                   (0.06,0.13]
                                                                                                                   (0.00,0.06]
                                                                                                                   (-0.06,0.00]
    (0.50,0.75]
    (0.25,0.50]
    (0.19,0.25]
                                                                                                                   (-0.13,-0.06]
    (0.13,0.19]
    (0.06,0.13]                                                                                                    (-0.19,-0.13]
    (0.00,0.06]
    (-0.06,0.00]                                                                                                   (-0.25,-0.19]
    (-0.13,-0.06]
    (-0.19,-0.13]
    (-0.25,-0.19]
                                                                                                                   (-0.50,-0.25]
    (-0.50,-0.25]
    [-0.75,-0.50]
                                                                                                                   [-0.75,-0.50]
                                                                                                                Units: grams of
                                          1983
                             Grams Per Gallon: gpg_devfromUSavg in 1983                                         lead per gallon.




    (0.50,0.75]
    (0.25,0.50]
    (0.19,0.25]
    (0.13,0.19]
    (0.06,0.13]
    (0.00,0.06]
    (-0.06,0.00]
    (-0.13,-0.06]
    (-0.19,-0.13]
    (-0.25,-0.19]
    (-0.50,-0.25]
    [-0.75,-0.50]




Notes. In each year, the map shows the deviation of each state’s annual average grams of lead per gallon of gasoline (gpg) from
the national annual average gpg in that year. The coloring is consistent over the years, ranging from red (indicating 0.50 to 0.75
gpg above the national average) to blue (indicating 0.50 to 0.75 gpg below the national average). The national annual average
gpgs were 1.30 in 1979, 0.64 in 1981, and 0.38 in 1983.
                                                             Page 39
                                                   Figure 2. Outcomes vs. Lead.

                          Behavior vs. Blood Lead                                               Behavior vs. Gas Lead
             .8                                                                   .8

             .7                                                                   .7

             .6                                                                   .6

             .5                                                                   .5
 Behavior




                                                                      Behavior
             .4                                                                   .4

             .3                                                                   .3

             .2                                                                   .2

             .1                                                                   .1

             0                                                                    0
                  0   5                  10                 15   20                    0    .5                 1                1.5    2
                          Blood Lead in Birth Year (mcg/dl)                                Gas Lead in Birth Year (grams per gallon)




                      Pregnancy vs. Blood Lead                                                Pregnancy vs. Gas Lead
             .8                                                                   .8

             .7                                                                   .7

             .6                                                                   .6
 Pregnancy




                                                                      Pregnancy
             .5                                                                   .5

             .4                                                                   .4

             .3                                                                   .3

             .2                                                                   .2

             .1                                                                   .1

             0                                                                    0
                  0   5                  10                 15   20                    0    .5                 1                1.5    2
                          Blood Lead in Birth Year (mcg/dl)                                Gas Lead in Birth Year (grams per gallon)




                          Violence vs. Blood Lead                                               Violence vs. Gas Lead
             .8                                                                   .8

             .7                                                                   .7

             .6                                                                   .6

             .5                                                                   .5
 Violence




                                                                      Violence




             .4                                                                   .4

             .3                                                                   .3

             .2                                                                   .2

             .1                                                                   .1

             0                                                                    0
                  0   5                  10                 15   20                    0    .5                 1                1.5    2
                          Blood Lead in Birth Year (mcg/dl)                                Gas Lead in Birth Year (grams per gallon)




Notes. Each point represents a particular state in a particular birth year. The sample includes all 50
states plus the District of Columbia and the birth years from 1979 to 1985 are shown. The outcomes
are composite behavior outcomes for that birth cohort, and they range from 0 to 1. Behavior
represents the total behavior problems index. Pregnancy is the average of available teen pregnancy
outcomes (pregnancy by age 19 in both the NLSY79 and NLSY97, and having gotten a partner
pregnant by age 19 from the NLSY97). Violence is the average of available violent action outcomes
(hit, hurt, and attack outcomes in both the NLSY79 and NLSY97). The line and shading show the
OLS regression line with a 95% confidence interval.




                                                                 Page 40
Table 1. Summary of Variables.
                                               NLSY 1979 CHYA         NLSY 1997
                                                Mean     Std. Dev.   Mean     Std. Dev.


Number of Observations                           3452                7889

Panel A. Characteristics
  Child Characteristics
      Year of birth                             1981.7    (2.41)     1982.0    (1.42)
      Female                                     49%                  49%
      Race: white                                58%                  71%
      Race: black                                19%                  15%
      Race: hispanic                              8%                  10%
      Race: other                                15%                   4%
  Maternal and Family Characteristics
      Teen mother                               49%                  21%
      Mother high school graduate               87%                  78%
      Family income ($, year 2000)              38.39    (31.45)     51.17    (37.20)
  Lead
      Predicted childhood blood lead (g/dl)     7.66     (3.70)      7.67     (3.14)

Panel B. Child Behavior
  Behavior Problem Indices (ages 4 to 12)
      Total (0 to 28)                            9.59     (6.14)
      Behavioral / Emotional Scale (0 to 8)                           1.53     (1.55)

  Behavior Problem Subscales (ages 4 to 12)
      Oppositional (0 to 30)                     6.32     (4.87)
      Antisocial (0 to 12)                       1.65     (1.83)
      Hyperactive (0 to 10)                      2.32     (2.09)
      Headstrong (0 to 10)                       2.94     (2.22)
  Behavior Problem Items (at age 10-11)
      Impulsive - Sometimes                      47%
      Impulsive - Often                           7%
      Bully - Sometimes                          25%
      Bully - Often                               4%
      Temper - Sometimes                         32%
      Temper - Often                              9%




                                               Page 41
Table 1. Summary of Variables (continued).
                                                 NLSY 1979 CHYA                   NLSY 1997
                                                    Mean      Std. Dev.           Mean     Std. Dev.

Panel C. Teen Risky Behavior
  Sex and Pregnancy
       Sex (by age 13)                                                            5%
       Pregnant (by age 17)                          12%                          15%
       Pregnant (by age 19)                          21%                          28%
       Got partner pregnant (by age 19)                                            5%
  Substance Use
      Alcohol (by age 13)                           32.1%                        27.1%
      Cigarettes (by age 13)                        34.8%                        30.2%
      Marijuana (by age 17)                         49.9%                        53.3%
      Age first drank alcohol                        14.5       (2.5)             12.6      (2.57)
      Age first smoked cigarettes                    14.0       (3.0)             13.6       (2.6)

Panel D. Aggressive and Criminal Behavior
  Aggressive Behavior
      Hit someone (by age 15)                       22.5%
      Hit someone (by age 17)                       31.8%
      Hurt someone badly (by age 17)                31.1%
      Attacked someone (by age 13)                                               12.6%
      Attacked someone (by age 17)                                               31.9%
  Criminal Behavior (by age 17)
      Arrested                                                                   22.7%
      Charged                                                                    13.2%
      Convicted                                     12.4%                         8.5%
      Convicted of violent crime                     2.4%                         1.9%
      Convicted of property crime                    4.2%                         3.5%



Notes. Means are shown, with standard deviations in parentheses. Data sources are as described in text.
Behavioral outcomes are from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) data on two cohorts born
during the phaseout of lead from gasoline: "NLSY 1979 CHYA" is a cohort of 3,833 children of the NLSY
1979 sample women (born between 1979 and 1985); "NLSY 1997" is a cohort of 7,889 children from the
NLSY 1997 sample (born between 1980 and 1984). Predicted childhood blood lead is calculated as described
in the text. Lead content of gasoline is from a variety of government sources; individual blood lead
measurements are from the second National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II).




                                                  Page 42
Table 2. Summary of Lead Variables.


                                                                                           Mean             Std. Dev.          25th pctile          Median           75th pctile



Blood Lead
   Blood lead in NHANES II, 1976 to 1980                                                  16.5                  6.7               12.0               15.0               20.0
   Blood lead in NHANES II, 1976                                                          19.3                  7.2               14.0               18.0               23.0
   Blood lead in NHANES II, 1980                                                           9.9                  3.2                8.0                9.0               11.0

Gasoline Lead
  Grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, 1976 to 1980                                      1.48                0.30                1.30               1.50               1.69
  Grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, 1980 to 1984                                      0.58                0.16                0.46               0.55               0.70
  Grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, 1976                                              1.72                0.24                1.59               1.75               1.87
  Grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, 1980                                              0.75                0.10                0.69               0.75               0.84
  Grams of lead per gallon of gasoline, 1984                                              0.42                0.07                0.37               0.42               0.46

Predicted Blood Lead
   Predicted blood lead for NLSY79 CHYA sample, born 1979 to 1985                           7.7                 4.0                 4.8               7.0                9.8
   Predicted blood lead for NLSY97 sample, born 1980 to 1984                                7.7                 3.6                 5.4               7.0                9.3


Notes. Lead content of gasoline is from a variety of government sources, as described in the text. Predicted childhood blood lead is calculated as described in the text; the
individual blood lead measurements used in that calculation are from the NHANES II.




                                                                                     Page 43
Table 3. Regression of Blood Lead on Gasoline Lead.

                                                 (1)               (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)


Gasoline Lead                                   4.13 **          7.52 **           5.95 **           6.19 **           5.81 **           7.69 **
                                               (0.42)            (0.60)            (1.14)            (1.15)            (1.20)            (1.93)
Age                                            -0.18 *           -0.17 **         -0.18 **          -0.23 **          -0.21             -0.28
                                               (0.10)            (0.08)            (0.08)            (0.09)            (0.09)            (0.35)
Female                                         -0.43             -0.30            -0.31             -0.33             -0.38             -0.24
                                               (0.28)            (0.25)            (0.25)            (0.25)            (0.25)            (0.41)
Race - Black                                    5.19 **          5.37 **           5.26 **                             6.08 **           4.97 **
                                               (0.45)            (0.42)            (0.42)                              (0.42)            (0.68)
Low Income (< 2x poverty)                       2.94 **          2.74 **           2.70 **           3.68 **                             3.65 **
                                               (0.38)            (0.33)            (0.33)            (0.33)                              (0.56)
Middle Income (2x to 3x poverty)                0.78 **          0.52 *            0.50              0.45                                0.88 *
                                               (0.35)            (0.30)            (0.30)            (0.31)                              (0.52)
Constant                                        9.10 **          4.44 **           3.80 **           3.64 **           4.59 **           1.77 **
                                               (0.73)            (0.89)            (1.65)            (1.74)            (1.67)            (2.83)




Ages included                              0 to 6 yrs        0 to 6 yrs        0 to 6 yrs        0 to 6 yrs        0 to 6 yrs       2 to 4 yrs

State dummies                                    No               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes

Year dummies                                     No                No               Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes

R-squared                                       0.21             0.32              0.33              0.26              0.30              0.36

Number of observations                         2322              2322              2322              2322              2322               856


Notes. Regression on the sample of 2,322 children age 0 to 6 with blood lead measurements in the NHANES II. Covariates and state and year fixed
effects are included as shown. Standard errors are Huber-White robust and clustered by state. Significance is indicated by ** for p<0.05 and * for
p<0.10.




                                                                            Page 44
Table 4. The Effect of Early Childhood Lead on the Total Behavior Problems Index.

                                                  Linear                  Log                Spline


  Blood Lead                                        0.134 **
                                                    (0.060)
  Log Blood Lead                                                         1.122 **
                                                                         (0.367)
  Blood Lead 0 to 5 mcg/dL                                                                    0.358 *
                                                                                               (0.190)
  Blood Lead 5 to 10 mcg/dL                                                                   0.133
                                                                                               (0.084)
  Blood Lead 10+ mcg/dL                                                                       0.011
                                                                                               (0.073)
  Age                                              -0.058 *             -0.057 *             -0.058 *
                                                    (0.029)              (0.030)               (0.029)
  Female                                           -0.974 **            -0.964 **            -0.970 **
                                                    (0.211)              (0.209)               (0.208)
  Race - Black                                     -1.065 *             -0.999 **            -0.751
                                                    (0.540)              (0.439)               (0.559)
  Race - Hispanic                                  -0.470               -0.462               -0.466
                                                    (0.421)              (0.421)               (0.422)
  Race - Other                                     -0.177               -0.179               -0.173
                                                    (0.418)              (0.418)               (0.420)
  Mother - high school graduate                    -1.750 **            -1.754 **            -1.760 **
                                                    (0.418)              (0.418)               (0.418)
  Mother - teen mother                             -0.302               -0.378               -0.410
                                                    (0.364)              (0.363)               (0.369)
  Income ($k)                                      -0.057 **            -0.055 **            -0.056 **
                                                    (0.008)              (0.008)               (0.008)



  Elasticity BPI wrt lead, at lead = 5              0.073 **             0.122 **             0.192 *
                                                    (0.034)              (0.042)               (0.100)
  Elasticity BPI wrt lead, at lead = 7.5            0.114 **             0.117 **             0.034
                                                    (0.037)              (0.038)               (0.218)
  Elasticity BPI wrt lead, at lead = 11             0.148 **             0.112 **             0.001
                                                    (0.063)              (0.035)               (0.007)


Notes. Analysis on NLSY sample as described in text. Regression is pooled OLS on the sample of children, born
between 1979 and 1985, ages 4 to 12, and observed during the years 1986 to 1998. Data weights provided by the
NLSY are employed. Control variables include: child age, gender, race or ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other),
mother having graduated from high school, teen mother, and a continuous variable for real family income in year
2000 dollars. Dummy variables are included for the mother’s age at the child’s birth, the child’s birth cohort, and
a set of interactions between the two sets of dummies; for a set of interactions between teen mother and child's
birth cohort; and for the census region of residence. Weights provided by the NLSY are employed. Results are
adjusted via bootstrap to account for the fact that blood lead was predicted in a first stage. Significance is
indicated by ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.10.




                                                      Page 45
Table 5a. Elasticities of Child Behavior Problems Indices & Subscales with respect to Blood Lead.

                                       Age 4-12              Age 6-7          Age 8-9             Age 11-12


 Total                                   0.117 **             0.000               0.215 **            0.141 *
                                         (0.038)              (0.046)             (0.063)             (0.079)
 Oppositional                            0.132 **             0.030               0.225 **            0.131
                                         (0.052)              (0.066)             (0.079)             (0.106)
 Antisocial                              0.130 *              -0.009              0.272 **            0.124
                                         (0.072)              (0.093)             (0.107)             (0.142)
 Hyperactive                             0.109 **             -0.049              0.098               0.117
                                         (0.050)              (0.080)             (0.079)             (0.127)
 Headstrong                              0.128 **             0.102               0.227 **            0.177 **
                                         (0.051)              (0.080)             (0.085)             (0.091)
 Behavioral/Emotional Problems           0.259 **
                                         (0.128)




Table 5b. Elasticities of Individual Child Behavior Problems with respect to Blood Lead.

                                                   Age 4-12

                                      Sometimes               Often

 Impulsive                               0.020                0.071
                                         (0.032)              (0.116)
 Bullies                                 0.073                0.158
                                         (0.090)              (0.195)
 Strong Temper                           0.095 **             0.252 **
                                         (0.047)              (0.126)



                                                   Age 6-7                                  Age 8-9                      Age 11-12

                                      Sometimes               Often          Sometimes                Often      Sometimes           Often

 Impulsive                              -0.116 *              -0.432 *            0.027               0.098         0.092            0.313
                                         (0.066)              (0.242)             (0.044)             (0.160)      (0.082)           (0.282)
 Bullies                                 0.015                0.032               0.262 **            0.568 **      0.210            0.459
                                         (0.143)              (0.302)             (0.127)             (0.280)      (0.149)           (0.332)
 Strong Temper                           0.054                0.140               0.184 **            0.479 **      0.117            0.311
                                         (0.084)              (0.218)             (0.080)             (0.214)      (0.107)           (0.287)


Notes. Analysis on NLSY sample as described in text, using log specification. All regressions were run on the NLSY79 CHYA sample of children,
born between 1979 and 1985, ages 4 to 12, and observed during the years 1986 to 1998, except for the "Behavioral/Emotional Problems" row which
is from the full NLSY97 sample. The table shows elasticities of each behavioral outcome with respect to the blood lead, evaluated at the sample
mean. In Table 5a, regression is ordinary least squares on the total behavior problems index, the behavior subscale indicated, or the
behavioral/emotional problems scale. In Table 5b, regression is ordered probit on the individual outcome indicated, where the categories are "never,"
"sometimes," and "often." Elasticities shown in the "sometimes" column are for moving from "never" to "sometimes;" elasticities shown in the "often
column are for moving from "sometimes" to "often." Control variables include: child gender, race or ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other), mother
having graduated from high school, and a continuous variable for real family income in year 2000 dollars. Dummy variables are included for the
mother’s age at the child’s birth, the child’s birth cohort, and a set of interactions between the two sets of dummies. Dummy variables are included
for the census region of residence. Weights provided by the NLSY are employed. Results are adjusted via bootstrap to account for the fact that
blood lead was predicted in a first stage. Significance is indicated by ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.10.



                                                                        Page 46
Table 6. Elasticity of Teen Risky Behavior Indices
         with respect to Blood Lead

                                                      Elasticity                    Elasticity
                                                     (NLSY79)                      (NLSY97)



Sex and Pregnancy

     Had sex by age 13                                                                  4.276 **
                                                                                       (0.414)
     Pregnant by age 17                                   1.041 **                      0.635 **
                                                         (0.559)                       (0.243)
     Pregnant by age 19                                   1.142 **                      0.600 **
                                                         (0.440)                       (0.151)
     Got partner pregnant by age 19                                                     1.736 **
                                                                                       (0.552)
Substance Use

     Alcohol by age 13                                    0.556 **                      0.221 **
                                                         (0.190)                       (0.088)
     Cigarettes by age 13                                 0.257                         0.259 **
                                                         (0.195)                       (0.082)
     Marijuana by age 17                                  0.568 **                      0.050
                                                         (0.161)                       (0.051)




Notes. Analysis on NLSY samples as described in text and indicated at the top of the columns.
Regressions are probit, and the table shows elasticities of each outcome with respect to blood
lead, evaluated at the sample mean. Control variables include: child gender, race or ethnicity
(black, Hispanic, or other), mother having graduated from high school, and a continuous variable
for real family income in year 2000 dollars. An additional vector of state-level control variables
includes: the minimum wage, maximum welfare benefit, and indicator variables for welfare
reform (either via a waiver under AFDC or a TANF reform), a parental living arrangement
requirement in welfare, and parental involvement requirement for teenage abortion. Dummy
variables are included for the mother’s age at the child’s birth, the child’s birth cohort, and a set
of interactions between the two sets of dummies. Dummy variables are included for the census
region of residence. Weights provided by the NLSY are employed. Results are adjusted via
bootstrap to account for the fact that blood lead was predicted in a first stage. Significance is
indicated by ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.10.




                                                            Page 47
Table 7. Elasticity of Attacks and Criminal Activity
          with respect to Lead.


                                                  Elasticity                 Elasticity
                                                 (NLSY79)                   (NLSY97)



Hit, Hurt, or Attack

   Hit someone by age 15                             0.441 **
                                                    (0.174)

   Hit someone by age 17                             0.503 **
                                                    (0.132)

   Hurt someone badly by age 17                      0.308 **
                                                    (0.112)
   Attacked someone by age 13                                                   0.500 **
                                                                                (0.227)
   Attacked someone by age 17                                                   0.359 **
                                                                                (0.107)
Crime (by age 17)

   Arrested                                                                     0.374 **
                                                                                (0.168)
   Charged                                                                      0.511 **
                                                                                (0.247)
   Convicted                                         0.595 **                   0.642 **
                                                    (0.265)                     (0.358)
   Convicted of a violent crime                      0.736                      0.208
                                                    (0.767)                     (0.765)

   Convicted of a property crime                     2.391 **                   0.691
                                                    (0.644)                     (0.600)



Notes. Analysis on NLSY samples as described in text and indicated at the top of the
columns. Regressions are probit, and the table shows elasticities of each outcome with
respect to blood lead, evaluated at the sample mean. Control variables include: child
gender, race or ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other), mother having graduated from high
school, and a continuous variable for real family income in year 2000 dollars. An
additional vector of state-level covariates includes: state per-capita income, the poverty
rate, the unemployment rate, a concealed weapons law, lagged police per capita, and
lagged prisoners per capita Dummy variables are included for the mother’s age at the
child’s birth, the child’s birth cohort, and a set of interactions between the two sets of
dummies. Dummy variables are included for the census region of residence. Weights
provided by the NLSY are employed. Results are adjusted via bootstrap to account for
the fact that blood lead was predicted in a first stage. Significance is indicated by ** for
p<0.05 and * for p<0.10.




                                                       Page 48
Appendix Table 1. Child Behavior Problems Index.
                                                                              Subscales

Item Description                                       Oppositional   Antisocial    Headstrong   Hyperactive
1    Sudden changes of mood or feeling
2    Complains no one loves him or her
3    High strung, tense, nervous                                                          x
4    Cheats or tells lies                                   x             x
5    Too fearful or anxious
6    Argues too much                                        x                             x
7    Difficulty concentrating                               x                                        x
8    Easily confused, in a fog                                                                       x
9    Bullies or is cruel/mean to others                     x             x
10   Disobedient at home                                    x                             x
11   Not sorry after misbehaving                            x             x
12   Trouble getting along with other children              x
13   Impulsive, acts without thinking                       x                                        x
14   Feels worthless or inferior
15   Not liked by other chidlren                            x
16   Obsessive, difficulty getting mind off thoughts                                                 x
17   Restless or overly active                              x                                        x
18   Stubborn, sullen, or irritable                         x                             x
19   Very strong temper or loses it easily                  x                             x
20   Unhappy, sad, depressed
21   Withdrawn
22   Breaks things deliberately (<12 years)                 x             x
23   Clings to adults
24   Cries too much
25   Demands lots of attention
26   Too dependent on others
27   Feels others are out to get him or her
28   Hangs around kids who get into trouble
29   Secretive
30   Worries too much
31   Disobedient at school (> 5 years)                      x             x
32   Trouble getting along with teachers (> 5 years)        x             x




                                                        Page 49
Appendix Table 2a. Elasticities of Child Behavior Problems Indices & Subscales
                     with respect to Blood Lead, Spline Specification.
                                       Age 4-12             Age 6-7          Age 8-9          Age 11-12


 Total                                   0.173 **            0.111            0.047               0.382 **
                                        (0.094)              (0.109)          (0.185)             (0.144)
 Oppositional                            0.242 **            0.166            0.065               0.432 **
                                        (0.093)              (0.136)          (0.184)             (0.159)
 Antisocial                              0.257 **            0.143            0.254               0.530 **
                                        (0.137)              (0.176)          (0.259)             (0.199)
 Hyperactive                             0.279 **            0.119           -0.010               0.397 **
                                        (0.095)              (0.186)          (0.185)             (0.198)
 Headstrong                              0.183 *             0.237           -0.003               0.317 *
                                        (0.110)              (0.173)          (0.207)             (0.182)
 Behavioral/Emotional Problems           0.390
                                        (0.284)




Appendix Table 2b. Elasticities of Individual Child Behavior Problems
                     with respect to Blood Lead, Spline Specification.
                                                  Age 4-12

                                      Sometimes              Often

 Impulsive                               0.152 **            0.587 **
                                        (0.069)              (0.276)
 Bullies                                 0.195               0.418
                                        (0.186)              (0.401)
 Strong Temper                           0.278 **            0.750 **
                                        (0.113)              (0.313)



                                                  Age 6-7                               Age 8-9                          Age 11-12

                                      Sometimes              Often         Sometimes              Often         Sometimes            Often

 Impulsive                              -0.060               -0.254           0.077               0.279             0.306 *          1.088 *
                                        (0.109)              (0.463)          (0.128)             (0.475)          (0.169)          (0.610)
 Bullies                                -0.187               -0.386           0.224               0.454             0.861 **         1.943 **
                                        (0.359)              (0.740)          (0.334)             (0.687)          (0.268)          (0.634)
 Strong Temper                           0.153               0.404            0.039               0.090             0.392 *          1.098 *
                                        (0.198)              (0.529)          (0.240)             (0.562)          (0.225)          (0.624)


Notes. Analysis on NLSY sample as described in text, using spline for blood lead with cutpoints at 5 and 10 g/dl. All regressions were run on the
NLSY79 CHYA sample of children, born between 1979 and 1985, ages 4 to 12, and observed during the years 1986 to 1998, except for the
"Behavioral/Emotional Problems" row which is from the full NLSY97 sample. The table shows elasticities of each behavioral outcome with respect to
blood lead, evaluated at the sample mean. In Table 5a, regression is ordinary least squares on the total behavior problems index, the behavior subscale
indicated, or the behavioral/emotional problems scale. In Table 5b, regression is ordered probit on the individual outcome indicated, where the categories
are "never," "sometimes," and "often." Elasticities shown in the "sometimes" column are for moving from "never" to "sometimes;" elasticities shown in the
"often column are for moving from "sometimes" to "often." Control variables include: child gender, race or ethnicity (black, Hispanic, or other), mother
having graduated from high school, and a continuous variable for real family income in year 2000 dollars. Dummy variables are included for the mother’s
age at the child’s birth, the child’s birth cohort, and a set of interactions between the two sets of dummies. Dummy variables are included for the census
region of residence. Weights provided by the NLSY are employed. Results are adjusted via bootstrap to account for the fact that blood lead was predicted
in a first stage. Significance is indicated by ** for p<0.05 and * for p<0.10.




                                                                        Page 50
