                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          PENSIONS, UNIONS
                       AND IMPLICIT CONTRACTS




                         Alan L. Gustman

                       Thomas L. Steinmeier




                      Working Paper No. 2036




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 1986




 The research supported herein was performed pursuant to contract
number J-9-M-3—0162 from the Office of The Assistant Secretary for
Policy, U.S. Department of Labor to the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and is part of the NBER's program in Labor Studies.
Opinions stated in this paper do not necessarily represent the of-
ficial position or policy of the U.S. Department of Labor, and are
not those of the NBER. Our May 1986 report to DOL entitled
"Pensions And Unions" provides further details about both the
empirical and theoretical analyses. We are grateful to Steven
Allen, Burt Barnow, Robert Hutchens, Richard Ippolito, Olivia
Mitchell, Edward Lazear, Joseph Pechman, John Turner, Steven Venti
and participants in the NBER Labor Studies Seminar for their com-
ments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2036
                                                  October 1986




                     Pensions, Unions and Implicit Contracts




                                     ABSTRACT



       This paper analyzes the relation of pension coverage and key plan

 characteristics to measures of union membership and strength, and to

 related interactions. The large and significant relationships which are

 found cannot be explained by, and are often inconsistent with, predictions

 obtained by extending the major explanations for the existence of pensions

 to allow for union monopoly effects. The findings support some (but not

 other) explanations in which the impetus for pensions arises more directly

 from the behavior of unions, and suggest that behavioral and related policy

 analyses of pensions should be conducted separately for the union and

 nonunion sectors.




Alan Gustmari                                    Thomas L. Steinmejer
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                Texas Tech University
Hanover, NH 03755                                Lubbock, Texas 79409
                              ?.   Introduction.
      Over bali of older workers are currently eligible for pensions when

they retire. Any detailed namination of the almost bewildering array of

provisions in actual pension plans quickly reveals that these plans are fir

from monolithic. Siaple tabulations, and regression analyses using data

from firm reports on pensions1 show a strong relation of union status to

pension coverage and to plan characteristics (Kotlikoff and Smith, 1983;

Freeman, 1985; and Ippolito, 1985).   In this paper, the relation between

unions and plan characteristics forms the basis for tests of the available

theories of pensions, both those in which unions play a special role and

those in which they do not. Our findings suggest that despite the

potentially important influence of plan characteristics on retirement,

mobility and work effort, economists have yet to isolate a behavioral model

of pension plan determination which can fully account for the observed

variation in plan characteristics.

     In the absence of a behavioral explanation for pensions which is

consistent with the empirical evidence, we are in a poor position to

evaluate the effects of major legislative initiatives regulating pensions

and retirement behavior. Hany of the behavioral models would lead us to

expect that firms and unions will adjust pension coverage and plan

characteristics in response to regulations and legislation, such as those

affecting vesting, mandatory retirement, treatment of benefits for

separated but vested employees, loading of benefits, actuarial returns for

early retirement, and rules regulating funding, plan termination and

pension insurance. Yet the likely adjustments suggested by alternative

behavioral models may be quite different.

     This paper has two broad goals. One is to assess further the union—

nonunion differences in pensions, analyzing them in a multivarlate setting


                                      I
where a full set of demoqraphic and labor market information is available,

while considering more systematically the form that these union influences

may take. Toward this end, we are using a         unique data set, the i83 Survey
of Consumer Finances (SCF).          It is based on a national random sample of

individuals, but for those      in    the survey who indicated they were covered by

pension plans4 detailed information about their pensions was obtained from

their employers In addition along with a systematic analysis of

interaction effects we are including among the union variables a measure

of   the proportion   of   the workers in the industry   who are orqanied. This

measure of union strengths which frequently is included in union wage

analyses, typically is ignored in pension equations.          (See, however,

Ippolito, 1985.)

        A second goal of the paper is to use the estimated relations between

measures of union influence and plan characteristics to narrow the set of

explanations for pensions. A surprisingly large number of theoretical

explanations may account for the disproportionately high coverage by

pensions in the union sector. Some of these explanations are obtained by

extending models explaining why pensions exist in the first place to allow

for union monopoly effects, while others specifically focus on union goals

and/or firm reactions to unions By comparing predictions from these

models as to union—nonunion differences in plan coverage and

characteristics with actual outcomes, it is possible to cast doubt on a

surprising number of the explanations for pensions and for the union—

pension relation, or at least on their use a.s the sole explanation for

these    outcomes
        The oroarizaticn of the paper 15 as follows. The next sectaon

discusses the predict ions of several hypotheses for the effect of unions on
 pension plan   characteristics. Section     III discusses the empirical

 specification and the data set employed in the study. The followinq

 section preserts the empirical results and considers their implications for

 the various hypotheses considered irl Section 11.      A final section contains

 a brief discussion of conclusions and      implications.

     II.   Predictions From Implicit Contract Models And Models Of Union

              Behavior For Union—Nonunion Pension Differentials.

      This section discusses the predictions of each of eiqht theories for

 the impact of unions on five specific pension characteristics. Table 1

summarizes these predictions, with one row for each theory and one column

for each characteristic. It is apparent from cells in the       table   that some

theories qenerate stronqer predictions for the union—pension relations than

do others. Thus our analysis will more severely tests some theories than

others.

     The first characteristics coverage, indicates simply whether unions

would result in more or fewer individuals being covered by a pension at

all. Plan type refers to whether unions would result in an increase in the

proportion of pensions which are defined benefit (DB) or defined

contribution (DC). The third column indicates whether plans covering union

workers would be more likely to have age and service requirements to

collect normal retirement benefits or requirements which depend only on

age. Formula refers to whether union plans are favored to have benefits

explicitly depending on a formula in which pay appears (FAP), or whether

benefits are independent of pay (i.e. pattern plans). The last column

indicates whether the plans of union workers are more or lees likely to be

integrated with Social Security, wherein an amount related to potential

Social Security benefits is subtracted from the basic pension benefit or a



                                      0_*
smaller factor is used     to   compute the pension benefit for income below the

Social Security tax base or a related figure, and a larger factor is used

for earnings above the specified income.

     According to the human capital explanation for pensions, the firm and

the worker are sharinQ the returns to specific human capital. Defined

benefit pensions are a convenient mechanism for tilting the age—

compensation profile so as to provide the worker with appropriate

incentives not to switch employers and thereby sacrifice the specific human

capital. With pensions, the worker is in effect compensated below his

potential productivity at alternative employers in the early years of the

implicit contract and above that productivity in the later years. The

compensation downturn induced by the pension at the age of normal

retirement is necessary to terminate the contract when the debt is repaid.

Secause unions increase the overall level of compensation, the resulting

wage differential already provides a substantial incentive for the

individual not to quit and thus reduces the need for defined benefit

pensions to reduce turnover (Freeman, 1980a and 1985). Because defined

benefit plans load a much greater proportion of benefits towards later

years of employment than do defined contribution plans, they present a risk

to the worker from turnover that appears to exceed the investment risk from

defined contribution plans. Thus the "prediction' from the human capital

model is that defined benefit plans should be less common where there are

unions, as indicated in row 1 in the table.

     In the shirkinq hypothesis (Lazear, 1979, 1983), defined benefit plans

are again used    to   tilt the eqe—compersation profile and terminate the

implicit   contract at an    appropriate age. The purpose of the contract is to

diiecourage   shirking   by threatening dismissal of any worker caught shirking,

which would in turn deny the worker the opportunity of       workinq in the later

                                           4
years and earnir    compansaton that would be higher than productivity.

In this scerrio inion have oaettinq effects. The union wane premium

by itself provides some penalty to workers who are terminated for shirkinq.

but unions also sake it   more difficult   to   dismiss workers   for   any reason,
including shirking. In order to maintain the incentives to avoid shirking,

unionized firms are less inclined to have defined benefit plans if the

former effect dominates and more inclined if the latter effect dominates.

The net effect is thus unclear, as reflected in the blank second row in the

table.

     An adverse selection model developed by Parsons (1983) is based on a

deterioration in the health and productivity of some workers. Large firms

are assumed unable to distinguish fully which workers are affected, and

hence they must pay the same compensation to all workers they perceive as

equal. The more productive workers then find work in other firms or in

self—employment where they can better be compensated according to their

true productivity, resulting in a process of adverse selection that may at

some age result in the collapse of the demand for older workers by larger

firms. Unions exacerbate the problem by making it more difficult for firms

either to adjust compensation or to fire those in ill health, even if they

can observe productivity. Defined benefit plans, with their attendant

incentives to retire at the normal retirement age, are one strategy for

avoiding the adverse selection problem by inducing all older workers to

leave the firm at some given age. Accordingly, unionized firms should be

more likely to have defined benefit plans so as to alleviate the problems

of adverse selection. Moreover, since the problem is age related, the

requirements for normal retirement in these plans should be related

strictly to age rather than to a combination of age and service.
       The pension u.nderfundinq theory, developed by Ippolito (1985), is

based on the firm's   reaction   to the presence of a union. Firms are assumed

to employ specific physical capital with a value outside the firm that is

low.    In this setting, it may be to the advantaqe of a majority of union

workers to stage a 'holdup and appropriate through excessively high wages

a portor! of the quasi—rents in fact due to the specific physical capital.

To induce investment in the firm, an implicit contract is arranged whereby

workers are paid, in part, in the form of underfunded pensions with a value

that diminishes if the workers do stage a holdup and force the firm out of

business. Defined benefit plans are required if the plans are to be

significantly underfunded. Moreover with current insurance arrangements,

the back loading cf benefits under defined benefit plans creates a cost to

the worker from plan termination. The theory does not appear to yield

determinate results as to the expected effects of a union presence on the

other pension plan characteristics considered in the table.

       The next two rows in the table contain the two major elements of the

"union voice" explanation for pensions. The first of these is the median

voter model of the union, in which unions press for provisions which favor

the median union worker rather than the marginal worker, where the former

is more likely to be an older, high seniority worker and the latter a young

worker. (Freeman, 198Ob Freeman and Medoff, 1984).      In the context of

pensions, the important fact is that the median worker has substantially

longer tenure, and hence is more likely to be with the firm until

retirement, than the marginal worker. Relative to the marginal worker, the

pension of the median worker is enhanced by a defined benefit plan with a

final average pay   formula ard Social Security   offsets. These provisions

allow the median worker, in effect. to capture some of the pension

contributions made by individuals +roe the saErie cohort who do not stay
until retirement, especially if the real wage profile is rising (Freeman,

 198, p. 105).1   Finally,   a iOflQ   tenure median worker prefers age and
service requirements for normal retirement, providing the worker with the

option of retiring with full benefits at an earlier age than a late

entering older worker. Requiring the (relatively) short tenure older

worker to wait later until collecting full benefits, or to incur an

actuarial penalty in order to begin collecting benefits at the same age,

reduces the value of those benefits, again permitting the median worker to

capture some of the pension contributions made by others, this time those

made by (relatively) short tenure older workers.

     The next line of the table considers an egalitarian model in which the

object of the union is to treat all workers as nearly equally as possible.2

Pensions in this case would be defined benefit pattern plans (or possibly

defined contribution plans with equal dollar per hour contributions per

worker), which would preclude the pensions from further magnifying wage

differentials among workers. A uniform age for normal retirement would

imply pensions of equal value per year of service for all workers

regardless of the age at which they joined the firm.3 Table 1 also

indicates that the egalitarian version of the union voice model would

predict that unions would favor Social Security integration. With

pattern plans, Social Security offsets result in larger pension payments to

lower wage workers, thus tending to equalize total compensation among

those with comparable service. Note that this is contrary to the standard

view of Social Security integration, which treats it as making benefits less

equal, and which is correct for FAP but not pattern plans.

     The "intergenerational transfer" theory, based on the ideas of Weiss

(1985), asserts that defined benefit plans may be a means by which those in



                                          -7
the union at the time   the pension is formed capture at least a part of the
monopoly rent that future union members would otherwise be able to obtain.

Particularly if past service credits (for service before the plan starts)

are involved, the original plan members receive benefits which are largely

financed by future   plan participants rather than by themselves, much as
happened with the Social Security system.4 If the object of the plan is to

transfer roughly equal amounts to each original plan member of a given age,

then a pattern plan without Social Security offsets would be appropriate,

as indicated on the seventh line of the table. However, a complete

analysis of this model would require further attention to trade—offs

between median voter and egalitarian motivations analogous to those noted

in the discussion of the elements of the union voice model.

     The final theory considered in the table is one discussed by Mincer

(1983).   In this theory, the number of workers and hours per worker enter

the production function separately, and firms optimize considering fixed

costs per worker arid variable costs per hour worked.   If a union succeeds

in raising the wage rate1 the firm is induced to shift along its production

frontier and employ more workers for a shorter average workweek. In an

effort to counter such an effect, which reduces the union premium received

by each worker1 the union attempts to shift some of compensation to items,

such as paid health insurance, which are fixed costs per worker independent

of hours worked. Pension plans can also serve this purposes but only if

they are pattern plans and do not have Social Security offsets.

     The predicted relations in Table 1 dcl not exhaust the explanations for

a union—pension relation, or for the plan characteristics that are

systematically affected by unions. Income taxes are a fundamental part of

any explanation for pensions. Thus the existence of union rents would lead

to the expectation of a positive union coveraqe re1ation and a positive


                                       8
relation between unions and pension generosity. Moreover, unions reduce

the risk to individuals that the firm will renege on the implicit contract.

Therefore, under   a   number of the theories examined above, unions     increase
the attraction of deferred payment schemes and reduce the compensating

differential associated with such plan features as an implied promise to

revise the nominal parameters of pattern plans or to adjust postretirement
                                             5
benefits for cost cf living increases.           In addition, our discussion has

ignored the various risks affecting the expected values of pension plans of

different types (Green, 1985), and has ignored issues created by imperfect

capital markets and heterogeneity (Nalebuff and Zeckhauser 1985),

important issues which, in some respects, may have different implications

in union arid nonunion environments. iso ignored are union political

considerations. Union leaders who believe they can fool their membership

may prefer ad hoc over automatic cost of living increases, or pattern over

salary related benefit formulas, creating the impression of a busy Union

leadership, while or the membership side, the public good aspects of union

solidarity may limit the extent to which pension benefits will be targeted

on particular groups of union members.

     Despite the omissions, the predictions in Table 1 provide a useful

beginning for an analysis of union—nonunion differentials in pension

coverage and plan characteristics.      In viewing the empirical results, it

should be borne in mind that a number of the hypotheses are not mutually

exclusive, and that our discussion has not integrated the various theories

to analyze their joint implications. Hence a particular outcome that is

inconsistent with a particular model does nat necessarily mean that the

model is incorrect, but rather that the opposing influences of other models

must be stronger with respect to that outcome.



                                         9
                   III.    The Empirical Specification And The Data.

        Symbols and definitions for the dependent and explanatory variables

are listed in Table 2.         Ltsin those symbols, the probabilities relating

pension and waqe oLtcomes to explanatory variables (X) may be written as


                              Pr(F, W, 1, M, Rq, F, Ss      X)



An individual is considered to be covered by a pension plan if he or she

so indicates, or indicates that he or she will be covered by a pension upon

continued employment for the current employer.6

        Not all combinations of the dependent variables are relevant. For

instance, plan characteristics are relevant only if the individual does

have a pension plan. Similarly, age and service requirements for normal

retirement are usually of interest only for defined benefit plans.

Therefore, the estimates break up the probability given above into a

conditional probability chain with three elements, as follows:


                                      Pr(P, W I


                                 Pr(T, M I P=yes, W, X)


                          Pr(Rq, F, Ss I   Pyes,   W, TDB. P1, Xi


The second probability is estimated only for those with pensions, and the

third only for those with defined benefit pensions.7 In each case, the

estimates are for a general functional form of the relationship between the

probabilities of the dependent variable combinations and the conditioning

var i a b I e s.



        The analytical technique used to fit these equations is        discrete
sultivariate analysis, a technique which is not only ideally suited for
analyzing qualitative data, but has an important advantage in the context

of this study of facilitating the analysis of interaction effects.

Relevant test statistics for significant interactions involving the union

or unionization variables are reported at the bottom of Table 3.      In
discrete multivariate analysis, the central statistic is G, which is —2

times the log—likelihood function


                                       n
                                =   —2E f. loq(f./p.),
                                      1=1



where p. is the probability predicted by the model for a combination of
values from the actual data, f. is the corresponding observed frequency,

and i runs over all possible combinations of variables. Estimating an

additional effect (or interaction) will tend to reduce G2, and the

significance of the effect is inferred from the size of the reduction.9

     The data set which forms the basis for the empirical analysis is the

1983 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Detailed information was collected

for the respondent, who was either the head, or in the case of a married

couple, the person who knew the most about family finances, and for the

respondents spouse. These are treated as independent observations. In

addition, for those who indicated that they were covered by a pension,

there is a survey of their employers which provides further detail on the

provisions of the pension plan. The employer was not told the name of the

employee. Iccordingly, there is no specific information pertaining to

credited service or to the pension account for the individual. The portion

of the sample analyzed is restricted to private sector employees who were

not self employed.

     The 4262   families   in the SCF contain a total of 6998 respondents and

spouses. Of these, 3970 reported their main activity as working. The


                                            11
other two major types of activities were being a housewife (1228

individuals) and being retired (1105 individuals).      0-f   those whose main

activity   was working, 1381 are excluded from the analysis because they

either were self employed or were not private sector employees, and 11

because they did not report union status, leaving 2578 individuals.10

Information on pensions is available from both the individual and the firm
                                             11
for   97 individuals   within that sample.


                             IV.   Empirical Results.

      Table 3 presents the central empirical results. The first column

describes the pension characteristics of the population. Thus, 60.17. of

the sample had pensions and 33.1V. did not, with the remainder falling in

the "dont know" category. Column 2 is derived from two sets of

simulations, both using the estimated parameters.1' One set calculates the

distribution of pension characteristics which would result if every

individual in the sample were in a union, holding all other conditioning

variables in that simulation at the values actually observed for

individuals in the sample. The other set calculates the analogous

distribution which would result if no individuals in the sample were in a

union. Hence, the figure in column 2 of row 1 indicates that if everyone

in the sample were in a union, pension coverage would be 25.5 percentage

points higher than it would be if no one in the sample were in a union.

Column 3 indicates the results of a similar exercise comparing the

distributions of characteristics if everyone were in a high unionization

industry relative to the distribution if everyone were in a low

unionization industry. The fourth column compares the distributions if

everyone were in a union and in a high unionization industry versus if

everyone were not jr a union and were in a low unionization industry.


                                       12
c:olumn 5 reports on the result; of simulations in which we ask what the

distribution of pension coverage and plan characteristics would be in the

absence of unions.     In these sisulations, all individuals are placed in the

nonunion and low unionization cateories.          In addition, any conditioning

variables which are themselves outcome variables (such as the wage in the

plan type equation) are adjusted so a; to reflect the indirect effect of

the absence of unions working through such variables.

     The empirical results indicate that union membership and workinq in

high unionization industries increase the probability of pension coverage
                      13
very substantially.        They simultaneously increase the probability of

being in the higher wage cateqories.         In comparing the actual percentage of

individuals covered by a pension (60.17.) with the percentage predicted if

there were no unions (52.57.), the bottom line is that, for the population

as a whole, unions and unionization appear to raise pension coverage by

about B percentage points, or fifteen percent above what coverage would

have been in the absence of unions.

     Among those covered by pensions, unions and unionization appear to

increase both the probability of belonging to a inultiemployer plan and of

having a plan of the defined benefit variety.14 Among those having defined

benefit plans, unions and higher unionization increase the probability of

age and service (as opposed to age only) requirements for normal retirement

and reduce the probability of having benefits related to salary and of

having Social Security offsets.      In almost all cases, that part of the

effect arising from union coverage is somewhat greater than the part

arising from workinq in a high rather than low unionization industry.

     In comparing the empirical results of Table 3 with the predictions of

Table 1, predictions from two explanations as to why there are pensions at



                                        13
all are contradicted by the data. The simple human capital explanation

predicts that unions should have a negative effect on pension plans

generally and defined benefit plans in particular, both contrary to actual

findings. Also inconsistent with the data is the adverse selection model.

This model makes a fairly strong prediction that unions should increase the

frequency of aqe only requirements for normal retirement, but the evidence

strongly suqgests otherwise. Since   it   makes no definite predictions about

the pension plan characteristics analyzed in this paper, the shirking

hypothesis is not in actual conflict with the data. However, it is

difficult to understand why unions have such strong negative effects on

salary—based formulae and on Social Security offsets in the context of this

hypothesis alone.

     Among the explanations relying on union behavior, the median voter

model incorrectly predicts that unions should favor final average pay

plans, while the egalitarianism version errs by predicting that unions

should favor simple age rather than aqe and service requirements for normal

retirement. Both models predict, although weakly, an increase in Social

Security offsets with unions, contrary to the evidence. mong the

remaining explanations, the simple version of the intergenerational

transfer theory, and the story in which unions attempt to use certain types

of pensions to forestall shortened hours, appear to yield the predictions

most in harmony with the estimates. Neither provides a convincing story of

the strong union effects on age and service requirements, however.

Finally, the underfundinq hypothesis is consistent with the observed

relation between unions ard defined benefit pensions, but with no

information on funding, xc are unable to test the theory very stronqly.

(See, however, Ippolito, 198.)

     Two interaction terms irvolvinq the results for the union—pension


                                     14
 coverage relation will be noted. First, there is a reinforcing effect of

 union coverage and unionization on pension coverage.         In an industry with

 low unionization, union     coverage   is associated with a 17.47. higher pension

 coverage, while in a high unionization industry it is associated with a

 34.97. higher pension coverage. An alternative way of looking at

essentially the same information is that among those covered by a union

contract, those in highly organized industries will have a 19.97. higher

pension coverage rate compared to those in weakly organized industries,

while for nonunion workers the comparable figure is only 1.97. This

reinforcing effect between union coverage and unionization on pension

coverage is reflected in the fact that the combined effect (36.77.) is

substantially higher than the sum of the two separate effects (25.57. +

5.57.).     A second important interaction is the negative interaction effect

of   firm   size and union coverage on pension coverage. For those in small

firms, union coverage is associated with a 42.77. increase in pension

coverage, while for those in large firms, the increase from union coverage

is 16.47..    Analogously, coverage is 35.87.   higher   among nonunion workers

employed in large rather than small firms, while union workers in large

firms have a 9.57. higher probability of being covered by a pension than do

union workers in small firms. Either belonging to a large firm or being

covered by a union contract will increase pension coverage substantially

relative to a nonunion member in a small firm, but both characteristics

combined will produce an effect only mildly larger than either one

separately.


                        V.   Conclusions And Implications.

      To summarize the empirical results First, in a multivariate setting,

union coverage is found to bear a strong and direct relation to pension


                                          15
coverage, and to a set of key plan characteristics. Second, union

strength, as measured by degree of unionization in the industry, also is

found to be systematically related to pension coverage arid to plan

characteristics. Third, significant interactions are found between union

membership and union strength, especially in the pension coverage equation,

sucigesting among other things that the impact of the union strength measure

affects union workers, but does not spill over in its effect on nonunion

workers. Fourth, the relations of pension coverage and plan

characteristics to such variables as firm size or industry are affected

systematically by unions.

         Simulations of pension outcomes in the absence of unions imply that

pension coverage in private sector employment in the United States would

fall from 60.17. to 52.57.; the proportion of plans which are defined benefit

would fall from 72.17. to 59.97.; the fraction of defined benefit plans with

age and service requirements for normal retirement would fall from 63.OX to

55.47.; the fraction of defined benefit plans with benefits determined in

accordance with salary would increase from 82.97. to 95.37.; and the fraction

of defined benefit plans with Social Security offsets would increase from

47.97.    to   52.77..


         Among the models which, when considered alone, generate predictions

for union—nonunion differences in pension plan characteristics that are in

conflict with the data are a. model which attributes pensions and their

characteristics to fira efforts to reduce turnover and loss of specific

capital, one which postulates that pensions are adopted because they are an

effective device for dealing with adverse selection in a union environment,

the median voter model of the union, and an egalitarian model of the union.

Among the alternative explanations for the union—pension relation, one



                                        16
emphasized by Mincer, whereby pensions are used by unions to raise per

worker as compared to per hour costs of union   workers, and a simplified
version of a model which would explain pensions as a device for

transferring rents amonq generations of union members, are consistent with

the largest number of union—nonunion differences in observed plan

characteristics. lso basically not contradicted by the findings, but less

severely tested, is a model which would explain pensions as a device for

protecting quasi—rents on firm investments. The shirking model is not

tested by these data at all.

     Results from these empirical exercises do not mean that certain

explanations for pensions can now be entirely ignored. Although an

explanation for pensions may, when considered in isolation, generate

predictions that are inconsistent with the data, the explanation may have

some relevance when combined with others.'      number of combinations of

the behavioral models considered above; including some that fore the basis

for more subtle explanations for pensions (e.g., Mincer, 1983 and Freeman,

1985), remain in the running. The job of explicitly integrating and

testing these separate explanations for pensions will be difficult, but is

essential for a full understanding of the labor market effects of pension,

Social Security and retirement policies.

     It is obvious from our empirical finding that the effect of unions an

pensions cannot be ignored, and that the expediency of including in a

pension equation a dummy variable for coverage by a union contract, or even

a set of variables reflecting union strength as well, is likely to

reflect inadequately the full influence of the union. The process of

pension determination in the union sector appears to be sufficiently

different from that in the nonunion sector that pension models, and

especially structural explanations, should be tested separately for the


                                    17
union and nonunion sectors.

       particularly fruitful     area   for further research is the

intergenerational transfer model. That model is both consistent with the

data and provides a vehicle for integrating a number of the explanations for

the union—pension relation which have partial validity. Moreover, the

intergenerational transfer model is extremely interesting from a public

policy viewpoint. For example, if pensions in the union sector are a

device for   redistributing   union rents from future to current generations of

union members, then pension losses from plan termination when monopoly rent

disappears, say due to import competition, would be interpreted in a very

different light from pension losses due to abrogation of an implicit

contract on the part of the firms.




                                          18
                                  Footnotes

 1.   Although a final average pay plan would be most advantageous to the
      marginal worker in the context of rising real wages, with a flat wage
      profile a pattern plan would be equally advantageous, at least if
      nominal benefits are frozen at the time of separation. Systematic
      information or-i the treatment of benefits for separated but vested
      employees is not provided in the SCF, or in other major surveys.
      Those pension experts we conferred with felt that most commonly, the
      nominal benefit is frozen at separation.

2.    Freeman's discussion of the union voice model, as it applies to
      pensions, involves a blend of these two models (1985, pp. 105—107).
      As noted in the conclusion, the evaluation of these separate elements
      of the model need have no implication for the validity of a model in
      which they are joined. Freeman does not, however, provide a formal
      mechanism for reconciling outcomes when the influences of these two
      models conflict.

3.    With age and service requirements, a long tenure worker is able to
      retire without actuarial penalty at an earlier age than a short tenure
      worker, and the fact the long tenure worker will receive benefits for
      more years would imply that the total value of his pension benefits
      per year of service is greater.

4.    If this explanation is true, studies of union—nonunion differences in
      compensation which estimate the value of nonwage compensation from
      information on the contribution of the firm to pension funds (e.g.,
      Rice, 1966, Gustman and Segal, 1972, Solriick, 1978, Freeman, 1981,
      1985, and Alpert, 1982) could turn out to be misleading. For a
      related discussion and evidence, see Allen and Clark (1986).
      Moreover, the desirability of underfunding plans, the question of
      ownership of plan assets and the relation of underfunding to stock
      prices could all have a very different interpretation from the
      conventional one if pensions represent the vehicle for redistributing
      union monopoly rents.

5.    To illustrate, Allen, Clark and Sumner (1986, p. 132) find, -for the
      period 1973 to 1979, that collectively bargained plans had post—
      retirement increases that were almost twice a; high as those in plans
      that were not collectively bargained.

6.    In the sample to be described below, 6.47. of union members and 12.87.
      of nonunion members indicated that they were covered by more than one
      plan or by a plan with multiple parts. In the case of multiple
      coverage, the variable indicating plan type refers to the entire plan.

7.    Due to limitations of the computer program calculating the estimates,
      the third probability is estimated for two groups of dependent
      variables. One group includes the F (formula type) and Ss (an
      indicator of Social Security integration) variables, and the other
      includes the Rq (plan requirements) variable. This strategy should
      not affect any of the estimates reported below because interactions
      among these dependent variables are not analyzed in the table, and
      because this equation is the last of the probability sequence. A


                                     19
      variable for the availability of early retirement is also included as
      a dependent variable in the second group (along with Rq), but since
      almost all firms reported that early retirement was available, the
      results involving this variable are not very informative and hence are
      not reported in the table.

8.    Among the explanatory variables one may question the inclusion of
      an age variable; however, the results are similar when the equations
      are reestimated without age as a right hand side variable. One may
      also argue that industry averages for such variables as education,
      race, and sex should be included among the explanatory variables.
      While this would increase the computational burden of the discrete
      multivariate algorithm considerably, it is relatively easy to test an
      analogous proposition, namely, whether the presence or absence of the
      unionization variable changes the size of the effects of education,
      race, and sex on pension coverage and pension characteristics. When
      the analysis for pension coverage and wages is redone, this time
      excluding the unionization variable, the size of the effects of these
      other variables generally changes by only a small amount.

9.    It may be shown that the discrete multivariate algorithm maximizes
      exactly the same likelihood function as does the standard multinomial
      logit algorithm, and hence the two sets of estimates must be
      equivalent (Haberman, 1978). Under the hypothesis of no true,.,effect,
      an additional estimated effect will yield a 116' which has a
      distribution with the degrees of freedom equal to the number of
      aditional independent parameters introduced by the ffect. If the
      116 is above the appropriate critical point on the X distribution,
      the effect (or interaction) is deemed2to have a significant impact on
      the dependent variable. Thus, the 11G statistic tests the joint
      significance of a group of dummy variables defining the categories of
      an explanatory variable. Whenever higher order interactions are
      siqnificant, so are the associated main effects. For previous
      examples of the application of this technique to analyze economic
      problems, see Gustman and Steinmeier (1981 and 1984).

10.   Although no explicit screen is applied to eliminate part—time workers
      from the sample,' requiring the main activity to be working could be
      expected to have a similar effect.

11.   Our report to the Department of Labor (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986)
      presents a detailed comparison of the descriptive statistics from the
      SCF with information from the 1983 CPS as presented in Andrews (1985)
      and in Di and Raisian (1985). The matched employer data on plan
      provisions are compared with figures from the Labor Department's Level
      of Benefits Survey (descriptive statistics are presented in Hatch et
      al.  1982) and with 1977 data from the Department's EBS—1 file, as
      summarized in Kotlikoff arid Smith (1983). In most cases the data
      match. When they do not, discrepancies frequently appear to reflect
      the different dates of surveys, especially in light of the decline in
      unionization between survey dates. Another source of discrepancy is
      the difference between surveys in which household members are
      included. The SCF includes one adult or a couple from each household.
      In contrast, the family unit in the CPS may include a number of
      secondary earners. However, there are some discrepancies between the


                                     20
      SCF data and those from the E8S—1 file pertaining to union—nonunion
      differences in plan characteristics which are not readily attributable
      to either of these causes.

12.   In the estimates and simulations, all main eects   are left in,
      whether significant or not. We also include significant higher order
      interactions between the dependent variable(s) and the explanatory
      var i ables.


13.   For individuals with the characteristics of union workers, Freeman
      finds, using CPS data, that union membership increases the probability
      of pension coverage by 22%, and for those with nonuni on
      characteristics by 267. (1985, Table 4.2). Our estimate of the impact
      of union coverage on pension coverage of 26% appears to be consi stent
      with these results, but is only two thirds of the estimated combined
      impact of union coverage and unionization.

14.   Note that there is some ambiguity in the question that was asked
      pertaining to plan entity.   Individuals were asked "Does the pension
      plan include people who work for other employers than your own?" An
      individual who observes former fellow employees who are vested in the
      firm's pension plan because of their past employment, but who are
      currently working for another firm, may answer yes to this question
      even if the plan is not a multiemplayer plan. Kotlikoff and Smith (p.
      6) report that 38.67. of union members are in multiemployer plans, and
      calculations from their Table 4.1:11 suggest that 37. of nonunion
      workers are in multiemployer plans. The comparable figures from the
      SCF are 28.6% and 18.27. respectively. With regard to plan type,
      Ippolito (1985, Table 4), using a different specification, found that
      "unionized participants have a 30 percentage point lower probability
      of being covered solely or primarily by a defined contribution plan".
      (p. 637)

15.   Note also that even though some of the behavioral explanations
      examined above may not, by themselves, explain pensions, they may be
      relevant for explaining other dimensions of wage and employment policy
      which are designed to encourage early exit from the firm.
                                       Table 1

               Expected Effects of Unions on Pension Characteristics


                                                      Pension Characteri stics

                                                         Age/Service           Social
                                               Plan        Require—           Security
                               CoveraQe        Type         ments    Formula Integration
Explanations for
   Pro vi s i on s:


   Human Capital                                DC



   Shirking


   Adverse Selection               +            OS           Aqe
                                                             Only

   Pension Underfunding            +            OS



   Union: Median Voter             +            DB         Age and      FAR      +
                                                           Service
                                   +            DB           Age      pattern    +
   Union: Egalitarianism
                                                             On I y


   Union;  Intergener—             +            DB                    pattern
       ational Transfers

   Union: Opposition to            +            DB                    pattern
      Shortened Hours




                                          —L
                           Table 2: Variable Definitions*

    Symbol                               Definition

    Dependent Variables:

     F        Type of formula: final average pay (FAP) or pattern

     M        Single or multiemployer plan

     P        Coverage by a persian plan, as reported by the individual

     Rq       Requirements for normal retirement: age requirements only, age
                and service requirements, or service requirements only

     Ss      Whether or not the plan has a Social Security offset

     I       Plan type: defined benefit, defined contribution, or both

     W       A categorical wage variable with limits defined to divide the
               sample into quarters, as follows: Wi < $4.60,
               $4.60 < W2 < $7.78, $7.78 ( W3 < $12.69, and $12.69 < W4

Explanatory Variables:

     A       Age: five categories are defined as: Al < 25, 25      A2     < 35
                   AS < 45, 45 A4 < 55 55 , AS)
     Ed      Level of education——college graduate, some college, high school
               graduate, and less than high school

     Mf      Manufacturing: whether or not the individuals industry is in
               manufacturing

     Dc      A set of three categorical variables indicating whether the
               occupation is blue collar, white collar managerial or other
               white collar

     Ra      Race: white or nonwhite

     Sx      Sex: male or female

     Sz      Firm size: whether or not the firm has 100 or more employees

     Un      Coverage by a union contract on the job or not

     Uz      A variable based on data developed by Freeman and Medoff (1979)
               classifying the three digit industry of employment according to
               degree of unionization. The categories, which divide the
               sample into thirds are: Uzi < 77., 77. < Uz2 < 317., and
               317.  Uz3


*     In addition, there is a separate NA category defined for all variables
      except F, Rq, Ss, and I, which are reported by the firm, and Un and Sx.


                                        23
                                      Table 3
           Partial Relation Of Union Membership And Unionization
    To Probabilities Of Pension Outcomes: Estimated From Firm Responses

                             Fraction         Union     Unioniz—    All     Simulated
                                Of           Contract    ation     Unions    Fraction
                             Population (Yes            (High—      —No      With No
                                In             -No)       Low)     Unions    Unions
                             Category

                         Pension Coverage and Wage
Pension Coverage (Self Reported)
   Covered                    .601       .255      .055             .367      .525
      In Large Firms                     .164
      In Small Firms                     .427
   Not Covered                .331     —.234     —.034             —.307      .388
      In Large Firms                   —. 139
      In Small Firms                   -.411

Wage (Self Reported)
   Low                         .223           —.136       .009     —.135      .239
   Medium Low                  .223           -.014      —.081     -.101      .273
   Medium High                 .222            .091       .075      .185      .163
   High                        .223            .025       .038      .029      .233

               Plan Characteristics for Those with Pensions
Plan Entity (Self Reported)
   Multiemployer Plan         .192      .116      .037      .144              .154
   Single Employer Plan       .682     -.085     —.040     —. 109             .698

Plan Type (Firm Data)
   Defined Benefit             .721            .150       .098      .239      .599
   Defined Contribution        .147           —.127      —.005     —.130      .206
   Both                        .132           —.022      —.093     —.109      .194

          Plan Characteristics for Those with Defined Benefit Plans

Age and Service Requirements .630              .149       .112      .302      .554
   (Firm Data)
Benefits Related to Salary                   —.   200   —.045      —.192      .953
   (Firm Data)
Social Security Offset         .479          -.339        .008     —.284      .527
   (Firm Data)




                                        'A
                          Table 3 (continued}

                Interactions With Union Membership And
               Unioni:ation Siqnificant at the 95 Level

Interaction               d.f.           Interaction      86L f
 Sz   Un   P      10.60     4              Mf   Un T    14.61    4
 Dc   Uz   P      29.87    14              Uz   M 1     21.53   12
 Un   Uz   P      15.57     6              Hf   Uz Rq   12.41    1
 Dc   Uz   W      54.61    28              Un   Uz Rq   13.60    3
 Hf 112    W      20.75     4              Un Fl   Rq    4.62    2
 Un Sx     W      19.80     4              Un H F       14.90    2
 Hf Uz Fl         15.75     2              Hf Uz Ss     26.33    1
 Un liz    M      19.52     6              liz A Ss     24.78   12
 Un Ed H          14.62     6




                                 25
                                Ref erences

Allen, Steven G. and Clark, Robert L.    'Unions, Pension Wealth and Age
     Compensation Profiles", Industrial And Labor Relation Review,
     Vol. .39, No. 4, July 1986, pp. 502—517.

Allen, Steven, Clark, Robert, and Sumner, Dan, Hpost_Retirement Adjustments
     of Pension Benefits,' Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 21, No. 1,
     Winter 1986, pp. 118—127.

Alpert, William T., "Unions and Private Waqe Supplements," Journal of Labor
     Research, Vol. III, No. 2, Spring 1982, pp. 179—199.

Andrews, Emily, The Chanqing Profile of Pensions In America, Washington,
     D.C.: Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1985.

Freeman, Richard B., "The Effect of Unionism On Worker Attachment To
     Firms", Journal Of Labor Research, Spring 1980a, pp. 29—62.

Freeman, Richard B., "The E<it—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market:
     Unionism, Job Tenure, Quits, and Separations," Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, June 1980b, pp. 643—673.

Freeman, Richard B. "The Effect of Unionism on Fringe Benefits," Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review, July 1981, pp. 489—509.

Freeman, Richard B., "Unions, Pensions and Union Pension Funds," in
     David A. Wise editor, Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice,
     Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1985, pp. 89—118.

Freeman, Richard B., and Medoff, James L., "New Estimates of Private Sector
     Unionism in the United States', Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
     Vol. 32, No. 2, January 1979, pp. 143 — 174.

Freeman, Richard B. and Medoff, James L., What Do Unions Do?, New York:
     Basic Books Inc., 1984.

Green, Jerry R., uThe Riskiness of Private Pensions", in David A. Wise,
     editor, Pensions, Labor, and Individual Choice, Chicago: The
     University of Chicago Press, 1985, pp. 357—375.

Gustman, Alan L. and Segal, Martin, "Wages, Wage Supplements and the
     Interaction of Union Bargains in the Construction Industry,"
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1972, vol. 25, pp. 179—


Gustman, Alan L. and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "The Impact Of Wages And
     Unemployment On Youth Enrollment And Labor Supply", Review of
     Economics And Statistics, Vol. 63, No. 4, 1981, pp. 553—560.

Gustman, Alan L. and Steirimmier, Thomas L., "Partial Retirement And The
     Analysis of Retirement Behavior', Industrial And Labor Relations
     Review, Vol. 37, Nc. 3, April 1984, pp. 403—415.



                                     26
