NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL NORMS AND THE ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS
Daron Acemoglu
Matthew O. Jackson
Working Paper 20369
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20369

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We thank Pascual Restrepo for excellent research assistance and comments. We also gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the NSF grants SES-0961481 and SES-1155302, and ARO MURI Award No.W911NF-12-1-0509.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Daron Acemoglu and Matthew O. Jackson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Social Norms and the Enforcement of Laws
Daron Acemoglu and Matthew O. Jackson
NBER Working Paper No. 20369
August 2014
JEL No. C72,C73,P16,Z1
ABSTRACT
We examine the interplay between social norms and the enforcement of laws. Agents choose a behavior
(e.g., tax evasion, production of low-quality products, corruption, substance abuse, etc.) and then are
randomly matched with another agent. An agent's payoff decreases with the mismatch between her
behavior and her partner's, as well as average behavior in society. A law is an upper bound (cap) on
behavior and a law-breaker, when detected, pays a fine and has her behavior forced down to the level
of the law. Law-breaking depends on social norms because detection relies, at least in part, on private
cooperation and whistle-blowing. Law-abiding agents have an incentive to whistle-blow because this
reduces the mismatch with their partner's behavior as well as the overall negative externality. When
laws are in conflict with norms so that many agents are breaking the law, each agent anticipates little
whistle-blowing and is more likely to also break the law. Tighter laws (banning more behaviors) have
counteracting effects, reducing behavior among law-abiding individuals but inducing more law-breaking.
Greater fines for law breaking and better public enforcement reduce the number of law-breakers and
behavior among law-abiding agents, but increase levels of law breaking among law-breakers (who
effectively choose their behavior targeting other high-behavior law-breakers). Within a dynamic version
of the model, we show that laws that are in strong conflict with prevailing social norms may backfire,
while gradual tightening of laws can be more effective by changing social norms.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics, E18-269D
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and CIFAR
and also NBER
daron@mit.edu
Matthew O. Jackson
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and CIFAR, and also external faculty of the Santa Fe Institute
jacksonm@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Laws often go unenforced because they conflict with prevailing social norms. In France,
dueling was outlawed by Louis XIII in 1626, and both Louis XIII and Louis XIV attempted
to enforce this ban, and went so far as executing officers taking part in duels. Nevertheless,
the dueling tradition remained strong for centuries thereafter. For example, Lynn (1997)
reports 10,000 of duels among French military officers with over 4000 deaths during the last
30 years of Louis XIV’s reign. In the United Kingdom, as in France, dueling also continued
to be widely practiced within the aristocracy and the military despite being banned, and
several leading British politicians and prime ministers also engaged in dueling at the end
of the 18th and early 19th centuries. In the United States, the former Treasury Secretary,
Alexander Hamilton, was fatally wounded by the then Vice-President Aaron Burr in a duel,
and the future President Andrew Jackson is reported to have taken part in several duels.
Even though dueling appears to have declined in northeastern United States after the early
19th century, the tradition remained strong for a long time in the South (e.g., Nisbett and
Cohen, 1996, Pinker, 2013). A prime reason why dueling bans were so ineffective, at least
for the first several decades of their imposition, appears to be that dueling was part of the
(social) norm among the upper classes and soldiers, and the authorities did not directly
observe most duels and had to rely on reports from participants, witnesses and bystanders.
Potentially more far-reaching examples of how laws can be ineffective when they conflict
with established customs are provided by the many instances in which several British laws
and practices failed to be enforced or became badly distorted in the colonies. In many
communities, the laws on the books went unenforced both in civil and criminal cases because
these laws contradicted prevailing social norms and legal customs (e.g., Barfield, 2010, on
Afghanistan, and Parsons, 2010 on India and Kenya). Though lack of enforcement of laws
has various causes, in all of these cases, a central economic force appears to have been the
fact that people believe that the law would not be obeyed by others, thus undermining the
private cooperation necessary for its enforcement.
Other historical examples, however, show that social norms can change in response to
laws when these have been designed to work with the prevailing norms and have sufficient
resources behind them to change the norms. Perhaps the most famous is the impact of civil
rights legislation on norms and practices in the US South, where as recently as the late
1950s, racism, racial stereotypes, discrimination, and racial slurs were highly common (e.g.,
Woodward, 1955, Wright, 2013). But the enforcement of federal anti-discrimination and
anti-racist laws, even if not completely eliminating such behaviors, fundamentally changed
the norms, with transformative effects on economic decisions, language, and social relations.1
A final example may help motivate our model more closely. Authorities often promulgate
laws to discourage tax evasion or production of low-quality, unsafe products by businesses.
1

Helliwell, Wang and Xu (2014) and Giavazzi, Petkov and Schiantarelli (2014) find that immigrants’
views on trust and attitudes toward cooperation and redistribution converge rapidly to the social norms in
the country in which they live, suggesting that people adapt to local laws and institutions.

1

But there are huge differences in the success of such laws across societies. For instance, the
IMF estimates that, in 2011, 30% of taxes are evaded in Greece, whereas the same number
is 7% in the United Kingdom (IMF, 2013, and HM Revenues and Customs, 2013). This is
in part because a large part of economic transactions in Greece take place in the shadow
economy (29.5% of GDP in Greece between 1996 and 2006, compared to 12.9% in the United
Kingdom, see Schneider, Buehn and Montenegro, 2010). Many commentators relate this to
differences in social norms across countries.2 Part of the reason for the ineffectiveness of
laws against tax evasion and regulations against low-quality products is that authorities
lack the resources to audit more than a trivial fraction of businesses to enforce these laws.
They, instead, rely on whistle-blowing by private citizens and other businesses. Suppose,
for example, that after a choice related to the quality of products (or tax evasion), each
producer matches with another producer to form a business partnership. Business partners
observe each other’s behavior and can whistle-blow on behavior outside of the law. Lowquality, unreliable products (or tax evasion) create negative externalities on the rest of
society, and in addition, a mismatch between two producers in terms of product quality or
how much of their business is illicit creates a cost for each (each will have to adjust to the
different behavior of their partner, which tends to be costly). This personal mismatch cost,
in addition to general civic duty, creates an incentive for some businesses and individuals
to whistle-blow on law-breakers (as it will force law-breakers to bring their behavior in line
with the law, reducing the mismatch against a law-abiding agent). But if potential whistleblowers themselves are law-breakers, such whistle-blowing will not be forthcoming. A society
in which laws (of any kind) conflict with social norms will thus have a harder time relying
on private enforcement, and thus will tend to have less effective laws.
This paper is a first attempt to formally model the interaction between social norms
and the enforcement of laws. We introduce a simple formalization of the idea that most
laws cannot just rely on policing or other forms of public enforcement, but need to leverage
private enforcement, that is, “whistle-blowing” from private citizens. But when laws are in
conflict with prevailing norms, there will be much less whistle-blowing. This will encourage
further law-breaking, and as laws are broken by more people, whistle-blowing becomes even
less likely, making law-breaking snowball.
We first develop a simple static model that encapsulates these ideas in the simplest
possible fashion. Agents choose a behavior and then are matched uniformly at random
with another agent. Utility depends negatively on the average behavior of other agents
and on the mismatch between the behaviors of the two partners. A (simple) law bans
behaviors above a certain threshold, denoted by L in the paper, and a law-breaker, when
detected, pays a fine and has her behavior forced down to L. Law-abiding agents have an
incentive to whistle-blow because this will reduce their partner’s behavior, curtailing the
negative externality and ameliorating the mismatch. When others break the law, each agent
2

The New Yorker, for example, writes: “The reason tax reform will be such a tall order for Greece, in
sum, is that it requires more than a policy shift; it requires a cultural shift.” (2011).

2

has further incentives to do so as well, because there will be less whistle-blowing. This
introduces the first major interaction between social norms and laws, and potentially leads
to multiple equilibria. Despite the potential multiplicity of equilibria, the model is tractable
and enables a tight characterization of all equilibria in terms of a threshold for law-breaking,
and a range of comparative statics of the lowest compliance equilibrium. For example, tighter
laws (banning more behaviors) lead to greater law-breaking and lower behavior among lawabiding agents, while greater fines for law-breaking reduce law-breaking but interestingly,
increase behavior among law-breakers (because the composition of law-breakers changes
towards higher types, and since each law-breaker chooses their behavior with the hope of
matching other law-breakers, this changing composition induces each law-breaker to choose
a higher behavior).
Though we start with a static model to illustrate the workings of the model, some of
the results related to our motivation above come from our dynamic model, in which each
individual matches with agents from both previous and future generations. Now prevailing
norms are given by the distribution of behavior in the previous generation (as in Acemoglu
and Jackson, 2013). After establishing that steady-state equilibria of this dynamic model
are identical to the equilibria in our static setup, we study the interaction between social
norms and laws. Echoing some of our discussion above, we show that laws that are in
strong conflict with existing norms backfire: abrupt tightening of laws causes significant
lawlessness, while gradual imposition of laws that are more in accord with prevailing norms
can successfully change behavior and thus future norms.3 The dynamic model also generates
“social multipliers” in law-breaking (as emphasized in, inter alia, Glaeser, Sacerdote and
Scheinkman, 1996): once there is high law-breaking, then next period there will be less
private corporation with law enforcement, increasing law-breaking further.
We also show how different types of laws interact when law-breakers in one type of
behavior are discouraged from whistle-blowing on another type of behavior. This interaction
leads to less law-breaking in one behavior when there is a loose law (as opposed to no law) in
the other behavior because law-abiding gives an option to the agent to whistle-blow on her
partner in the other behavior if her partner’s action is very high. However, our analysis also
shows that badly-designed — excessively tight — laws for one type of behavior (e.g., smallscale drug crime in inner cities) can make laws against other types of behaviors completely
ineffective (e.g., laws against larceny or gangs). This extension thus provides a potentially
new perspective on the debate on the broken windows theory of Kelling and Wilson (1982),
which claimed that the high incidence of serious crime in inner cities was a result of permissive
attitudes towards small-scale crimes such as vandalism, graffiti, fare-dodging on the subway,
or certain types of anti-social behavior. This theory calls for much stricter enforcement of
laws against small-scale crimes, and was the inspiration of the tough policing strategies used
in high-crime cities such as New York. Our theory suggests that pervasive law-breaking on
3

Using the French Revolution as an example, Acemoglu, Cantoni, Johnson and Robinson (2012) point to
potential effectiveness of radical institutional change related to breaking the existing political equilibrium.
The advantage of gradual changes in laws here abstracts from this political channel.

3

such things as drugs or small-scale vandalism can indeed spill into law-breaking in other
dimensions. Yet crucially, it sees the faultline not in the fact that there is such behavior
in inner cities, but in the presence of laws that criminalize a large fraction of society in
these areas. It would be much more effective, according to our theory, to decriminalize such
behaviors, so that a large fraction of individuals do not automatically become law-breakers
and can have greater willingness to cooperate with law enforcement in other dimensions of
behavior of greater import to society.
Our theory also suggests why laws relying on private enforcement (whistle-blowing) can
be more effective in some activities than others depending on the degree of “assortative
matching”. When law-breakers are more likely to match with law-breakers (which is typically
the case in activities such as dueling, smuggling, or racketeering), the power of private
enforcement is more limited than in other activities (such as tax evasion or investment in
the safety and reliability of products), where businesses breaking the law are more likely to
match with law-abiding businesses.
Our paper relates to a number of distinct literatures. First, there is a large law and
economics literature focusing on the design of rules, punishments and monitoring structures
in order to discourage certain types of behavior. This literature pioneered by Becker (1968)
and Becker and Stigler (1974), and surveyed for example in Shavell (2004), typically does
not investigate how private attitudes affect enforcement.
Our paper is more closely related to a small literature on the interactions between social
norms and laws.4 One branch of this literature (e.g., Acemoglu, 1995, Calvo-Armengol
and Zenou, 2004, Ferer, 2008, Glaesar, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 1996, Rasmusen, 1996,
Sah, 1991, Aldashev et al., 2012) shows how law-breaking, corruption and rent-seeking type
activities become profitable when others engage in such behavior, potentially leading to
multiple equilibria. Another branch shows how certain social norms can emerge even without
formal legal institutions (e.g., Ellickson, 1991, Bernstein, 1992, Pistor, 1996).
A more recent third branch is even more closely related to our work, and investigates the
interactions between laws and social norms. Benabou and Tirole (2011) develop a model
in which norms encourage certain types of behavior because of agents’ desire to signal their
intrinsic types to others or to themselves, and laws in this context both interact with this
signaling role of norms and may themselves signal the society’s attitudes to individuals (see
also Posner, 1997, Cooter, 1998, and Posner, 2002, for related perspectives). Hay, Shleifer
and Vishny (1996) and Hay and Shleifer (1998) mention — among several other factors —
the importance of achieving congruence between prevailing social norms and laws, especially
4

There is also a vast literature on social norms and culture, with roots in the writings of Simmel (1903,
1908), Sorokin (1947), Morris (1956), Williams (1960), Bierstedt (1963), and Gibbs (1965) and a substantial
literature in social psychology on law-abiding behavior, for example discussed in Tyler (1990). The different
approaches to social norms within economics are discussed in Mailath and Samuelson (2006). But these
literatures inside or outside economics do not focus on the interplay between norms and the enforcement of
laws.

4

in the context of the transition from socialism to a market economy.5 Akerlof and Yellen
(1994) anticipate the same point in their analysis of criminal behavior, and write “the major
deterrent to crime is not an active police presence but rather presence of knowledgeable
civilians, prepared to report crimes and cooperate in police investigations.” Berkowitz, Pistor
and Richard (2003) also touch on these issues in their discussion of how transplantation
of common law legal systems may not work in the context of certain prevailing customs.
Nevertheless, none of these papers, and no others that we are aware of, consider the two-way
interactions between social norms and the enforcement of laws, which is our main focus here.
Finally, our work is also related to several recent works modeling the evolution of culture, social norms and cooperation, such as Acemoglu and Jackson (2013), Bisin and Verdier
(2001), Doepke and Zilibotti (2008), Galor (2011), Tabellini (2008), and Voth and Voigtlander (2012). In Tabellini, for example, moral values affect whether there is cooperation in
a prisoner’s dilemma type game, and parents decisions concerning which types of values to
inculcate in their children, along the lines of Bisin and Verdier’s (2001) approach, is affected
by the prevailing set of values in other agents in society.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section introduces our baseline
static model. Section 3 presents the analysis of the static model and contains our main
results. We extend this baseline model to a dynamic setup in Section 4, and discuss the
interplay between historically-determined norms and laws and how laws in conflict with
norms may backfire. Section 5 contains several extensions, including the one concerning
the interplay between laws regulating different types of behavior. Section 6 briefly discusses
welfare properties of the simple laws we focus on in this paper, while Section 7 concludes.
All of the proofs are contained in the Appendix.

2

The Static Model

We first present our baseline static model, which introduces the main economic forces.

2.1

Agents, Matching, Laws and Payoffs

There is a finite population of agents, N = {1, . . . , n}, with n ≥ 2 taken to be even. In the
baseline model, we consider a simple (uniformly random) pairwise matching of the agents
represented by a matching function m : N → N . Throughout, m(i) denotes the match
partner of agent i, with m(i) 6= i (and with the usual convention that m(m(i)) = i).
Agent i has type θi ∈ [0, 1], distributed according to a cumulative distribution function
F . Type draws are i.i.d. across agents, and for simplicity, we assume that F is strictly
5

For example, the latter paper writes, “A further reason that private parties in Russia refuse to use the
legal system is that they operate to some extent extralegally to begin with and, hence, do not want to expose
themselves to the government” (p. 399) and conclude by stating “whenever possible, laws must agree with
the prevailing practice or custom. If public laws violate the practice, then private parties may refuse to
enforce them either on their own or with ultimate referenced courts.“ (p. 402).

5

increasing and continuous on [0, 1] with F (0) = 0 and F (1) = 1.
In the baseline model, we focus on a single dimensional behavior. In particular, agent i
chooses a base behavior bi ∈ [0, 1] before the matching stage (thus agent i does not know m(i)
when choosing bi ). We refer to bi as the base behavior because the agent’s actual behavior
may be forced away from this level ex post to some Bi because of the enforcement of a law.
We model laws in a simple way. A law, L ∈ [0, 1], is set by the government and is an upper
bound on the behaviors of agents. This means that any behavior above L is prohibited.6
However, the government only has limited ability to enforce laws without private cooperation
(because it does not always observe individual behaviors). In particular, we assume that the
government observes behavior in any pair with probability η ∈ [0, 1), and in this case, the
behavior of any law-breaking party in the relationship will be pushed down to L. In addition,
when there is no law enforcement (with probability 1 − η), an agent can whistle-blow to the
government that her partner’s behavior is above the law L. Agent i can only do so if her
partner indeed has behavior exceeding L; i.e., if bm(i) > L. We also assume that the agent
herself must be law-abiding to be able to whistle-below; i.e., bi ≤ L.7 We denote the whistleblowing decision of agent i by wi ∈ {0, 1}, with 1 indicating whistle-blowing.
If bi > L and wm(i) = 1, meaning that agent i is breaking the law and her match whistleblows (which, as just stated, presumes that bm(i) ≤ L), then her behavior is adjusted down
to the highest level consistent with the law, L, and she ends up paying a fine φ > 0.8
Thus, the resulting action of agent i can be written as


L if bi > L, and wm(i) = 1 or if there is public enforcement (probability η)
Bi wm(i) , bi =
bi otherwise.
With this notation, agent i’s payoff is given by
2

ui (θi , Bi ) = −a (Bi − θi )2 − (1 − a) Bi − Bm(i) − ζB i − η + (1 − η) wm(i) I{bi >L} φ, (1)
where

P

Bj
n−1
is the average behavior of agents other than i. The parameter ζ ≥ 0 captures negative
externalities of the behaviors across the population. The parameter a ∈ (0, 1) is an (inverse)
measure of “social sensitivity,” and regulates the relative importance of own preference versus
matching the prevailing “norm,” which in the static model simply corresponds to “expected
j6=i

B −i ≡

6

That laws only prohibit high behaviors is for simplicity. One could also allow for laws that ban both
high and low behaviors, such as speed limits on highways.
7
This is easy to motivate (in the presence of nontrivial fines), as when the authorities come to enforce the
behavior within the partnership they could observe the behavior of both agents and thus the whistle-blowing
agent could face punishment if not abiding by the law. We relax the assumption that law-breakers cannot
whistle-blow and also discuss the issue of amnesty for whistle-blowers in Section 5.4.
8
Fines can be interpreted as deadweight losses or transfers. If fines are transferred back to the population,
then there will be an additional term in the utility function. These would create an additional incentive to
whistle-below (similar to the externality term), without any substantive implications for our analysis.

6

behavior” of other agents in the economy that each player would partially like to match.9
The last term subtracts the fine imposed on law-breakers conditional on public enforcement
(probability η) or when there is no public enforcement (probability 1 − η) but there is private
whistle-blowing.
Because high behaviors have negative externalities on the population, there is a reason for
the government to discourage such behaviors, and laws acting as upper bounds on behavior
are the government policy on which we focus. Equation (1) also clarifies the two reasons
why an agent may whistle-blow on the high behavior of her partner: first, she reduces the
negative externality she (and everybody else) suffers (from the term ζB −i ); and second, she
may be able to reduce the mismatch between her behavior and her partner’s (from the term
2
(1 − a) Bi − Bm(i) ).10

2.2

Motivating Examples

It is useful to have some running examples to fix ideas. One simple application illustrating
some of the main trade-offs is that of a business partnership.
Suppose that each of the partners can choose a level of compliance with a tax, for instance
a value-added tax. The nature of the business affects the ease of tax evasion (e.g., how much
of the business is based on cash), which can be thought of as the agent’s type. Evading taxes
is easier if the companies involved in a transaction are evading at equal levels, since it is more
difficult to disguise transactions to the extent that the reports of the partners regarding the
transaction differ. Thus, there is an improvement in payoffs by matching a partner’s level of
tax evasion. Because tax authorities cannot police all balance sheets, whistle-blowing plays
a critical role in the detection and prevention of tax evasion. Each agent’s tax evasion leads
to negative externalities on other agents, through lost tax receipts.
As a related example, suppose that each agent decides how much effort to exert to produce
a high-quality, safe and reliable product, and then matches with another agent. The matched
partners then combine their products to produce a consumer good, the quality of which will
be a combination of the qualities of the two products. Low-quality, unreliable products
create a negative impact on the utility of the population, but are potentially profitable for
the producer because producing them is less costly and some fraction of customers do not
observe the quality of the consumer good they purchase.
In this example as well, there are natural reasons for why each agent would like their
behavior (quality of product) to match that of their partner. In particular, those with
high-quality products would not like to see the quality of the consumer good they produce
being brought down by the low-quality product of their partner. Conversely an agent with
9

This is in line with some of the common definitions of norms and sociology, for example, “A norm, then,
is a rule or a standard that governs our conduct in the social situations in which we participate. It’s a
societal expectation.” (Bierstedt, 1963, p. 222).
10
If fines are transfers, there would also be a third reason, as whistle-blowing will generate revenues from
fines, which as noted above, could be redistributed to the agents.

7

a low-quality product will suffer additional costs because of the incompatibility between its
product and the high-quality product of their partner.11
Though the government would like to regulate product quality, it has an imperfect ability
to do so because it does not always directly observe qualities. It can legislate a minimum
quality standard on each product, and then enforce it through random inspections and
whistle-blowing behavior of business partners. If an agent is detected to have a low-quality
or unsafe product, they will be subject to a fine and will also have to take costly action
to bring their product into compliance with the law. The business context also motivates
our assumption that whistle-blowers who are law-breakers will themselves be detected. For
example, if a law-breaking firm whistle-blows on their partner’s low-quality product or tax
evasion, the subsequent investigation will likely reveal their own transgressions.
Both examples further clarify the meaning of “norms” in our model. The simplest interpretation is that norms here are “external norms” corresponding to expected behavior
with important payoff consequences, i.e., whether an agent expects their partner to have
a low-quality or high-quality product. In the dynamic version of the model we study below, instead of this expectation, external norms correspond to the historical distribution of
behavior (quality of products).12
It is straightforward to see that many other types of behaviors also fit the model, for
example, dueling, tax compliance, consumption of illegal substances, disruptive behavior,
corruption, and so on. In all of these cases, behaviors are not typically observable directly
by the government but are more commonly observed by some other agents (roommates,
business partners, employees, etc.), and agents care about the behavior of those they are
closely associated (match) with.

2.3

Equilibrium

The game we have set up consists of two stages: in the first, each agent chooses a behavior
conditional on their type, and then in the second stage, they decide whether to whistle-blow
on their partner.
It is straightforward to observe that, in our baseline model it is a strictly dominant
strategy for an agent with bi ≤ L and bm(i) > L to whistle-blow (because this reduces both
the externality and the mismatch with the partner’s behavior). As a consequence, in this
11

Though producers might also have an incentive to whistle-blow on competitors, this will be limited by
the fact that they will not have closely observed the behavior of their competitors and whistle-blowing is
only possible given hard information.
12
In addition to external norms, our model could also be used to study the interplay between laws and
“internal norms” (that is, norms that individuals adhere to for moral reasons, e.g., Hoffman, 1977, or Tyler,
1990). In this case, individuals would whistle-blow because the behavior of their partners or of others that
they observe are in dissonance with their moral values and expectations. For example, one could assume
that internal norms adapt to an individual’s own behavior and some function of average behavior in society,
and if an individual sees a behavior very far from their internal norms, they feel compelled to try to prevent
it.

8

multi-stage complete information game, any sequential equilibrium will have whistle-blowing
as part of the equilibrium whenever the opportunity arises. Given this observation, we define
an equilibrium for the first stage only, using the standard notion of a pure-strategy symmetric
Bayesian equilibrium. Such an equilibrium is given by β : [0, 1] → [0, 1], with β(θi ) indicating
the action taken by type θi .13
In what follows, whenever we refer to equilibrium, it is to such a pure-strategy symmetric
Bayesian equilibrium of the induced one-stage game.

3

Analysis of the Static Model

In this section, we characterize the equilibria of the static model presented in the previous
section, and present our main comparative static results.

3.1

Existence of Equilibrium

Strategies are said to be monotone if β(θi ) ≥ β(θ0i ) whenever θi > θ0i . Our first result shows
that all equilibria are in monotone strategies. An implication of monotone strategies is that,
in any equilibrium, there will exist some threshold type θ∗ such that all types below θ∗ are
law-abiding, and all types above θ∗ are law-breaking (and this threshold can be one or zero,
corresponding, respectively, with all agents being law-abiding and law-breaking).
Proposition 1 An equilibrium exists, and all equilibria are in monotone strategies and are
characterized by a threshold θ∗ above which all types break the law and below which they obey
the law.
Like all of other propositions, the proposition’s proof is given in the Appendix. There,
Lemma 1 establishes the monotonicity of strategies, and existence follows straightforwardly
given the threshold characterization in Proposition 4 below.
It is important to note that ours is not a game of strategic complementarities because a
higher behavior of an agent’s (potential) partner can encourage her to obey the law in order
to be able to whistle blow.

3.2

Equilibrium without Laws

We next characterize the equilibria without laws, or equivalently the case where L = 1 (so
that laws are not binding). In this benchmark case, there is a unique equilibrium given in
the next proposition.
13

We take strategies to be measurable functions of type. Since F is continuous (and thus does not have any
atoms) and agents are only indifferent at one type, there will be no non-trivial mixing, so the focus on purestrategy equilibria is essentially without loss of any generality. The possibility for asymmetric equilibria (and
hence the qualifier “symmetric”) is a consequence of having a finite number of agents. With a continuum,
all equilibria are in symmetric strategies.

9

Proposition 2 Without any law (L = 1), there is a unique equilibrium and it is linear in
own type and described by
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[θ].
Equilibrium strategies are depicted in Figure 1 as a function of own type, θi . Linearity
here is a simple consequence of the fact that, without laws, payoffs are quadratic.

bi
aqi + (1‐a)E[q]

(1‐a)E[q]
qi

Figure 1: Equilibrium without laws.
A feature which is paralleled by equilibria with laws is that the parameter a, regulating the
“social sensitivity” of payoffs, determines the slope of equilibrium strategies. The distribution
of types F only affects the form of the equilibrium via the threshold value of θ between lawabiding and law-breaking (which is not relevant here), and via E[θ] (and thus the intercept
in Figure 1). This implies that agents always choose a convex combination, with weights a
and 1 − a, between their preferred action given by their type, θi , and “expected behavior”
(or “norm”) in society, given by E[θ].

3.3

Equilibrium with Laws

With this benchmark in place, for the remainder of the paper we focus on the case in which
laws are binding, i.e., L < 1. The next two propositions characterize the equilibria in this
case, showing that, compared to the case without laws, there is a crucial choice between
law-abiding and law-breaking behavior, and the impact of laws on the behavior of others
will also change the expected behavior that enters into the calculations of law-abiding and
law-breaking agents.
Proposition 3 For any L ∈ (0, 1), there exists φ ≥ 0, such that
• if φ > φ, then there is a unique equilibrium, which involves full compliance (all types
obey the law);
10

• if φ < φ, then there are multiple equilibria: one with full compliance and (at least two)
other equilibria ordered by the threshold above which all types break the law.
When the fine against law-breakers that are detected is sufficiently large, i.e., φ > φ,
the unique equilibrium involves law-abiding behavior (full compliance) by all agents. The
intuition for this case is instructive. For any L > 0, there will be some agents who always
obey the law (because their type, θ, is sufficiently low). This translates into a positive
probability of paying the fine φ for any law-breaking agent (even if the direct government
detection of law breaking is 0), discouraging law-breaking for very large fines. Even when
φ < φ, the full compliance equilibrium continues to exist. In this case, even though the fine is
not large enough to discourage law-breaking with only a small fraction of agents obeying the
law and whistle-blowing, when all agents are law-abiding a law-breaker will be reprimanded
with probability 1 (either due to public enforcement or whistle-blowing by her partner), and
will also be induced to choose a behavior less than L. Nevertheless, when φ < φ, there are
also equilibria in which a non-trivial fraction of the population breaks the law.14
It is useful to note that the multiplicity of equilibria highlighted in this proposition has
a different economic intuition than the multiplicities already emphasized in the literature
(e.g., congestion effects in policing or the legal system, or peer effects). In particular, it is
a consequence of the fact that when others are breaking the law, there will be little private
cooperation with law enforcement, encouraging yet others to do likewise.
Although the equilibrium threshold for law-breaking and the fraction of law-breakers may
not be unique, the next proposition shows that the form of the equilibrium is the same in
all equilibria.
Proposition 4 All equilibria are of the following form. There exists θ∗ ∈ [L, 1] such that
β(θi ) = β abiding (θi ) ≡ min[aθi + (1 − a)x, L] if θi < θ∗

(2)

β(θi ) = β breaking (θi ) ≡ aθi + (1 − a)E[θ|θ > θ∗ ] if θi > θ∗ ,

(3)

and
where x is the unique solution to x = E[min β(θ), L].
The general form of equilibria is depicted in Figure 2. The form of the strategies
β abiding (θi ) and β breaking (θi ) is intuitive. Recall that without laws (cfr. Proposition 2), an
agent chose a convex combination of her preferred behavior given by her type, θi , and expected behavior in society. For law-abiding agents, the calculus is still similar, except that
as shown by the expression, aθi + (1 − a)x, the expected behavior is replaced by x.15 This
14

Note, however, that φ can be equal to zero, in which case such equilibria will not exist. A trivial example
is when L is arbitrarily close to 1.
15
Note that x is implicitly defined as a fixed point of an increasing mapping, since β(θ) is itself an increasing
function of x. This implies that x may not be unique. However, we show in the Appendix that is defined
uniquely.

11

is the expectation of the actual behavior of other agents (rather than their base behavior,
bi ) and thus takes into account that the agent herself can whistle-blow (or there is public
enforcement) on any partner who chooses the behavior above L and force them down to L.
By definition of these agents being law-abiding, their behavior is equal to aθi + (1 − a)x only
if this expression is below L (and otherwise their behavior is capped at L).

bi

bi

L

L

L

qi

L

(a) Law fully obeyed

q*

qi

(b) Law partially obeyed

Figure 2: Multiple Equilibria: The black line is the equilibrium without any law. The blue
dashed lines indicate equilibrium behavior. These are the two extreme equilibria. In (a)
everyone obeys, and in (b) it is those below θ∗ who obey, where θ∗ is the lowest compliance
equilibrium threshold. Equilibria can be ordered in terms of θ∗ .
The calculation of law-breaking agents is different. These agents know that their partner,
if she is law-abiding, will whistle-blow on them, setting their behavior down to L. Thus, when
choosing their behavior, these agents only reason conditionally — conditional on matching
with another law-breaking agent and not being subject to public enforcement. As a result,
their behavior is a convex combination of their own type, θi , and the expected behavior of
their partners conditional on their partner being law-breaking, which is E[θ|θ > θ∗ ]. Note
that the parameter η does not explicitly enter equations (2) and (3). This is because, as
just explained, law-abiding agents can always whistle-blow on a law-breaking partner, while
law-breaking agents are reasoning conditionally. The law-breaking threshold θ∗ naturally
depends on the probability of public enforcement, η.
Equilibria in Proposition 4 are conditional on the law-breaking threshold θ∗ . It is also
straightforward to derive an expression for this threshold, which balances out the costs and
benefits of law-breaking for the threshold agent at θ∗ , and this is given by equation (A10) in
the Appendix.
Although Proposition 3 highlights that there are multiple equilibria (in the case where
φ > φ), Proposition 4 shows that all equilibria are characterized by a law-breaking threshold
θ∗ (which may be equal to one, in which case all obey the law). Equations (2) and (3) also
indicate that different equilibria are ranked in terms of their threshold for law-breaking, θ∗ .
If we consider two equilibria with different levels of θ∗ (for given levels of L and φ), then in
12

the one with lower θ∗ , the behavior of all law-abiding citizens will be the same (because x
does not change); there will be more law-breaking (more agents above θ∗ ); but law-breakers
will choose lower behaviors (because E[θ|θ > θ∗ ] is lower). In what follows, we often focus
on the lowest compliance equilibrium, meaning the equilibrium with the lowest θ∗ and thus
the highest amount of law-breaking.16

3.4

Comparative Statics

We now provide some simple comparative statics for the lowest compliance equilibrium.
Proposition 5 Consider the lowest compliance equilibrium. Then:
1. A small increase in φ (higher fine), ζ (greater externality), and/or η (higher likelihood
of public enforcement):17
• increases θ∗ and so lowers the fraction of agents breaking the law;
• leaves behavior by each agent who was obeying the law unchanged;
• but leads to higher behavior among those still breaking the law.
2. A large increase in φ, ζ, and/or η shifts the equilibrium to full compliance and reduces
overall average behavior.
3. There exists ζ > 0 such that if ζ < ζ, a small decrease in L (a stricter law):
• decreases θ∗ , increasing the fraction of agents breaking the law;
• leads to lower behavior by each agent who was already breaking the law; and
• leads to lower average behavior by those obeying the law.
4. If ζ > ζ, then the comparative statics of a stricter law are reversed.
16

One might also study the stability of equilibria under best-response dynamics to investigate which
equilibria are more likely to be robust to small perturbations. Under some regularity conditions, both the
full compliance equilibrium and the lowest compliance equilibrium are stable under this notion of stability.
17
A small increase is defined to be such that, after this change, the lowest compliance equilibrium has
a law-breaking threshold in a small neighborhood of θ∗ (the law-breaking threshold before the change).
In particular, suppose that there exists a neighborhood N of the parameter vector (L, a, φ, η, ζ) and a
continuous function Θ∗ : N → [0, 1] such that θ∗ = Θ∗ (L, a, φ, η, ζ) and there is an equilibrium with lawbreaking threshold Θ∗ (L0 , a0 , φ0 , η 0 , ζ 0 ) for all (L0 , a0 , φ0 , η 0 , ζ 0 ) ∈ N . Then there always exists small changes in
φ, η and ζ (within N ) that still lead to an equilibrium nearby, and the statements here refer to comparisons
to this nearby equilibrium. This requirement holds generically and simply rules out situations in which the
lowest compliance equilibrium is defined by a point of tangency rather than the intersection of the two curves
defined in the proof of Proposition 4. When this requirement is not satisfied, any change in parameters is a
“large” change in terms of this proposition.

13

The proposition focusses on the lowest compliance equilibrium, but the same comparative
statics apply to all equilibria that are stable under best-response dynamics as discussed in
footnote 16.
Several aspects of this proposition are worth stressing. First, higher fines, greater public
enforcement and tighter (more restrictive) laws all have unambiguous effects on the fraction
of law-breakers, as depicted in Figure 3, but more nuanced impacts on levels of behavior.

bi

bi

L

L
L
q*

q*

qi

(a) An increase in fine, φ; externality,
ζ; or public enforcement, η.

q*

q*

qi

(b) A decrease in the (tightening of
the) law L

Figure 3: Comparative Statics
In particular, starting from φ < φ, a small increase in φ (which keeps us in the same
region) reduces the fraction of law-breakers because the penalty is now higher. The impact
of this increase in fines on behavior is more subtle, highlighting the rich interactions between
laws and behavior in our model. A higher φ has no impact on β abiding (x is independent of
both φ and θ∗ as noted above), but increases θ∗ and thus E[θ|θ > θ∗ ]. This implies that
the function β breaking shifts up, highlighting that even though all strategies are monotone,
the impact on the behavior of law-breakers is non-monotone. Intuitively, some law-breakers
switch to law-abiding behavior in response to the higher fine, and the remaining law-breakers
now expect to match with a relatively higher θ (with consequently higher behavior) and so
they adjust their behavior upward. So, fewer agents break the law, but do so by a greater
amount (i.e., law-breakers increase their behavior). This leads to an ambiguous average
effect that depends on the specifics of the distribution (as illustrated in Figure 4 below for
the case of changes in L).
A large increase in φ, on the other hand, takes us above the threshold φ thus destroying all equilibria except the full compliance equilibrium (and thus avoiding the somewhat
paradoxical effect of encouraging high behavior among law-breakers).
Greater public enforcement (higher η) has the same effects as a greater fine for lawbreaking, increasing the law-breaking threshold and also increasing behavior among lawbreakers. A greater externality in behavior (higher ζ) also acts similarly to a greater fine,
although for different reasons: it induces people to obey the law so that they can whistle-blow
on others.

14

A stricter law acts quite differently from increasing fines or public enforcement. Let us
first focus on the case where the externality is small, i.e., ζ < ζ. In this case, a stricter
law increases the fraction of law-breakers, because obeying the law is now more onerous
(requires lower behavior). However, now in addition to having more law-breakers (with
lower average law-breaking behavior), a tighter law also reduces the behavior of each lawabiding agent (because L is lower), and switches the highest types — who were choosing the
highest behavior among the law-abiding agents — to law-breaking, thus reducing average
behavior among law-abiding agents through both channels.
Nevertheless, because those switching from law-abiding to law-breaking increase their
behavior, the impact on overall average behavior is again ambiguous. The effect of a tighter
law on average behavior is shown in Figure 4. In particular, this figure illustrates that,
compared to no law, a very permissive law — which is associated with a unique full compliance equilibrium — necessarily reduces average behavior. But a further tightening of the
law may eventually lead to a discontinuous jump in average behavior at the point where
full compliance ceases to be the unique equilibrium and there emerges a low compliance
equilibrium with a positive fraction of agents breaking the law. Yet further tightening of the
law reduces average behavior in the lowest compliance equilibrium, but this effect is again
reversed eventually, when the increase in law-breaking starts to overwhelm the reduction in
behavior among law-abiding and law-breaking agents. These results highlight the possibility
that excessively tight laws may achieve the opposite of their objectives: increasing, rather
than reducing, average behavior in society. We further discuss the potential paradoxical
effects of strict laws in the context of our analysis of dynamic settings and settings with
multiple types of behavior in Section 5.1.

Bavg

Lowest
Compliance
Equilibrium

Full
Compliance
Equilibrium
Multiple
Equilibria

L

Unique
Equilibrium

Figure 4: Average behavior as a function of the law. Average behavior decreases in the full
compliance equilibrium, but may increase or decrease in the lowest compliance equilibrium.
Also worth noting is that the impact of a change in law reverses for high enough externalities ζ (i.e., when ζ > ζ). This reversal is a consequence of the fact that when the
15

externality is large, the desire to whistle-blow on other agents and reduce the externality
they create overwhelms the other effects, and so agents prefer to obey the law in order to be
able to whistle-blow and reduce the behavior of others. In large societies the externality for
any particular individual becomes small, and this effect becomes unimportant (and we are
always in the ζ < ζ region).18
We finally note that the impact of a change in the parameter a, which regulates the social
sensitivity of behavior, is more subtle because this parameter affects both the slope of the
equilibrium and the cutoff threshold θ∗ , as pictured in Figure 5.

bi

L

q*

q*

qi

Figure 5: Increasing the sensitivity to the partner’s action (a decrease in a)

4

Dynamics

The static model transparently exposits how laws and expected behavior of other agents
influence behavior. Though the expected behavior of other agents acts as a “norm,” anchoring the behavior of each individual in society, the static setup does not permit an analysis
of how past “norms” (patterns of behavior) influence the evolution of future behavior. In
this section, we consider a dynamic generalization of the static model, which enables us to
demonstrate how laws that are in conflict with prevailing norms can backfire, while more
moderate laws can be successful in changing behavior and norms in society.

4.1

Dynamic Model

Our dynamic model is a straightforward generalization of our static setup. We consider an
overlapping generations model, with each generation consisting of n agents. An agent i of
generation t, denoted (i, t), when born, chooses a base behavior b(i,t) , and then matches with
18

In particular, ζ increases with n, and becomes arbitrarily large when n tends to infinity.

16

an agent of the previous generation, t − 1, and an agent of the next generation, t + 1.19 We
denote the matching partner of agent (i, t) at time t (from generation t − 1) by mt (i, t) and
at time t + 1 (from generation t + 1) by mt+1 (i, t).
We assume that the base behavior of each agent is “sticky,” in particular meaning that it
is chosen only once by each agent.20 For instance, using one of our our motivating examples,
each agent decides how much investment to make in a high-quality product at the beginning
of their business life.
The rest of the setup closely follows our static model (and in fact is chosen to maximize
this parallel). In particular, there is a law Lt that governs the play in period t. To begin
with, we assume that the sequence of laws is known to all agents, but we also consider an
unanticipated change in the sequence of laws below. Each agent can whistle-blow against
either/both her partner from the previous and the next generation, and we assume that an
agent who is caught breaking the law (either because of whistle-blowing or public enforcement) is only forced to change her behavior in the specific interaction in which her behavior
is detected.21 In other words, even though the base behavior, b(t,i) , is constant, the actual
behaviors of agent (i, t) against her partner from the previous and the next generations can
t+1
t
and B(i,t)
(where we are using the natural
be different, and are denoted, respectively, by B(i,t)
convention that the interaction between generations t − 1 and t takes place at time t). We
also assume that, when laws are time-varying, individuals are bound by the laws that were
in operation in their youth. So an individual born at time t will have broken the law in both
of her interactions at time t and t + 1 if her base behavior b(i,t) is above Lt . And if she is
caught in either period, her behavior is forced down to Lt (and she pays the fine φt ). This
assumption also implies that when there is a change in laws, a generation is automatically
grandfathered provided that they obeyed the law in place at the time of their birth.22
k
=1
Behavior at time 0 is taken as given and described by some strategy β 0 (·). Let wm
k (i,t)
designate that agent (i, t)’s partner at time k whistle-blows on her in time period k, and
19

Matching with own generation, as well as previous and next generations, complicates the analysis further,
without modifying any of our main results, so we simplify matters by focusing on an environment in which
matching is only with previous and next generations.
20
While full stickiness makes the analysis transparent, a partial friction still produces similar effects, though
with additional complications (see Acemoglu and Jackson, 2013, for a more detailed discussion).
21
This implies that the government cannot automatically force an individual to change her behavior in
future interactions just because she was whistle-blown in her “youth”. This could be, for example, because
the government cannot direct its enforcement towards monitoring certain agents more closely, and we can
imagine that an agent can in fact change her behavior in the future by paying some fixed costs, so that the
government cannot be sure that this past transgressor has indeed broken the law again without monitoring
her. The extension to this more general case complicates the model, but does not affect the main insights.
22
All of our major insights also hold with the alternative assumption of no grandfathering, which makes
each agent responsible to match the current law (in fact, all of the results with constant laws are trivially the
same). More importantly, a version of one of our key results in this section, Proposition 8, also holds in this
case, and in fact becomes somewhat more obvious, since a tightening of the law automatically makes many
people in the previous generation law-breakers and thus unable to whistle-blow on the next generation. This
mechanical effect is eliminated with our grandfathering assumption.

17

k
wm
= 0 indicate that her partner does not whistle-blow.
k (i,t)
The payoffs to agent (i, t) are a natural generalization of those in the static model and
are given by
t
u(i,t) = (1 − λ) [ a B(i,t)
− θ(i,t)

2

t
t
− Bm
+ (1 − a) B(i,t)
t (i,t)

2

t

t
I
)φt ]
−ζB (i,t) − (η + (1 − η) wm
t (i,t) {b(i,t) >Lt }

2
2
t+1
t+1
t+1
+λ [ a Bt,i
− θt,i + (1 − a) B(i,t)
− Bm
t+1 (i,t)

(4)

t+1

t+1
I{b(i,t) >Lt } )φt ] .
−ζB (i,t) − (η + (1 − η) wm
t+1 (i,t)

Here 1 − λ and λ are the payoff weights on, respectively, past and future interactions, and
are inclusive of time-discounting. Laws and fines are allowed to be time-varying as noted
above (and to interpret the timing of the terms at the end of each line, recall the convention
that the interaction between generations t − 1 and t takes place at time t, and that an agent
born at time t is subject to the laws and fines imposed at time t).
In addition, we define externality terms on generation t as
P t+1
P
P
P t
t+1
t
t
t+1
j B(j,t+1) +
j6=i B(j,t)
j6=i B(j,t)
j B(j,t−1) +
B (i,t) ≡
and B (i,t) ≡
2n − 1
2n − 1
are the analogues of the negative externality term in the static model. The relationship
between base and actual behaviors is given by
(
k

Lt
if b(i,t) > Lt , and wm
= 1 or there is public enforcement (prob. η)
k
k
k (i,t)
B(i,t) wmk (i,t) , b(i,t) =
b(i,t) otherwise,
where k = t or t + 1.
Whistle-blowing is no longer automatic in cases in which laws differ across periods. For
example, an agent obeying a less tight law may wish to allow an agent of the next or previous
generation to break a more stringent law. Thus, strategies now must include not only the
base behavior as a function of an agent’s type, but also the whistle-blowing choices of a
law-abiding agent as a function of the behavior of her matches from the previous and the
next generations.
A dynamic equilibrium is then defined as a pure-strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium
that is symmetric with respect to the agents of any given generation,23 and is summarized
23

Because, as mentioned above, whistle-blowing behavior now occurs after observing other agents’ behaviors, our equilibrium notion incorporates sequential rationality. With just the requirement of Bayesian
equilibrium (without perfection), there exist trivial equilibria in which all agents obey laws and whistle-blow
on any deviations (even though this may not be in their interest ex post, since whistle-blowing then ends
up off the equilibrium path). Because aspects related to Bayesian updating of beliefs are not relevant in our
context, we essentially just use Bayesian equilibrium strengthened with subgame perfection (thus avoiding
technical details related to updating beliefs on sets of measure zero).

18

by a collection of functions {β t (θ)}∞
t=0 describing base behavior choices, as well as whistle24
blowing decisions.
A steady-state equilibrium is a dynamic equilibrium in which β t (θ) = β ∗ (θ) for all t (in
settings in which laws, fines, and other parameters are constant over time).

4.2

Steady-State Equilibria

Because steady-state equilibria of this dynamic model (with φt = φ and Lt = L for some φ
and L and all t) coincide with the equilibria of the static model, we start with steady-state
equilibria, turning to dynamic equilibria in the next subsection.
Proposition 6 Let B be the set of equilibria of the static game, and B ∗ be the set of steadystate equilibria of the dynamic game (with the same parameter values as the static game and
with Lt = L and φt = φ for all t). Then B = B ∗ , and every steady-state equilibrium is given
by a strategy of the form

β abiding (θi ) if θi < θ∗
∗
β (θi ) =
β breaking (θi ) if θi > θ∗
for some threshold θ∗ , where β abiding (θi ) and β breaking (θi ) are as defined in (2) and (3) in
Proposition 4.
In steady state, all generations have the same distribution of behavior, and thus the
matching facing each agent with respect to the previous and the next generations is entirely
analogous to that in the static model. Proposition 6 then implies that the comparative
statics from the static model generalize to steady-state equilibria.

4.3

Dynamic Equilibria

Next, we establish the existence of and monotonicity of strategies in dynamic equilibria using
the same arguments used for proving Proposition 1.
Proposition 7 A dynamic equilibrium exists, and all dynamic equilibria are in monotone
strategies (i.e., β t (θi ) is nondecreasing in θi for each t). Moreover, a dynamic equilibrium is
characterized by a sequence of thresholds, {θ∗t }∞
t=0 , and behavior of each generation is given
by
β t (θi ) = min[aθi + (1 − a)((1 − λ)xt−1 + λxt+1 ), L] if θi < θ∗t ,
24

β 0 is an initial condition, and need not be a best response to the future plays, but can be (as in the case
of a steady-state equilibrium). We focus on equilibria in which play is symmetric within a generation, as
equilibrium strategies are only subscripted by time and not players’ identities. There is no similar requirement
of symmetry across generations.

19

and
β t (θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)

(1 − λ) Pr(θ > θ∗t−1 )zt−1 + λ Pr(θ > θ∗t+1 )zt+1
if θi > θ∗t ,
(1 − λ) Pr(θ > θ∗t−1 ) + λ Pr(θ > θ∗t+1 )

where xt = E min[β t (θ), L] and zt = E[β t (θ)|θ > θ∗t ].
Several features are worth noting. First, the characterization of equilibrium in Proposition 7 is similar to Propositions 4 and 6, with the only difference that the terms x and z
can no longer be directly computed in terms of primitives (the distribution of θ), but are
determined recursively, starting with an initial condition given by the behavior of an exogenous starting generation and another boundary condition pertaining to the limit of the
distribution of behavior as t goes to infinity.
Second, though the characterization applies to all dynamic equilibrium, it is silent on
whether the dynamic equilibrium is unique or there are multiple equilibria. When λ = 0,
each generation best-responds to the behavior of the previous generation, which ultimately
ties back to a starting condition, and thus at one extreme there is uniqueness. When λ is
high, there can be a multiplicity of equilibria because of the expectation of how the next
generation will behave, which may vary as laws change with time, and so this is a source of
multiplicity which is distinct from the multiplicity of steady-states.
Finally, note that the dynamic equilibria of this model also generate a type of “social
multiplier” (e.g., Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 1996). In particular, if there is high
law-breaking at time t, then these agents will not whistle-blow on their future partners, and
anticipating this, there will be high law-breaking at time t + 1, and so on.

4.4

Social Norms and the Effectiveness of Laws

We now show that laws that are in strong conflict with the prevailing norms may backfire
and significantly increase law-breaking, while more moderate laws that are not in discord
with prevailing norms reduce behavior without causing as much lawlessness (because they
change social norms in the process). Though the general insight concerning the interplay
between social norms and laws holds for all parameter values, the analysis with changing
laws and behaviors is quite complex, and this motivates our focus in the next proposition
on a subset of the parameters for which the sharp contrast between abrupt and gradual
tightenings of laws can be transparently demonstrated. In particular, since our emphasis is
on how the best response of the current generation is shaped by the prevailing social norms
determined by the behavior of past generations, we focus on the case in which λ = 0 so that
things are backward looking.25
25

In this case, the equilibrium is unique. It also then follows that any sequence of equilibria of nearby
games for positive values of λ for which strategies converge to a limit (where convergence is defined in the
weak∗ topology for all finite T ) as λ gets small, must then converge to an equilibrium that satisfies the
proposition for arbitrary T , and so upper hemicontinuity of the equilibrium correspondence (under such
convergence) would imply that the result holds for small λ.

20

Proposition 8 Fix F , φ > 0 and ζ ≥ 0, and let λ = 0. There exists η̄ > 0, and for each
η ∈ (0, η̄) there exists ā > 0 such that for a ∈ (0, ā) the following holds. Suppose that there
is an initial law, L ≥ (1 − a)E[θ] + a (so non-binding), and a society starts at time t = 0 in
the unique steady-state equilibrium corresponding to L. For any new law L0 < (1 − a)E[θ] − a
for which there is a less than full compliance steady-state equilibrium under L0 :
• ( Abrupt tightening of law) If there is an unanticipated and permanent change to L0 in
period 1, then all agents break the law in period 1, and some agents continue to break
the law in subsequent period in any equilibrium, and behavior converges (weak∗ ) to the
lowest compliance equilibrium associated with L0 over time.
• ( Graduate tightening of law) However, for any such L0 there exists a (finite) decreasing
sequence of laws {Lt }Tt=1 with LT = L0 and then keeping the law at L0 subsequently,
such that following a switch to this sequence of laws, all agents comply with the law at
their birth and play converges (weak∗ ) to the full compliance steady-state equilibrium
associated with L0 .
A significant tightening of the law creates a conflict between the prevailing norms and the
law, leading to an immediate and significant increase in law-breaking. This then makes it
impossible for society to achieve the full compliance steady-state equilibrium. For example,
starting with the full compliance steady-state equilibrium for law L, a much tighter law L0
will not be enforced. This is because agents in the previous generation, even though they
are grandfathered, will force their partner down to L0 if they whistle-blow, but L0 is much
lower than their current behavior, and thus forcing their partner down to L0 would cause
significant miscoordination. This implies that the initial (grandfathered) generation, though
it can whistle-blow, will choose not to whistle-blow against the behavior that would have
been chosen by the next generation absent of the law. But then knowing that there will be no
whistle-blowing forthcoming from this initial generation, the next generation ignores the law,
leading to pervasive law-breaking. This extent of law-breaking cannot last, because the very
low types in the next generation will want to obey the law and whistle-blow on law-breakers.
Nevertheless, significant law-breaking persists and society converges (from below, meaning
from greater law-breaking behavior) to the lowest compliance steady-state equilibrium, with
positive law-breaking.
In contrast, a series of gradual laws converging to L0 can be much more effective in containing law-breaking and can achieve full compliance. In particular, each gradual tightening
of the law will have a small impact on behavior, and the next generation will be willing to
abide by the law, because this enables both coordination with the current generation and
avoids the costs imposed by public law enforcement. This gradual sequence of tighter laws
slowly changes the prevailing norms, and as norms change, these tighter laws become more
and more powerful in restricting behavior. This ensures the convergence of the dynamic
equilibrium without ever deviating from full compliance. Both parts of the proposition are
illustrated in Figure 6.
21

β
β

L0

limit β’
β3

L0

β2

β0

β0 = β1

L1 = L2 …= L’

L1

β1

L2

β2

L’

β’

θi

θi

(a) An abrupt tightening of the law leading to a
switch from full compliance to the lowest compliance equilibrium

(b) A gradual tightening of the law while maintaining the full compliance equilibrium

Figure 6: Dynamics of the Effects of a Law

5

Extensions

In this section, we discuss several extensions. To facilitate the exposition, these are presented
in the context of the baseline static model.
The first extension focuses on multiple types of behavior regulated by multiple laws,
showing that badly-designed laws in one dimension make other dimensions of laws ineffective. Other extensions show how assortative matching between individuals depending on
their behavior changes the results, and highlight the implications of relaxing some other
assumptions in the model.

5.1

Multiple Laws

We first consider an extension of the model to multiple behaviors.
Each individual has a two-dimensional vector of types (θ1i , θ2i ), and chooses two behaviors (b1i , b2i ). Individual types are drawn from a joint type distribution G. To simplify the
discussion in this extension and focus on the interaction in laws, we assume that G is such
that θ1i = θ2i for all i (meaning that G puts probability 1 on the “diagonal” where each agent
has the same type on both dimensions).
Each individual now matches (uniformly at random) with two others, corresponding to
the two dimensions of behavior. We denote the partners of agent i in these two matches by
(m1 (i), m2 (i)). There are two different laws applying to each dimension of behavior, denoted

22

by (L1 , L2 ). We take payoffs to be a direct generalization of (1),

2

X

k 2
k k
k
k
k
k
k
ui =
−a Bi − θi − (1 − a) Bi − Bmk (i) − ζ B i − (η + (1 − η) wmk (i) I{bki >Lk } )φ ,
k=1,2

(5)
where

Bjk
.
≡
n−1
As (5) shows, there is no direct payoff linkage between the two dimensions of behavior.
The key linkage results from the fact that an agent cannot whistle-blow on her partner on
either dimension if she has broken any laws (e.g., a firm that whistle-blows on their business
partner for their environmental transgressions will have her tax records also scrutinized). We
also assume that an agent only observes the behavior of her partner in the specific dimension
for which they are matched with her.
Equilibria can again be defined similarly and are in monotone strategies. However, the
linkage between the two dimensions of behavior makes equilibrium more subtle. In particular,
compared to a world in which there is only one type of behavior, an individual may be more
willing to obey the law because by doing so, she has the option to whistle-blow on the other
dimension. But also an individual will be less willing to obey the law because others who
are breaking the law in the second dimension will not be able to whistle-blow on her in
the first dimension. Though it is not possible in general to determine whether the first or
the second effect dominates (and thus whether the linkage between the two dimensions of
behavior makes law-breaking more or less likely), the next proposition characterizes some
cases in which the law on one dimension encourages law-abiding behavior in the other and
also some cases in which it encourages law-breaking in the other dimension.
k
Bi

P

j6=i

Proposition 9 Consider the model with multiple laws described above. Suppose that there
is a non-trivial law in the first dimension (L1 < 1) but no law in the second dimension

(L2 = 1), and an associated equilibrium, β 1 (θ), β 2 (θ) with a law-breaking threshold θ1∗ < 1
on the first dimension. Then:
• There exist δ̄ and δ such that if a law L̃2 ∈(L1 − δ, L1 + δ̄) is imposed on the second
1
2
dimension, then there is a new equilibrium β̃ (θ), β̃ (θ) that involves a law-breaking
threshold θ̃

1∗

> θ1∗ (i.e., there is less law-breaking on the first dimension).

2
then
• There exists L > 0 such
 1that if2 a law
 L̃ < L is imposed on the second dimension,
1∗
1∗
the new equilibrium β̃ (θ), β̃ (θ) involves a law-breaking threshold θ̃ < θ (i.e.,
there will be more law-breaking on the first dimension).

This proposition thus shows that the imposition of law sufficiently similar to prevailing
laws on the second dimension increases law-abiding behavior in the first dimension, while
a very strict law in the second dimension encourages law-breaking in the first. The latter
23

result here is particularly important because it suggests that a “badly-designed” law in the
second dimension destroys the power of the first law. This is because a too strict (or badlydesigned) law naturally leads to extensive law-breaking in the second dimension. But then
these agents will cease to be able to whistle-blow on the first dimension, the anticipation of
which discourages law-abiding behavior in the first dimension. This reasoning may explain
why laws that are viewed as unfair or unjust lead to the erosion of respect for other laws
and regulations in society as discussed in the Introduction.
In light of this extension, we can return to our discussion of the broken windows theory
of Kelling and Wilson (1982) in the Introduction. Consistent with the broken windows
theory, pervasive law-breaking in the second dimension encourages law-breaking in the first
dimension (which may be more costly for society, e.g., if ζ 1 is very high). Then, one might
conclude that greater resources have to be devoted to prevent law-breaking behavior in the
second dimension. Though this would not be entirely incorrect in our model, the real problem
is not that there is high behavior in the second dimension, but that the law in the second
dimension is too strict (badly-designed). Decriminalizing moderate behaviors in the second
dimension would be much more effective in preventing the “culture of law-breaking,” and
for reducing law-breaking in the first dimension.

5.2

Assortative Matching and the Power of Laws

We have so far assumed uniform random matching. In many situations, those engaged in
illegal activities may be able to partner with others also doing so. A simple way of flexibly
allowing for this possibility is to introduce some degree of assortative matching. To analyze
this possibility, let us modify the model in one other dimension, by assuming that there is a
continuum of agents.26 Then, suppose that with probability q, an individual matches with
another agent with exactly the same type as herself, and with probability 1 − q, she matches
with somebody else uniformly at random. As q → 0, we converge to our baseline model.
As q → 1, we converge to fully assortative matching. Equilibria are again similar to the
baseline, but both the threshold for law-breaking, θ∗ , and the strategies of law-abiding and
law-breaking agents are now modified as outlined in the next proposition.
Proposition 10 Suppose that in the baseline static model we have probability q ∈ [0, 1] of
assortative matching. Then Propositions 1 and 3 apply, and Proposition 4 is modified such
that
β(θi ) = min[(a + (1 − a)q)θi + (1 − a)(1 − q)x, L] if θi < θ∗
and
β(θi ) = (a + (1 − a)q)θi + (1 − a)(1 − q)E[θ|θ > θ∗ ] if θi > θ∗ ,
where x is the unique point satisfying x = E [min[(a + (1 − a)q)θ + (1 − a)(1 − q)x, L]|]. In
addition, θ∗ is decreasing in q.
26

Though this requires some care in the definition of a matching, we omit these details.

24

The intuition for the change in the law-abiding and law-breaking strategies is straightforward (as they both reflect the increased likelihood of a match with somebody very close
to one’s own type and thus reduced mismatch). Though both law-abiding and law-breaking
agents benefit from a higher probability of assortative matching, the gain is greater for lawbreakers, since it enables them to avoid facing whistle-blowing and punishment. Hence,
higher q encourages greater law-breaking. As a consequence, enforcing laws is more difficult
in activities where law-breakers can more easily find and operate with other law-breakers,
thus insulating them from whistle-blowing. This suggests that laws relying on private enforcement (whistle-blowing) can be more effective in certain activities, such as tax evasion,
where the degree of assortative matching is likely to be more limited, than others such as
smuggling.

5.3

Costly Whistle-Blowing

In this subsection, we introduce a cost of whistle-blowing, ε, and to simplify the discussion
we set the probability of public enforcement to zero, i.e., η = 0. Now agent i’s payoff is
2
ui = −a (Bi − θi )2 − (1 − a) Bi − Bm(i) − ζB i − wm(i) I{bi >L} φ − wi I{bm(i) >L} ε.
(6)
Let us start by considering the decision to whistle-blow (since it is no longer optimal to
whistle-below on all law-breakers). Since whistle-blowing reduces the action of one’s partner
to L, the gain to doing so for an agent who has chosen behavior Bi is
2
2
(1 − a)[ Bi − Bm(i) − (Bi − L)2 ] = (1 − a)[Bm(i)
− L2 + 2LBi − 2Bm(i) Bi ],
and whistle-blowing is a strict best response when this quantity exceeds ε. It is straightforward to verify that it will do so when Bm(i) > Wε (bi ) (where the switch from Bi to bi reflects
the fact that agent i is law-abiding and hence Bi = bi ). Incorporating this behavior, we can
again reduce our multistage game to a static one in which each agent chooses β(θi ), and
define an equilibrium as a pure-strategy Bayesian equilibrium. Then the next proposition
follows straightforwardly using the same arguments as Proposition 1.
Proposition 11 An equilibrium exists, and all equilibria are in monotone strategies.
Proposition 11 also enables us to simplify the whistle blowing strategy by writing Wε
as a function of θi rather than bi (by simply substituting for bi = β(θi )), so that whistleblowing happens when the behavior of one’s partner is above a threshold W̄ε (θi ). It is also
straightforward to see that every equilibrium is characterized by a threshold θ∗ such that
types above this threshold break the law. Though the exact characterization in Proposition 4
no longer applies, it can be shown that any equilibrium with costly whistle-blowing converges
to an equilibrium of the form given in Proposition 4 as ε → 0.
Proposition 12 As ε → 0, the equilibrium with costly whistle-blowing converges (weak∗ )
to an equilibrium of the baseline model with a zero cost of whistle-blowing.
25

An interesting implication of costly whistle-blowing (with η = 0) is the possibility of a
distinction between “laws on the book” and laws that are actually enforced. In particular,
for any positive cost of whistle-blowing, ε, there exists a range of behaviors on which nobody
will blow the whistle. So even though these are banned behaviors (i.e., they are above L),
everybody understands that they will be tolerated by society. There then exists another
threshold above L, say L̂, beyond which whistle-blowing begins (but not all behaviors above
L̂ will be whistle-blown upon as this will depend on the behavior of the partner).
Another result that follows immediately from the analysis of costly whistle-blowing is that
the government can also increase the enforcement of laws by rewarding whistle-blowing. This
can offset the reduction in whistle-blowing due to the cost, and in fact, it can induce whistleblowing in situations (such as those highlighted in Proposition 8) where the unwillingness of
agents to whistle-blow makes laws ineffective.

5.4

Whistle-Blowing by Law-Breakers

In the baseline model, we assumed that only law-abiding agents can whistle-blow. The
analysis is similar when this assumption is relaxed. It can be verified that if the fine for
whistle-blowing, φ, is sufficiently large (though less than the threshold φ̄ defined in Proposition 3, above which the unique equilibrium involves all agents obeying the law), then no
agent who has herself broken the law will whistle-blow. But when φ is sufficiently small, an
agent who has broken the law by a small amount may prefer to whistle-blow when matched
against somebody who breaks the law by a very large amount, because this will get both of
them to coordinate at L (and thus avoid the disutility resulting from a significant mismatch).
Nevertheless, we can utilize the same strategy as in the previous subsection, where we first
solve for whistle-blowing, and then substituting for this, we look for an equilibrium in terms
of β(θi )’s for each agent. An equilibrium can then be defined in the same fashion and is once
again characterized by a threshold θ∗ .
This extension also enables us to discuss how amnesty laws, which partially wave sanctions against law-breakers who turn whistle-blower, affect law-breaking. In our model, when
law-breakers can whistle-blow and avoid punishment because of an amnesty, whistle-blowing
greatly increases.

6

Welfare

We conclude our formal analysis with a brief discussion of welfare properties. We should
first note that the (simple) laws we have examined in this paper are not fully optimal. If a
social planner could influence ex post behavior, then she would do so in a pair-dependent
manner, since there is a mismatch (miscoordination) externality within a pair. We believe
that the laws we have studied in this paper are nevertheless relevant because they are much
simpler to implement than fully pair-dependent taxes or subsidies conditional on the exact

26

behavior of each agent.
Here we would like to note that it is not generally optimal to choose laws and fines that
force full compliance. In particular, note that for any law L > 0, there exists some level of
fine, defined as φ̄ in Proposition 3, which will ensure full compliance. The next proposition
shows that provided that the externality on others is not too large, full compliance is not
optimal. To establish this result, we focus on the choice of a utilitarian social planner (and
treat fines paid in equilibrium as pure transfers).
Proposition 13 Fix a distribution of types F and law L ∈ (0, 1). Then for any partial
compliance equilibrium (associated with some fine φ < φ̄), there exists ζ̄ such that for any
ζ < ζ̄, utilitarian social welfare is greater under this partial compliance equilibrium than
under full compliance. Moreover, there exist distributions and levels of externality for which
the total expected utility maximizing law and fine involve partial compliance.
This proposition implies that for sufficiently small externalities, any partial compliance
is better than full compliance — and thus, the utilitarian social planner would not like to
choose a very high fine φ > φ̄. Naturally, this result may not be true if externalities are very
large, but still points out that there are natural reasons for allowing some law-breaking in
society.
The intuition for this proposition is instructive. Partial compliance leads to law-breaking
only by high types. When a high type matches with a low type, the latter can whistle-blow
and reduce the behavior of her partner back down to L. This insulates low types from the
mismatch consequences of law-breaking by high types, and thus low-types (those below the
law-breaking threshold θ∗ ) are only worse off in a partial compliance equilibrium relative to
full compliance because of the negative externalities from high behavior. This reasoning also
implies that under partial compliance, there will only be behavior above L when two high
types (two types above θ∗ ) match. But it is costly for a utilitarian social planner to force
two high-type agents down to L. In fact, by revealed preference, these high types strictly
prefer partial compliance to full compliance (as they could have chosen law-abiding behavior
even under φ < φ̄). Consequently, if the externality that law-breakers impose on society is
not too large (i.e., provided that ζ < ζ̄), it is optimal to permit high-type agents to break
the law when they are matched to each other. Notably, this conclusion holds for any φ < φ̄,
and thus for any partial compliance equilibrium (though of course the relevant threshold ζ̄
for the size of externalities does vary across partial compliance equilibria).

7

Conclusion

This paper has examined the interplay between social norms and the enforcement of laws.
The main motivation for our approach comes from the fact that many laws are ineffective,
in part because they conflict with prevailing social norms, making private agents unwilling
to cooperate with law enforcement (for example, by whistle-blowing).
27

In our model, agents choose a behavior (e.g., tax evasion, production of low-quality products, corruption, substance abuse, etc.), and then are matched uniformly with another agent.
Utility depends negatively on the average behavior of other agents and on the mismatch between the behaviors of the two partners. A law is a cap (upper bound), L, on behavior
and a law-breaker, when detected, pays a fine and has her behavior forced down to L. Incentives to break the law depend on social norms because detection has to rely, at least in
part, on private cooperation and whistle-blowing. Law-abiding agents have an incentive to
whistle-blow because this will reduce their partner’s behavior, ameliorating the mismatch.
When laws are in conflict with norms so that many others are breaking the law, anticipating little whistle-blowing, each agent has further incentives to also break the law. We show
that all equilibria are characterized in terms of a threshold for law-breaking, and a range of
comparative statics of the lowest compliance equilibrium are presented. For example, greater
fines for law-breaking reduce law-breaking and behavior among law-abiding agents, but also
increase behavior among law-breakers (because law-breakers choose their behavior in the
hope of matching with other law-breakers, and in this case, the composition of law-breakers
has shifted towards higher type agents). A tighter law (banning more behaviors) leads to
greater law-breaking, but also reduces behavior among law-breakers.
We further show that laws that are in strong conflict with prevailing social norms may
backfire and lead to a significant decline in law-abiding behavior in society. In contrast,
gradual imposition of moderately tight laws can be effective in changing social norms and can
thus alter behavior without leading to pervasive lawlessness. We also show that excessively
strict (or badly-designed) laws concerning some dimensions of behavior encourage broader
law-breaking in society.
We view our paper as a first step towards a systematic analysis of the interaction between laws and norms. Important next steps in this research program would include, among
others, an investigation of the interaction between internal norms and laws; the interplay
between collective choices of society (as a function of behavior), laws and norms; the impact
of laws on the inference that agents may draw on the type and intentions of law-breaking
and law-abiding agents in society; and a systematic investigation of substitutability and complementarity between private and public law enforcement. Empirical investigation of these
interactions, and the role of history and prevailing social norms on law-breaking behavior
and law enforcement, are also obvious fruitful area for future research.

Appendix
The following lemma establishes the monotonicity and structure of best replies to (symmetric) strategies of the other players.
Lemma 1 Let β(·) be a best response for some agent i to any strategy β 0 (·) played by the
other players. Then β(θi ) ≥ β(θ0i ) whenever θi > θ0i . Furthermore, either β(θi ) ≤ L in which

28

case


β(θi ) = min L, aθi + (1 − a)E[min[L, β 0 (θm(i) )]] ;
or β(θi ) > L and then
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[β 0 (θm(i) )|β 0 (θm(i) ) > L].
Proof of Lemma 1: Consider any measurable β 0 (·) used by the other agents.
Following (1) we can write agent i’s expected payoff, including only the external effects
that i’s behavior affects, as:
Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) = −

ζ
E[min(β 0 (θm(i) ), L)]
n−1
h

−a (bi − θi )2 − (1 − a)E

if bi ≤ L; (A1)

2 i
0
bi − min[β (θm(i) ), L]

and

ζ
ηE[min(β 0 (θm(i) ), L)] + (1 − η)E[β 0 (θm(i) )]
if bi > L; (A2)
n−1


− Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) ≤ L)(a(L − θ)2 + (1 − a)E (L − β 0 (θm(i) ))2 |β 0 (θm(i) ) ≤ L + φ)

Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) = −

−η Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) > L)(a(L − θ)2 + (1 − a) × 0 + φ).


−(1 − η) Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) > L) a(b − θ)2 + (1 − a)E (b − β 0 (θm(i) ))2 |β 0 (θm(i) ) > L .
To understand (A1), note that the first line is simply the expected externality from her
match. The second line comes from the utility of the distance between action and own type
and match’s behavior; noting that the agent’s match’s behavior is always at most L, either
due whistle-blowing or enforcement if it starts above L. To understand (A2), note that the
first line is simply the expected externality from her match. The second line comes from
noting that with probability Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) ≤ L) the agent will meet a law-abiding agent, who
will whistle-blow on her. In this case, her behavior will be reduced down to L and she will
incur the fine φ. The third line comes from noting that with probability with probability
η Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) > L), she will meet a fellow law-breaker but there will be public enforcement,
and in this case she will again be subject to the fine, and her behavior will be reduced to L
(but so will the behavior of her partner accounting for the 0 term).must look Finally, with
probability (1 − η) Pr(β 0 (θm(i) ) > L) the agent will meet another law-breaker and will not be
subject to public enforcement. In this case, her utility is given by the convex combination
of the distances between her behavior and her type, and her behavior and the behavior of
the fellow law-breaker (β 0 (θm(i) )), and this gives the last line.
It then follows from the first-order necessary conditions that a best response must satisfy:
either β(θi ) ≤ L and


β(θi ) = min L, aθi + (1 − a)E[min[L, β 0 (θm(i) )]] ;

29

(A3)

or β(θi ) > L and
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[β 0 (θm(i) )|β 0 (θm(i) ) > L].

(A4)

Both of these functions are nondecreasing in θi , and (A4) is always greater than (A3). So,
the only possible violation of the nondecreasing property would have to be a setting where
the best response at θi is smaller than (or equal to) L, while at θ0i < θi the best responses
greater than than L.
Consider any bi and bi such that bi ≤ L and bi > L and let us evaluate
Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) − Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ).
To rule out this last situation where the best reply at θi is no higher than L, while at θ0i < θi
the best reply is higher than L, it is enough to show that Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) − Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) is
increasing in θi . From (A1) and (A2), it follows that


Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) − Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) = (1 − (1 − η) Pr[β 0 (θm(i) ) > L])a (bi − θi )2 − (L − θi )2
h
2 i
2
0
+(1 − η) Pr[β (θm(i) ) > L]a (bi − θi ) − bi − θi
+X
where X is a term that is independent of θi . We simplify to get
Eui (bi , θi , β 0 ) − Eui (bi , θi , β 0 )
= (1 − (1 − η) Pr[β 0 (θm(i) ) > L])2a(L − bi )θi + (1 − η) Pr[β 0 (θm(i) ) > L]2a(bi − bi )θi + Y
where Y is a term that is independent of θi . This expression is increasing in θi whenever
Pr[β 0 (θm(i) ) > L] > 0. In the case in which Pr[β 0 (θm(i) ) > L] = 0, a strategy of L offers a
strictly higher payoff than any strategy above L, and so the best reply at θ0i < θi could not
be higher than L. This concludes the proof.
Proof of Propositions 1 and 4: The monotonicity follows from Lemma 1, and then
the existence of a cutoff type describing any agent’s best reply follows directly. Thus, by
the lemma, any symmetric pure strategy equilibrium must be such that there is a threshold
θ∗ such that agents above this threshold break the law and those below do not (with full
compliance corresponding to θ∗ = 1 and full law-breaking to θ∗ = 0). Moreover, from the
characterization of strategies in the lemma it also then follows that such an equilibrium β(·)
must satisfy the following when θi > θ∗
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E [β(θ)|θ > θ∗ ] .
Taking expectations conditional upon θ > θ∗ on both sides leads to
E [β(θ)|θ > θ∗ ] = E [θ|θ > θ∗ ] ,
and thus
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E [θ|θ > θ∗ ] .
30

(A5)

When θi < θ∗ , the Lemma 1 implies that
β(θi ) = min [L, aθi + (1 − a)E [min(β(θ), L)]] .
Thus,
β(θi ) = min(L, aθi + (1 − a)x),

(A6)

where x ≡ E [min(β(θ), L)].
Next, we show that for any θ∗ , x is uniquely defined, as claimed.
We expand x = E [min(β(θ), L)] as
x = Pr(θ < θ∗ )E [min(min(L, aθ + (1 − a)x), L)|θ < θ∗ ] + Pr(θ > θ∗ )L,
or
x = Pr(θ < θ∗ )E [min(L, aθ + (1 − a)x)|θ < θ∗ ] + Pr(θ > θ∗ )L.

(A7)

The right-hand side of this equation is a contraction (it is nondecreasing in x but always
less than one-for-one as 1 − a < 1). Thus, by the contraction mapping principle (A7) has a
solution and it is unique.
We have therefore established Proposition 4, subject to proving existence, which then
completes the proof of Proposition 1.
Existence of an equilibrium follows straightforwardly as θ∗ = 1 is always an equilibrium:
if all other agents abide by the law, then any action bi > L is dominated by bi = L, and so
then best replies must all be abiding by the law. In that case, by the arguments above θ∗ = 1,
and then β(θi ) = min[aθi + (1 − a)x, L] is a best reply to itself, providing an equilibrium.
Proof of Proposition 2: Applying Lemma 1 to the case in which L = 1, it follows that
the unique best response of any agent i to the strategies of other agents is to set
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[bm(i) ].
Writing E[b] for the expected strategy of a randomly selected agent, the above expression
implies that
E[b] = E [aθ + (1 − a)E[b]] ,
which given 0 < a < 1 has a unique solution of
E[b] = E[θ].
Thus, the unique equilibrium without laws involves
β(θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[θ],
as claimed.
Proof of Proposition 3: We have already shown that in any equilibrium, (2) and (3)
have to hold given the law-breaking threshold θ∗ . Clearly, the relevant thresholds are fixed
31

points: if all other agents use threshold θ∗ , then it is a best response for each to also use
threshold θ∗ . Given the monotonicity of best responses already established in Lemma 1, it
is sufficient to look at the payoffs from law-breaking and law-abiding for the agent of type
θ∗ .
We first note that there is always an equilibrium with θ∗ = 1 given that φ > 0. This
follows since, if all other agents abide by the law, then by breaking the law an agent’s action
will reduced down to L with certainty and the agent will pay the fine φ. The agent would
have a strictly higher payoff from choosing L directly. Thus, it is a best response to obey the
law when all other agents do, and so having θ∗ = 1 and actions as in (2) is an equilibrium.
We next consider characterize equilibria for which θ∗ < 1.
Suppose that type θ∗ decides to take a law-breaking action. Then, from (A5) in the proof
of Lemma 1, the optimal law-breaking action will be aθ∗ + (1 − a)y (with y ≡ E[θ|θ > θ∗ ]),
and since θ∗ ≥ L this behavior is above L. Her payoff can then be written based on (A2) as


− Pr(θ < θ∗ )(a(L − θ∗ )2 + (1 − a)E (L − aθ − (1 − a)x)2 |θ < θ∗ + φ)
−η Pr(θ > θ∗ )(a(L − θ∗ )2 + φ)
−(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ ) a(aθ∗ + (1 − a)y − θ∗ )2


+(1 − a)E (aθ∗ + (1 − a)y − aθ − (1 − a)y)2 |θ > θ∗
ζ
−
(ηE[min(β(θ), L)] + (1 − η)E[β(θ)]) .
(A8)
n−1
Suppose, instead, that type θ∗ chooses to abide by the law, in which case she will set her
behavior to b = min[L, aθ∗ + (1 − a)x] and from (A1) receive expected payoff

− Pr(θ > θ∗ ) a(b − θ∗ )2 + (1 − a)(b − L)2
(A9)


∗
∗ 2
∗
2
− Pr(θ < θ ) a(b − θ ) + (1 − a)E (b − aθ − (1 − a)x) |θ < θ
ζ
E[min(β(θ), L)].
−
n−1
The threshold type θ∗ is given by setting (A8) equal to (A9). We the former on the lefthand side and the latter on the right-hand side and equal to each other. To help with the
comparative statics analysis, we then transfer all terms involving φ and ζ to the right-hand
side, and all other terms to the left-hand side; noting that that Pr(θ > θ∗ ) = 1 − Pr(θ < θ∗ );
and dividing both sides by (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ ) (which is strictly positive in view of the fact
that η < 1 and θ∗ < 1 as we see below), we obtain:




1 − (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )
∗ 2
∗
2 ∗
2
2
−a(1 − a) (θ − y) − (1 − a)a E (θ − θ ) |θ > θ −
a(L − θ∗ )2
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )




1
+
Pr(θ > θ∗ )(1 − a)(b − L)2 + a(b − θ∗ )2
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )






Pr(θ < θ∗ )
(1 − a) E (b − aθ − (1 − a)x)2 |θ < θ∗ − E (L − aθ − (1 − a)x)2 |θ < θ∗
+
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )


1 − (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )
ζ (E[β(θ)] − E[min(β(θ), L)])
=
φ+
.
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )
n−1
Pr(θ > θ∗ )
32

Noting that
E[β(θ)] − E[min(β(θ), L)] = Pr(θ > θ∗ )E[θ − L|θ > θ∗ ],
this simplifies to

1 − (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )
−a(1 − a) (θ − y) − (1 − a)a E (θ − θ ) |θ > θ −
a(L − θ∗ )2
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )




1
+
Pr(θ > θ∗ )(1 − a)(b − L)2 + a(b − θ∗ )2
(A10)
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )






Pr(θ < θ∗ )
∗
∗
2
2
(1
−
a)
E
(b
−
aθ
−
(1
−
a)x)
|θ
<
θ
−
E
(L
−
aθ
−
(1
−
a)x)
|θ
<
θ
+
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )


1 − (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ )
ζ
=
φ+
E[θ − L|θ > θ∗ ].
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )
n−1
2

∗

2

2



∗ 2

∗





Note that since all of the transformations used to obtain (A10) involve adding and subtracting
numbers and dividing by the positive number, the left-hand side of (A10) is greater than the
right-hand side if and only if (A8) is greater than (A9).
We now consider the set of θ∗ that satisfy (A10).
First, note that θ∗ ≥ L, since for type L choosing behavior L strictly dominates anything
above it: L does strictly better against law-abiders, and gets maximal utility against lawbreakers since all of their behaviors are reduced to exactly L, the most preferred point of an
L type. So, let us consider the set of θ∗ ∈ [L, 1) that satisfy (A10). The fact that for θ∗ = L,
choosing behavior L strictly dominates anything above it implies that the expression in (A8)
is strictly less than the expression in (A9) when θ∗ = L. This implies that the left-hand
side of (A10) is greater than its right-hand side at θ∗ = L.
Second, as shown above, if others are all abiding by the law, then it is a strict best
response to abide by the law for an agent. Put differently, when θ∗ = 1 (A8) is strictly
less than the expression in (A9). This implies that the left-hand side of (A10) is strictly
greater than its right-hand side as θ∗ → 1 (where this statement is for the limit θ∗ → 1,
since the expressions in (A10) diverge at θ∗ = 1 due to the fact that they are both divided
by (1 − η) Pr(θ > θ∗ ), though of course this does not affect their relative ranking as θ∗ → 1).
Next, note that the right-hand side is continuous and increasing in θ∗ and is always
positive, and as just argued the right-hand side starts out and ends up strictly above the
left-hand side. Note that the left-hand side is also continuous in θ∗ . Thus, if there is an
intersection and an interior equilibrium (rather than tangency which we discuss in the next
paragraph), then the smallest intersection must involve the left-hand side cutting the righthand side from below, and the greatest intersection must involve the reverse. This pictured
in Figure 7, with the blue line corresponding to the left-hand side and the red curve to the
right-hand side.27 As Figure 7 makes it clear, when there is an intersection between the two
27

The figures are drawn for the case in which b = L, in which case the left hand side stays bounded while
the right-hand side asymptotes to infinity as θ∗ → 1 (since then Pr(θ > θ∗ ) → 0, but qualitatively similar
pictures hold for the other case, but the left hand side may be unbounded.

33

curves, there must be at least two of them and thus two equilibrium thresholds (all in the
range θ∗ ∈ [L, 1)).
Right hand side

Lowest Compliance

Left hand side

Intermediate Compliance

Cutoff θ*

Figure 7: Multiplicity of Partial Compliance Equilibria.
Now consider the case in which φ is large. In that case the right-hand side still starts out
at a higher intercept on the vertical axis, and for large enough φ will have no intersection
with the left-hand side. The threshold value for there to be a tangency between the two
curves is defined as φ̄ (and when there are intersections for all values of φ, we set this as
φ̄ = 0). So when φ > φ̄, there are no interior equilibria and the unique equilibrium is full
compliance. When φ̄ > 0 and φ < φ̄, there are at least two interceptions as drawn in Figure
7, and the full compliance equilibrium always continues to exist. This completes the proofs
of Propositions 3 and 4.
Proof of Proposition 5: Recall that the lowest compliance equilibrium threshold for lawbreaking, θ∗ , is given by the smallest intersection of (A8) and (A9), or equivalently, by the
left-hand side of (A10) intersecting the right-hand side from below as shown in Figure 7.
First note that the definition of “small” changes from footnote 17 is satisfied in Figure
7 since the lowest compliance equilibrium is given by the intersection of the two curves
(rather than a tangency point). Now all of the comparative statics follow by noting how the
parameters in question shift the right-hand and left-hand sides of (A10). In particular, the
right-hand side shifts up and the left hand side is unchanged when φ, η or ζ increases, as
pictured in Figure 8a.
When L decreases (and laws become more strict), both sides of equation (A10) shift as
pictured in Figure 8b. The right-hand side shifts up, while the left-hand side’s shift depends
on parameters, and so which effect dominates depends on the level of the parameters. In
particular, there is a critical ζ, ζ (as a function of the other parameters), above which the
equilibrium threshold increases, and below which it decreases (since ζ affects the magnitude
of the change of the right-hand side equation).
34

Specifically, the derivative of the right hand side is −ζ/(n − 1). The derivative of the
left-hand side with respect to L depends on whether b = L or differs from it. Let us first
treat the case in which when L declines, b = L in some small neighborhood. In that case,
the derivative of the left-hand side is −2a(θ∗ − L), and so the critical ζ for which the two
effects balance is
ζ = 2a(n − 1)(θ∗ − L).
Above this, the increase in the right-hand side is larger from a decrease in L (leading to an
increase in θ∗ ), while below it, the shift in the left-hand side is greater from a decrease in L
(leading to a decrease in θ∗ ).

Right hand side

Right hand side

Left hand side

Left hand side

New Lowest
Compliance
Equilibrium

New Lowest
Compliance
Equilibrium

Cutoff θ*

Cutoff θ*

(a) Comparative Statics of the Equilibrium
Thresholds due to an increase in fine, public enforcement, or externality.

(b) Comparative Statics of the Equilibrium
Thresholds due to a Tighter Law.

Figure 8: Comparative statics in the lowest compliance equilibrium.
Next, let us suppose that b < L when L declines slightly from its starting level. In that
case, the derivative of the left-hand side is
−2a (θ∗ − L)


1
+
(2 Pr(θ > θ∗ )(1 − a)(L − b) + 2 Pr(θ < θ∗ )a(θ∗ − L)
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )
− 2 Pr(θ < θ∗ )(1 − a)E [(L − aθ − (1 − a)x)|θ < θ∗ ])
and so
ζ = 2a(n − 1) (θ∗ − L)


n−1
−
(2 Pr(θ > θ∗ )(1 − a)(L − b) + 2 Pr(θ < θ∗ )a(θ∗ − L)
∗
(1 − η) Pr(θ > θ )
− 2 Pr(θ < θ∗ )(1 − a)E [(L − aθ − (1 − a)x)|θ < θ∗ ]) .
This latter expression could be 0 or less, in which case the change is then unambiguous.
35

The rest of the results in parts 1 and 3 of the proposition follow directly from the inspection of equations (2) and (3). Finally, part 2 follows by considering large changes defined as
changes that shift one of the two curves so much that the interior equilibria disappear. This
case clearly leads to full compliance as the unique equilibrium and reduces overall average
behavior.
Proof of Propositions 6 and 7: Both of these results follow immediately by observing
that in steady state, the maximization problem of agents is identical to that in the static
model.The characterization of equilibrium proceeds in a similar fashion to the proof of Proposition 4, except that the distribution of behavior in the previous and the next generations
needs to be treated separately. This leads to an immediate generalization of equations (2)
and (3). The characterization of the threshold θ∗ proceeds in exactly the same fashion as in
the proof of Proposition 4 and is omitted.
Proof of Proposition 8.
First let us note that generation 0’s behavior is described by
β 0 (θi ) = β no law (θi ) = aθi + (1 − a)E[θ].

(A11)

Consider an unanticipated tightening of the law to L0 < (1 − a)E[θ] − a. Let us start by
analyzing the whistle-blowing behavior of type θ = 0 of generation t = 0. Because society
was previously in a full compliance steady-state equilibrium, all agents from generation t = 0,
and in particular type θ = 0, are law-abiding according to L and are hence grandfathered
after the law change, and can whistle-blow. By whistle-blowing, type θ = 0 can bring her
partner with behavior b > L0 down to L0 (this period’s law). From (4), the gain of doing so
is
(b − β 0 (0))2 − (L0 − β 0 (0))2 = (b − (1 − a)E[θ])2 − (L0 − (1 − a)E[θ]))2
< (b − (1 − a)E[θ])2 − a2
where the equality uses the fact that, from (A11), β 0 (θ = 0) = (1−a)E[θ], and the inequality
exploits the fact that L0 < (1 − a)E[θ] − a. Then for any behavior L0 < b ≤ a + (1 − a)E[θ],
the best response for type θ = 0 is not to whistle-below. Thus, it is, a fortiori, the unique
best response for any type to not whistle-blow against such behavior.
Next, consider behavior of generation t = 1. Now note that (i) this generation cannot
whistle-blow on the previous generation (that was law-abiding according to L); (ii) there
will not be whistle-blowing from the previous generation provided that b ≤ a + (1 − a)E[θ];
(iii) behavior in the next period does not matter for their utility given λ = 0. Then, for η
sufficiently small (i.e., η < η̄ with η̄ > 0 suitably defined) this generation will have a unique
best response of β no law (θ) as specified in (A11).
Next, consider the lowest compliance equilibrium β 0 and associated threshold θ∗0 associated with L0 . Note that E[β 1 (θ)] = E[θ] < E[β 0 (θ)|θ > θ∗0 ]. Thus, the best response β 2 to
36

β 1 has a lower cutoff θ∗2 ≤ θ∗0 and also, with the same reasoning as in the proof of Lemma
1, results in a strategy such that E[β 2 (θ)|θ > θ∗2 ] ≤ E[β 0 (θ)|θ > θ∗0 ]. Iterating, the cutoff for
law breaking of generation t, θ∗t ≤ θ0 , and E[β t (θ)|θ > θ∗t ] ≤ E[β 0 (θ)|θ > θ∗0 ] holds for every
t, with an increasing sequence of cutoffs θ∗t .
Note also, that in period 2 onwards, types with θ ≤ L0 will wish to abide by the law,
since they can force any partners’ behavior to be at most L0 , as their partners are not
grandfathered under the original law, but must obey L0 . Thus, although θ∗1 = 0, thereafter
θ∗t > L0 . Since {θ∗t } is an increasing sequence and bounded above by θ∗0 , it converges. Its
limit point must then be the threshold for the lowest compliance steady-state equilibrium,
and hence θ∗0 . Weak∗ convergence of the equilibrium actions to the steady-state then follows
from the (uniquely-defined) form of the best responses described in the proof of Lemma 1.
Finally, note that the equilibrium is unique as each generation’s behavior is completely
determined by the previous generation’s.
(Gradual tightening of law ) Next consider a sequence of gradual tightenings defined by
L1 = β 0 (1) − ε = a + (1 − a)E[θ] − ε,
and
Lt = max[L0 , Lt−1 − ε],
with ε defined below.
We next show inductively that each generation follows the current law given that all
previous generations have. As the induction step, suppose that for all previous generations
t0 < t, β t0 conforms to the law Lt0 and is a best response to the previous generation’s strategy.
We will then show that this is true for t.
We first show that for any type, choosing Lt is preferable to any behavior above Lt . The
loss in utility from such conformity is bounded above by a + (1 − a)ε2 (where the first term
is the loss in not matching own type, and the latter is the furthest change between any
match from the previous generation from abiding compared to playing any higher strategy).
Breaking the law, on the other hand, leads to a loss of at least ηφ due to public enforcement.
Thus, for a + (1 − a)ε2 < ηφ the agents are
p better off abiding by the law than breaking it.
Picking any ā < ηφ and then setting ε < (ηφ − a)/(1 − a) suffices to establish the result.
Once Lt = L0 after a finite number of steps, all future generations will obey the law L0 , and
thereafter the argument in Lemma 1 implies that the behavior of all types is nonincreasing in
time (and decreasing when it is above their steady-state behavior), and again the equilibrium
strategy profile converges (weak∗ ) to the full compliance steady-state equilibrium profile, as
the limit point must be an equilibrium and it involves full compliance.
Proof of Proposition 9: To prove the first part, and note that with L2 = 1 (i.e., no
law on the second dimension), the equilibrium threshold θ∗ is given by exactly the same
characterization as in Proposition 4, and in particular, by the intersection of the left- and
37

right-hand sides of equation (A10) above. Next consider the imposition of a law L̃2 = L1 .
Then, in the lowest compliance equilibrium, all law-abiding agents (those with types less than
θ1∗ ) in the first dimension would also abide by the law in the second dimension (since the two
dimensions are symmetric). But then types just above θ1∗ now have an additional reason to
abide by the law (on both dimensions), since this will give them an option to whistle-blow
on very high behaviors on the other dimension. This shifts up the benefit to law-abiding
behavior and thus the right-hand side of (A10), increasing θ1∗ and reducing law-breaking.
By continuity, the same argument applies to L̃2 not too far from L1 , thus establishing that
there exist δ̄ and δ such that any L̃2 ∈ (L1 − δ, L1 + δ̄) induces more law-abiding behavior
on the first dimension.
To prove the second part, consider L̃2 > 0 but small. This implies that only types very
close to zero will abide by the law on the second dimension and thus there will be very little
whistle-blowing on the first dimension, reducing θ1∗ and thus encouraging law-breaking on
the first dimension.
Proof of Proposition 10: This proposition follows immediately from writing out the best
responses of law-abiding and law-breaking agents as in the proofs of Proposition 3 and 4
with the assortative matching technology, and thus the details are omitted to save space.
Proof of Proposition 11: The proof of this proposition closely follows the proof of Proposition 1 and is omitted.
Proof of Proposition 12: To prove this result, note that the threshold for whistle-blowing
W̄ε (θi ) defined in the text as a function of the cost of whistle-blowing, ε, converges to L (for
all θi ≤ θ∗ ) as ε converges to zero. This ensures that any sequence of equilibria with costly
whistle-blowing converges to an equilibrium of the baseline model (weak∗ ) using standard
upper hemicontinuity arguments (e.g., Theorem 2 of Jackson, Simon, Swinkels and Zame,
2002).
Proof of Proposition 13: Let us first suppose that ζ = 0, so that there are no externalities.
Then, for a given law L and distribution of types F , consider first the level of fine φ1 > φ̄ so
that there is full compliance (from Proposition 3). We will now compare utilitarian welfare
in this full compliance equilibrium to that under the level of fine φ2 < φ̄ leading to partial
compliance. Under partial compliance there exists a law-breaking threshold θ∗ < 1 such
that below this threshold, there is law-abiding behavior, and above this threshold, there is
law-breaking (and thus law-breaking for a positive measure of agents).
First, note that for all θ0 ≤ θ∗ , behavior under both scenarios (where the fine is φ1 and
φ2 ) is given by
β(θ0 ) = min[aθ0 + (1 − a)x, L],

38

where x is the unique fixed point of x = E [min[aθ + (1 − a)x, L]]. This follows because lawabiding agents can whistle-blow on law-breakers when they match and reduce their behavior
to L. Since there are no externalities, this implies that these agents have exactly the same
expected utility under both scenarios, i.e.,
U2 (θ0 ) = U1 (θ0 ) for all θ0 ≤ θ∗ ,
where Uk (θ0 ) denotes the expected utility of type θ0 under scenario k = 1, 2.
Second, observe that all agents above θ0 > θ∗ can still choose law-abiding behavior when
the fine is φ2 < φ̄, which will give them exactly the same expected utility U1 (θ0 ) as in the
equilibrium with fine φ1 < φ̄. Since they choose to break the law, by revealed preference we
have that U2 (θ0 ) ≥ U1 (θ0 ). But in fact we also know that only type θ∗ is indifferent between
law-breaking and law-abiding behavior, and thus we have
U2 (θ0 ) > U1 (θ0 ) for all θ0 > θ∗ .
This implies that utilitarian social welfare is always strictly greater with partial compliance than full compliance when there are no negative externalities (i.e., ζ = 0). But given
this strict ordering, it also follows that for any level of fine φ2 < φ̄ (and thus for any partial
compliance equilibrium), there exists ζ̄ > 0 such that for ζ < ζ̄, utilitarian social welfare is
greater under the (nearby)28 partial compliance equilibrium than under full compliance.
We prove the last claim in the proposition for an extreme distribution with equal weight
on just two types, as this is easily extended to a continuous distribution that approximates
this distribution. Consider a distribution with equal weight on two types, 1 > θ2 > θ1 > 0,
and let θ = 12 (θ1 + θ2 ).
Consider any law L that is strict enough to have partial compliance, in particular such
that
a
θ + (θ2 − θ1 ) > L > θ1 ,
2
and a low enough φ so that there exists a partial/low compliance equilibrium (so that θ1 s
comply and θ2 s do not). Then, the low compliance equilibrium is such that β(θ2 ) = θ2 and
β(θ1 ) =

2aθ1 + (1 − a)L
.
1+a

The full compliance equilibrium has the same action for type θ1 , but θ2 = L for type θ2 .
Let us thus check that there is a law L < θ + a2 (θ2 − θ1 ) that leads to higher expected
total utility than any L ≥ θ + a2 (θ2 − θ1 ). Given that the types θ2 and θ1 are both better
off when meeting their own type under a partial compliance equilibrium than under no law,
then taking externalities are sufficiently small, it is enough to show that the total utility
of a type θ1 meeting a θ2 is better for at least some L < θ + a2 (θ2 − θ1 ) than a law above
28

Noting that the equilibrium changes continuously in a neighborhood if the equilibrium was not a tangency
point, and that corresponding utilities vary continuously.

39

that threshold. The total utility just accounting for the cross-type matching and the portion
affected by the law (when the externality is 0) is
−a(

2aθ1 + (1 − a)L
2aθ1 + (1 − a)L
− θ1 )2 − a(L − θ2 )2 − 2(1 − a)(
− L)2 .
1+a
1+a

The derivative of this with respect to L is

2

2
(1 − a)
2a
−2a
(L − θ1 ) − 2a(L − θ2 ) − 4(1 − a)
(L − θ1 ).
1+a
1+a
When L = θ + a2 (θ2 − θ1 ), this becomes
−a

8a2
(1 − a)2
(θ2 − θ1 ) + a2 (1 − a)(θ2 − θ1 ) − (1 − a)
(θ2 − θ1 ),
1+a
1+a


−1 + a + a + a2 − 8a
= a(1 − a)(θ2 − θ1 )
,
1+a

which is negative, implying that the total utility is increased as L is decreased below L =
θ + a2 (θ2 − θ1 ) and there is partial compliance.

References
Acemoglu, Daron (1995) “Reward Structures and the Allocation of Talent,” European
Economic Review, 39(1), 17-33.
Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Cantoni, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson
(2013) “The Consequences of Radical Reform: The French Revolution,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3286–3307.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew O. Jackson (2013) “History, Expectations, and
Leadership in the Evolution of Social Norms,” MIT and Stanford, SSRN DP 1839768.
Akerlof, George, and Janet L. Yellen (1994) Gang Behavior, Law Enforcement,
and Community Values, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
Aldashev, Gani, Imane Chaara, Jean-Philippe Platteau, and Zaki Wahhaj
(2012) “Formal Law as a Magnet to Reform Custom,” Economic Development and Cultural
Change, 60(4): 795–828.
Barfield, Thomas (2010) Afghanistan: A Cultural and Political History. Princeton
University Press, Princeton New Jersey.
Becker, Gary S. (1968) “Crime and Punishment: an Economic Approach,” Journal
of Political Economy 76(2): 169–217.
Becker, Gary S. and George J. Stigler (1974) “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance,
and Compensation of Enforcers,” The Journal of Legal Studies 3(1): 1–18.
Benabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole (2011) “Laws and Norms,” NBER Working
Paper 15579.
40

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard (2003) “Economic Development, Legality, and the Transplant Effect,” European Economic Review 47(1):
165–195.
Bernstein, Lisa (1992) “Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual
Relations in the Diamond Industry,” Journal of Legal Stud, 21: 115.
Bierstedt, Robert (1963) The Social Order (Second Edition), McGraw-Hill, NY.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier (2001) “The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics of Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory, 97: 298–319.
Calvó-Armengol, A. and Yves Zenou (2004) “Social Networks And Crime Decisions: The Role of Social Structure In Facilitating Delinquent Behavior,” International
Economic Review, 45(3): 939–958.
Cooter, Robert (1998) “Expressive Law and Economics,” Journal of Legal Studies,
27.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2008) “Occupational Choice and the
Spirit of Capitalism,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2): 747–793.
Ellickson, Robert (1991) Order Without Law. Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Ferrer, Rosa (2010) “Breaking the Law when Others Do: A Model of Law Enforcement
with Neighborhood Externalities,” European Economic Review 54(2): 163–180.
Galor, Oded (2011) Unified Growth Theory, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Giavazzi, Francesco, Ivan Petkov and Fabio Schiantarelli (2014) “Culture: Persistence and Evolution” NBER Working Paper.
Gibbs, Jack P. (1965) “Norms: The Problem of Definition and Classification,” American Journal of Sociology, 70(5): 586-594.
Glaeser, Edward L., Bruce Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman (1996) “Crime
and social interactions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 507–548.
Hay, Jonathan R., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (1996) “Toward a
Theory of Legal Reform,” European Economic Review, 40(3): 559–567.
Hay, Jonathan R., and Andrei Shleifer (1998) “Private Enforcement of Public
Laws: A Theory of Legal Reform,” American Economic Review, 88(2): 398–403.
Helliwell, John, Shun Wang, and Jinwen Xu (2014) “In How Durable are Social
Norms? Immigrant Trust and Generosity” NBER Working Paper.
Hoffman, Martin L. (1977) “Moral Internalization: Current Theory and Research”
in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Volume 10, New York: Academic Press.
Jackson, Matthew O., Simon, Leo K., Swinkels, Jeroen M., and William R.
Zame (2002) “Communication and Equilibrium in Discontinuous Games of Incomplete
Information,” Econometrica, 70(5): 1711–1740.
Lynn, John A. (1997) The Giant of the Grand Siecle: French Armies, 1600-1715,
Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Mailath, George J. and Larry Samuelson (2006) Repeated Games and Reputations.
New York, Oxford University Press.

41

Morris, Richard T. (1956) “A Typology of Norms,” American Sociological Review,
21(5): 610-613.
Nisbett, Richard, and Dov Cohen, (1996) Culture of Honor: The Psychology of
Violence in the South. Westview Press.
Parsons, Timothy (2010) The Rule of Empires: Those Who Built Them, Those Who
Endured Them, and Why They Always Fall. Oxford University Press.
Pinker, Steven (2011) The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined.
New York: Viking.
Pistor, Katharina (1996) “Supply and Demand for Contract Enforcement in Russia:
Courts, Arbitration, and Private Enforcement,” Review of Central and East European Law,
22: 55–87.
Posner, Eric (2002) Laws and Social Norms. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Posner, Richard (1997), “Social Norms and the Law: An Economic Approach” The
American Economic Review, 87:2, 365-369.
Rasmusen, Eric Bennett (1996) “Stigma and Self-Fulfilling Expectations of Criminality.” Journal of Law and Economics39: 519–544.
Sah, Raaj K. (1991) “Social Osmosis and Patterns of Crime,” Journal of Political
Economy, 1272–1295.
Shavell, Steven M. (2004) Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law. Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
Simmel, Georg (1903) The Metropolis and Mental Life, Dresden: Petermann.
Simmel, Georg (1908) Sociology: Investigations on the Forms of Sociation, Leipzig:
Duncker and Humblot.
Sorokin, Pitirim A. (1947) Society, Culture, and Personality, Harper and Brothers,
New York, NY.
Tabellini, Guido (2008) “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 123(3): 905–950.
Tyler, Tom R. (1990) Why Do People Obey the Law. Yale University Press, New
Haven, Connecticut.
Williams, Robin M. (1960) American Society: A Sociological Interpretation, Alfred
A Knopf, New York NY.
Wilson, James Q and George Kelling (1982) “Broken Windows: The Police and
Neighborhood Safety,” The Atlantic.
Woodward, Comer V. (1955) The Strange Career of Jim Crow. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Wright, Gavin (2013) Sharing the Prize: The Economics of the Civil Rights Revolution
in the American South.
Wyatt-Brown, Bertram (1982) Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior in the Old
South.Oxford University Press, New York.
Young, Peyton H. (1998) Individual Strategy and Social Structure: An Evolutionary
Theory of Institutions. Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey.
42

