                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SPOUSAL LABOR MARKET EFFECTS FROM GOVERNMENT HEALTH INSURANCE:
            EVIDENCE FROM A VETERANS AFFAIRS EXPANSION

                                          Melissa A. Boyle
                                          Joanna N. Lahey

                                        Working Paper 20371
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20371


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




The authors would like to thank participants at the Southern Economic Association, the NBER Summer
Institute on Aging and the Stata Texas Empirical Microeconomics Conference for helpful comments
and Courtney Coile, Laura Dague, and Tom DeLeire for insightful discussion. The authors also thank
Jillian Boles and Dutch Holland for excellent research assistance. The research reported herein was
pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Retirement
Research Consortium (RRC) and the National Institute on Aging grant R03AG042874-01. The findings
and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views of SSA, the
NIA, any agency of the Federal government or the RRC. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Melissa A. Boyle and Joanna N. Lahey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Spousal Labor Market Effects from Government Health Insurance: Evidence from a Veterans
Affairs Expansion
Melissa A. Boyle and Joanna N. Lahey
NBER Working Paper No. 20371
August 2014
JEL No. H42,I13,J14,J22,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

Measuring the overall impact of public health insurance receipt is important in an era of increased
access to publicly-provided and subsidized insurance. Although government expansion of health insurance
to older workers leads to labor supply reductions for recipients, there may be spillover effects on the
labor supply of uncovered spouses. While theory predicts a decrease in overall household work hours,
financial incentives such as credit constraints, target income levels, and the need for own health insurance
suggest that spousal labor supply might increase. In contrast, complementarities of spousal leisure
would predict a decrease in labor supply for both spouses. Utilizing a mid-1990s expansion of health
insurance for U.S. veterans, we provide evidence on the effects of public insurance availability on
the labor supply of spouses. Using data from the Current Population Survey and Health and Retirement
Study, we employ a difference-in-differences strategy to compare the labor market behavior of the
wives of older male veterans and non-veterans before and after the VA health benefits expansion.
 Our findings suggest that although household labor supply may decrease because of the income effect,
wives’ labor supply increases, suggesting that financial incentives dominate complementarities of
spousal leisure. This effect is strongest for wives with lower education levels and lower levels of household
wealth. Moreover, wives with employer-provided health insurance in the previous year remain on
the job while those without increase their hours, suggesting incentives to retain or obtain health insurance.
 Finally, non-working wives enter the labor force, those who were working part-time increase their
hours, and full-time “career” women are largely unaffected.


Melissa A. Boyle
Department of Economics
College of the Holy Cross
1 College St.
Worcester, MA 01610
mboyle@holycross.edu

Joanna N. Lahey
The Bush School
Texas A&M University
Mailstop 4220
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jlahey@nber.org
    I.      Introduction

         Government-provided benefits can significantly impact the work and retirement decisions

of eligible individuals. Although measuring the effect of a benefit on a recipient is relatively

straightforward, the measurement of a program’s total effect is complicated when other family

members are not covered by the program. Specifically, a program may have positive or negative

spillover effects on the labor supply of uncovered family members. When these spillover effects

are not taken into account, the full effect of the benefit on labor supply may be mismeasured.

         The potential effect of health insurance on work behavior has been of particular interest

with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (e.g. Antwi et al. 2012; Baicker et al.

2014; Dague et al. 2014; Garthwaite et al. 2014; Kolstad & Kowalski 2014), especially in light

of Congressional Budget Office projections of reductions in labor supply as a result of this

legislation. 1 Going forward, it will be important to study not just the direct effects of health

insurance availability on individuals, but also the effects on labor supply of the family as a unit.

As previous literature demonstrates, both theory and empirical evidence suggest that publicly-

provided health insurance not linked to employment decreases labor supply of recipients (Boyle

and Lahey 2010, Dague et al. 2014, Garthwaite et al. 2014). Standard theory predicts that such a

benefit will reduce the opportunity cost of leisure, particularly for workers who were previously

reliant on employer-provided coverage. Thus, for these recipients, labor supply is predicted to

fall.

         However, the effect of this receipt on the spouse’s labor supply is not theoretically clear

cut. On the one hand, husbands and wives who enjoy spending time together and who are not

credit constrained may time their retirements close together. Thus, wives may reduce their hours

1
  See Garrett & Kaestner (2014) for a summary of recent research on public insurance and labor supply. See
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/45010-breakout-AppendixC.pdf for CBO estimates of
the impact of the ACA on labor supply (last accessed: 7/17/14).

                                                       2
or exit the labor force at the same time as their husbands, increasing the negative labor supply

impact of the benefit. On the other hand, financial factors are also important to the spouse’s

labor supply decision. For couples who are credit constrained, joint retirement may not be an

option, and the spouse who does not receive the benefit may work more hours in order to reach a

target household income once the covered spouse leaves the labor market. The non-covered

spouse may also need to increase labor supply in order to receive own employer-provided health

insurance, or to increase household income in order to self-insure. This effect would mitigate the

labor supply impact of a benefit borne by one spouse.

         These competing effects may vary by socioeconomic status (SES) and income. Lower

SES couples are more likely to be credit constrained, and low SES men may be more likely to

work in physically demanding occupations and to be in worse health. Lower SES women may

work in jobs that allow for more flexible hours than career women of higher SES. We would

therefore expect to see women’s hours increase in low SES couples as husbands take advantage

of the health insurance offer while wives increase their hours to make up for lost income or to

receive their own insurance. High SES women in career-type jobs, on the other hand, may have

little discretion over hours worked if they wish to remain employed, suggesting that any change

must be on the extensive rather than intensive margin. Additionally, they may already have

access to retiree coverage of their own or through their spouse. If these women are attached to

their jobs, or they have not yet reached their target retirement incomes, their hours worked may

not be affected by their spouse’s health insurance receipt. Differences in spousal spillovers by

SES are understudied from a theoretical perspective, and to our knowledge this is one of the first

papers to provide empirical evidence on how these effects vary with the spouse’s education

level.



                                                 3
       This paper uses a unique government health insurance expansion to examine the effect of

health insurance receipt by men nearing retirement age on the labor supply of their wives. In the

mid-1990s, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs expanded health insurance availability for

U.S. veterans. Using data from the Current Population Survey and the Health and Retirement

Study, we employ a difference-in-differences strategy to compare the labor market behavior of

the wives of older veterans and non-veterans before and after the VA health benefits expansion

to test the impact of public health insurance on these spouses. Studying the effect of health

insurance on these older workers is especially important for mitigating demographic pressures on

government programs such as Social Security. With the increasing labor force participation of

women, these spillovers have the potential to have a sizeable impact on the economy and

government programs.

       Our findings, which are robust to a variety of specification checks, indicate that although

household labor supply may decrease with the husband’s offer of comprehensive health

insurance, labor supply of wives increases, on average. This effect suggests that financial

considerations dominate the propensity for a wife to retire at the same time as her husband. This

outcome is stronger for wives with high school education or less and with lower levels of

household wealth and no or low pension income. These women are both more likely than more

educated women to be financially constrained and to be in occupations with flexible work hours

and easier labor market entry and exit even at older ages. Wives with lower levels of education,

low non-housing wealth, and low pension income are more likely to enter the labor force while

women with more education, non-housing wealth, and pension income do not significantly

increase their propensity to work on the extensive margin.




                                                 4
         Health insurance receipt in the previous year also determines the effect on women’s labor

market outcomes. Women without health insurance coverage from their employers move from

part-time to full-time work and increase both their hours and their earnings. Those with their

own health insurance are more likely to remain employed.

         Wives’ labor supply responses also vary by the type of job held in the previous year.

Wives who did not work in the previous year have an increased probability of part-time work

and self-employment. Wives who worked part-time are more likely to increase their hours to

full-time. Women who worked full-time in the previous year are insensitive to their husbands’

receipt of insurance. These results provide further evidence that wives in career jobs are

insensitive to the husband’s insurance offer, while those in more flexible employment situations

increase their labor supply, potentially for the purpose of providing their own insurance or to

replace family income.




   II.      Theory and Related Literature

         In the simplest model, health insurance on the job is paid for by lower pecuniary

compensation on the job (e.g. Olson 2002).           Receiving health insurance exogenous to

employment is therefore akin to a positive income shock for the household. In this model, there

is an income effect which dictates that household labor supply will drop. However, it is not clear

within the household whether this decrease in overall labor supply will be borne by both spouses

or by a specific spouse. In this section, we first discuss how in-kind benefits may differ from

cash transfer benefits. Next, we detail two competing theories that could affect spousal labor

supply in opposite directions: complementarities of spousal leisure that would encourage wives

to retire with their husbands, and financial considerations that would encourage wives to increase

                                                 5
their labor to make up for the husband’s lost income and benefits. Finally, we discuss how these

theoretical predictions may vary by socioeconomic status.



In-kind Benefits

           In-kind benefits such as health insurance differ from cash-transfer programs by design

(Currie & Gahvari 2008; Moffitt 2002). One reason that in-kind benefits may be offered is

because as a society, we may prefer that recipients allocate their consumption bundle in a way

that favors the in-kind benefit over other goods.2 However, such benefits may affect labor

supply differently than equal value cash transfers because either they cause different distortions

or they mitigate distortions caused by the tax code in a way that cash transfers do not (Currie &

Gahvari 2008).

           Specifically, in-kind benefits may have different labor market effects depending on

whether labor and consumption are substitutes or complements (Currie & Gahvari 2008; Gahvari

1994; Leonesio 1988; Moffitt 2002). Both positive and negative effects of in-kind benefits on

labor supply have been found empirically, with housing vouchers and food stamps decreasing

labor supply (Currie 2003; Jacob & Ludwig 2012) and childcare (Gelbach 2002) increasing it.

           Gahvari (1995) develops a theoretical model of the relationship between in-kind transfers

and labor supply, and specifically examines the case of health care/health insurance. He notes

that health care may increase labor supply if it improves health but may decrease labor supply if

people were working in order to obtain health care. This hypothesis has been supported by

recent empirical results (Boyle & Lahey 2010).

           Recent studies on the labor supply effects of expanding state health insurance programs

to childless adults generally find a resulting decrease in labor supply. Guy et al. (2012) show a
2
    Other potential reasons, including targeting and tax efficiency are detailed in Currie & Gahvari (2008).

                                                            6
modest decrease in the probability of employment for individuals who become eligible for public

insurance as a result of the expansion of a number of different state programs in the 2000s.

Garthwaite et al. (2014) and Dague et al. (2014) find substantial increases in employment as a

result of states (TN and WI) rescinding an offer of Medicaid coverage for childless adults. On

the other hand, Baicker et al. (2014) demonstrate no statistically significant employment effects

of Medicaid enrollment for childless adults in Oregon, potentially because the OR program

targeted a lower-income population than those in TN and WI. In related work, a recent paper on

the Medicaid expansions in the late 1980s and early 1990s finds that pregnant women reduced

their labor supply when offered health insurance (Dave et al. 2013). These studies examine the

effect of health insurance on the recipient only and do not measure potential spillover effects of

coverage to spouses.

       Medicaid is one program for which family spillover effects on employment outcomes

have been studied. Early research investigating the effects of children’s Medicaid receipt on

welfare mothers’ employment found that Medicaid access tied to AFDC receipt decreased labor

supply (Ellwood and Adams 1990, Moffitt and Wolfe 1992, Winkler 1991). Similarly, Tomohara

and Lee (2007) find that non-white, married women with low levels of education reduced their

labor supply so that their children would qualify for SCHIP. A number of more recent studies

following the decoupling of welfare and Medicaid eligibility find either no effect or labor supply

increases (Yelowitz 1995; Montgomery and Navin 2000; Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2001 &

2005; Hamersma and Kim 2009; Hamersma 2013; Strumpf 2011). However, as children are, for

the most part, ineligible to work in jobs that provide health insurance, the effects of spousal

health insurance may be different from those for children’s Medicaid.




                                                7
       For the program we study, theory predicts that publicly provided health insurance is a

substitute for labor for the recipient. Previously, the recipient needed to work to obtain the

benefit, and with the government-provided benefit this is no longer necessary. Therefore the

recipient may cut back on labor.

       However, the predictions are not as clean-cut for the wife of the recipient. If the husband

remains employed and receives family coverage (and does not increase his expected probability

of leaving the labor force in the future), then she is not affected by the health insurance offer. If

his receipt allows him to leave employment, losing family coverage, then his health insurance

offer is a complement to her labor—the in-kind benefit increases (or has no effect on) her labor

supply. At the same time, the health insurance coverage acts as an external income shock to the

entire family, and increased income can decrease labor supply through the income effect. In

addition, as we detail in the next section, complementarities of spousal leisure may increase a

wife’s incentive to retire once her husband has retired.



Complementarities of Spousal Leisure

       Husbands and wives may make joint retirement decisions, which would increase the

attractiveness of reducing hours for wives. In this model, leisure time spent with a spouse

provides higher utility than leisure time without a spouse, so one spouse’s retirement raises the

opportunity cost of labor for the other spouse. Empirically, husbands and wives who both work

often time their retirements close together (e.g. Blau 1998; Coile 2004; Gustman & Steinmeier

2000; Ho and Raymo 2009; Hurd 1990; Weaver 1994).

       Most work studying joint retirement decisions has focused on monetary shocks such as

pension or social security rule changes and benefits that are fungible across spouses; that is, from



                                                 8
the perspective of the family unit, it does not matter which spouse gains the additional money.

Both structural and empirical results in this literature are consistent with the hypothesis of

complementarities of spousal leisure, although husbands seem more responsive to wives’

monetary shocks than vice versa (Baker 2002; Coile 2004; Gustman & Steinmeier 2000). In

fact, Coile (2004) finds that while men respond to their wives’ financial incentives, there is a

very small effect of husbands’ financial incentives on wives’ retirement. An exception to this

asymmetry appears in the European literature, where recent work finds that husbands and wives

are equally responsive in some cases (Stancanelli 2012) or wives are more responsive than

husbands to the spouse’s shock in others (Hospido & Zamarro 2013).3 If U.S. women do not

retire because they are less likely than their husbands to be able to obtain affordable health

insurance once they do so, or because they value health insurance more than their spouses do (as

found by Honig & Dushi 2005), then that may explain some of the mystery behind this

asymmetry.

        Previous research that has examined the effect of health insurance receipt on spousal

work behavior has generally found negative effects of husbands’ health insurance availability on

wives’ labor supply (Buchmueller & Valletta 1999; Kapinos 2009; Murasko 2008; Olson 1998;

Royalty & Abraham 2006). However, this research focuses on the effect of employer-provided

health insurance availability that can cover the entire family and not just the plan participant.

The theoretical implications of this type of policy change, similar to extending COBRA or

providing universal healthcare, are different than for a policy which only covers one specific


3
  A unique exception to this European pattern is Goux et al. (2014), which examines the effect of a French
workweek reduction, something which does not have an income effect but does directly reduce hours, on the
spouse’s labor. This paper finds that wives are responsive to husbands, but not vice versa and suggests that women
in France have more heavily constrained work-weeks than men in France. Similarly, papers on UI and DI in the
United States tend to find that wives respond to husband’s benefit receipt by working less (e.g. Cullen and Gruber
2000, Chen 2012), but this phenomenon is more likely to be a secondary-earner effect rather than a joint retirement
effect given the ages of the cohorts involved.

                                                         9
member of the household. In these previously studied cases, the wife will have less of an

incentive to increase labor supply (even when her husband previously provided the family’s

health insurance) because she will not need to provide health insurance for the family.

Additionally, this literature tends to focus on younger age groups, who may be more attached to

the labor force than those ages 55 and older. Some of this literature also has problems with

positive marriage selection—“high quality” husbands are more likely to have both health

insurance and “high quality” wives with their own labor force attachment. However, the main

findings still hold even when this endogeneity is corrected for in more recent work (Kapinos

2009).



Financial Incentives

         In theory, household labor supply should decrease with the effective income shock from

publicly-provided health insurance, but that labor supply reduction may not be borne equally by

all members of the household.      Because wives in these cohorts are more likely than their

husbands to have jobs with flexible hours (Johnson 2004; Long & Jones 1981), it is possible that

a wife’s hours may rise when a husband leaves a traditional 40-50 hour a week job, although the

income effect would dictate that total family labor supply would decrease.

         Women are also less likely to have health insurance from their own employment than

men (Kapur and Rogowski 2011). If a woman had been receiving health insurance through her

husband’s job but he has been offered public health insurance, it may make sense for the wife to

seek employment options that enable her to obtain her own employer-provided insurance, such

as by increasing her hours to full-time (Averett and Hotchkiss 1995) or by obtaining a new job




                                               10
with health insurance coverage. Alternatively, she might increase her work hours or seek a

higher-paying position in order to pay for her own health insurance out-of-pocket.

       In essence, although the program results in a decrease in job-lock for husbands, it might

create job-lock for wives. Therefore, we would expect to see a larger positive effect on labor

market outcomes for women who did not have employer-provided health insurance of their own

in the previous year. Since men in this cohort are likely to be older than their wives, and also

more likely than their wives to work physically demanding jobs, it may be optimal for the

husband to exit the work force while the wife increases her work hours in order to meet a target

level of income for the household.



Differences by Socioeconomic Status

       Note that these theories interact with the socioeconomic status (SES) of the couple.

Gahvari (1995) notes that lower and higher SES recipients may prefer different benefits

packages, with lower SES beneficiaries preferring additional income to a more generous in-kind

benefit. VA health insurance might be preferable to no insurance or to expensive insurance for

lower SES couples, but may not be preferable to employer-based insurance or retiree insurance

for higher SES couples. Similarly, as noted above, lower SES couples may be too credit-

constrained for both members of a couple to retire jointly when the husband is given health

insurance. On the other hand, higher SES couples may have more enjoyable jobs, higher wealth

targets, and access to retiree insurance. As a result they may have plans for joint retirement at

older ages, and would thus not show up as jointly retiring in our sample. Finally, couples may

react differently to financial incentives by their SES. Lower SES women may be less likely to be

in a career job and have the option of working part-time or increasing their hours from part-time



                                               11
to full-time, whereas higher SES women may have traditional 40-hour per week career jobs with

less flexibility on the intensive margin.



    III.      Description of VA Program

           The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) health care system was established in the

1930s to treat veterans with conditions resulting from their military service, and later, low-

income veterans. Prior to the time period we study, VA primarily provided inpatient care, and

limited the availability of outpatient care for non-service-connected conditions to follow-up

visits after an inpatient stay.

           The U.S. government began a major overhaul of this health care system in the mid-1990s.

The impetus was an effort to catch up with progress in technology and efficiency in private-

sector medicine. During this time, VA health care was restructured as a comprehensive health

care system that focused on primary care and preventive medicine rather than hospital-based

specialty services. Following this change, VA experienced a 44 percent decline in the number of

inpatients and a 66 percent increase in the total number of outpatient visits (Klein and Stockford

2001). At the same time, VA also changed its resource allocation system by distributing its

health care budget using a capitated, patient-based formula, similar to the HMO model. VA

expected that these changes would result in significant cost reductions. Based on this

assumption, it relaxed its rules on eligibility for care and offered services to all veterans rather

than limiting guaranteed access to low-income and service-connected disabled veterans (U.S.




                                                 12
GAO 1999). During our post period, VA care was consistently found to be of high quality (see,

for example, Ross et al 2008).4

         Veterans were required to fill out paperwork enrolling in the VA program before they

could use health care services. However, it is important to note that veterans could enroll

without utilizing VA health care, but enrollment guaranteed the ability to use VA services in the

future. Additionally, during the time period of our study, not enrolling did not imply that

veterans would not be able to fill out paperwork and enroll in the future should they need VA

services. In that respect, VA functioned as insurance for veterans even in the absence of

enrollment, similar to the way that COBRA serves as insurance for the first 60 days after job

separation regardless of whether the job leaver chooses to pay a premium. Nevertheless, 6.6

million veterans had enrolled by 2002 and VA’s patient load had increased from 2.6 million

veterans in 1995 to 4.3 million in 2002 (U.S. GAO 1996 & 2003).

         During our study period, enrolled veterans were sorted into one of seven priority groups.

Those with service-related conditions resulting in disability of 50 percent or higher were

considered the highest priority for treatment and were placed in group one. Those with incomes

above VA determined thresholds and no service-connected disabilities were considered the

lowest priority and placed in group 7. Priority groups 1-6 consisted of previously-eligible

veterans and care remained free for them. Group 7 veterans were newly-eligible and were

charged modest copayments. The priority groups were used only for enrollment purposes and

determination of copays during the time period of our study. For all enrollees, routine care

appointments were provided on a first-come first-served basis regardless of group.



4
 The expansion in the eligible population combined with an increase in veterans seeking care as a result of the Iraq
and Afghanistan wars, however, led to an eventual increase in wait times for care at VA facilities in certain regions
which resulted in the current scandal which has been heavily reported on in the popular press (e.g., Cohn 2014).

                                                         13
         The VA restructuring affected the availability of health care for all veterans. For those

not previously eligible, the policy introduced a form of non-employer-provided health insurance.

For the previously-eligible (i.e., low-income or disabled), it represented an increase in the scope

of health care and health insurance, similar to what is available in the private sector. Therefore,

this change provides an exogenous introduction of an outside health insurance option for all U.S.

veterans but not for non-veterans.      In order to estimate the spillover effect from publicly

provided health insurance on spousal labor supply choices we compare the labor supply

outcomes of wives of veterans to those of non-veterans before and after the change.

         Previous research indicates that veterans used this health insurance to leave full-time

employment. Between 35 and 70 percent of new VA health care users are individuals who drop

private health insurance plans, potentially because they are leaving full-time work (Boyle 2009).

In response to the policy change, Boyle and Lahey (2010) find a 3.3% increase in the probability

that a veteran leaves the labor force and an 8.4% decrease in the probability that a veteran works

full time although some disadvantaged groups appear to increase their labor supply.



   IV.      Data and Empirics

Data
         The primary dataset for this paper is the Census Bureau’s March Current Population

Survey (CPS) for the years 1992 through 2002. The CPS includes consistent information on

employment and demographic controls, including veteran status, at an annual level for these

years. Using a difference-in-differences (DD) estimation strategy, we compare the labor supply

choices of wives of veterans and wives of non-veterans before and after the restructuring of VA




                                                14
health care. We thus limit our sample to married couples.5 To focus on households in which the

husband is on the margin of not working (i.e. approaching retirement), we study couples in

which the husband is between the ages of 55 and 64.6 Additionally, because of the small number

of female veterans in this age cohort we restrict our veteran sample to include only males. We

delete from our sample couples for which the wife is a veteran, as these wives will be directly

affected by the treatment.7 With these restrictions, the treated population is therefore the wives

of married male veterans ages 55 to 64, and the control group is the wives of married male non-

veterans in the same age group. We define 1992-1995 as the pre-policy period and 1998-2002 as

the post-policy period because changes in the VA health care were rolled out during 1996 and

1997.8

         The CPS allows us to study labor market outcomes on the extensive margin such as labor

force or employment exit, and on the intensive margin, such as hours worked, or movement into

part-time work. It further allows us to examine earnings, although the universe for which we can

study current earnings outcomes is limited during this time period, and type of labor force

participation, such as self-employment. We are also able to examine the effects for different




5
  There may be a concern that the treatment causes selection into marriage or divorce. In our sample of men,
marriage rates are almost identical in the pre- and post-periods for veterans and non-veterans once age is controlled
for.
6
  Medicare eligibility at age 65 affects the impact of other public health insurance on the work decision, so we do
not include older men. In general, we find that the significance of results is slightly stronger if we limit to those age
50-64 rather than 55-64, possibly because of a larger sample size.
7
  We also delete the two observations for which the wife is under the age of 19. The results are nearly identical
when these are not deleted. We have also run regressions limiting wife ages to 45-64, 50-64, and 55-64. In general
these results are qualitatively the same as our main results. Quantitatively, the Table 3 results on work outcomes are
generally slightly larger in magnitude and significance for these subsets (Table 7, Panel I provides some results).
8
  We end our study period in 2002 because VA revised the rules for obtaining health care in January 2003. We
have also estimated our regressions restricting our post-period to 1998-2001 because of a concern that particular
Vietnam Era veterans are affected by a 2002 change that categorized diabetes as a war-related injury for veterans
who may have been exposed to Agent Orange ( Autor and Duggan 2007; Duggan et al. 2010). Results are
qualitatively almost identical and significance increases in some regressions when we remove 2002 from our
sample. Table 7, Panel III provides these results for Not Working and Hours Worked outcomes.

                                                           15
demographic groups, such as divisions by education and employer-provided health insurance

coverage.


        We also utilize the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) for the years 1992-2002 (survey

conducted in even numbered years) as a supplement to our CPS results.                           In addition to

demographic information and information on current labor supply, the HRS includes additional

data on wealth and pension status. We use the same empirical strategy, sample definition, and

the same definitions of pre- and post.9




Main Specification

We use a probit model to estimate the following equation:


        (1)      yi = b0 + b1veteran + b2veteran*post +X'b3+ δt + σs + ζst + ε



        The dependent variables, yi, include indicators for wives’ labor supply outcomes

including not working, hours worked last week, weekly hours worked conditional on working

any hours, weekly earnings, and ln(weekly earnings).10 The variable not working is 0 if the wife

is employed and 1 otherwise. The part-time variable reported is coded as 1 if the number of

weekly hours worked is between 0 and 35 hours, and 0 if the individual works more than 35



9
  Replication of our main results using the HRS in place of the CPS are similar (generally showing the same sign,
significance, and magnitude) and are available from the authors. There will be some differences because even with
the weighting, the HRS sample is a panel that ages over time while the CPS sample is a repeated cross-section.
10
   Weekly earnings are earnings during a usual work week. This question is limited only to respondents in their
fourth and eighth months of the survey, reducing sample size. For the weekly earnings outcomes we code
respondents in these months who did not have positive earnings as having zero earnings. Hourly earnings are
constructed from weekly earnings and are available from the authors. We present weekly earnings because the
results for hourly wages are similar to those for weekly earnings but, as a created variable, hourly earnings
introduces more measurement error and is more problematic dealing with top-coding. Non-imputed hourly earnings
are available only for the subset of the sample that earns an hourly wage.

                                                       16
hours. Self-employed is an indicator that is equal to 1 if the class of worker is self-employed

(either incorporated or not incorporated) and 0 otherwise.

       Among the independent variables, veteran is a dummy equal to 1 if the husband has been

honorably discharged from active military duty, post is a dummy equal to 1 in the post-policy

period, X is a vector of the wife’s individual characteristics including age, race, education, and

indicators for employer-provided health insurance and pensions in the previous or current year

(including codes of 0 for those not employed) and δt is a full set of year dummies while σs is a

full set of state dummies and ζst is a state-specific time trend. State dummies and year dummies

account for heterogeneity in veteran take-up by state and time; this heterogeneity could be

caused by local economic conditions making the program more attractive or variation in the

degree to which the program was publicized to veterans in different regions. A state-specific

time trend accounts for factors varying within states linearly over time in some specifications.

Because the propensity for separating from the labor force will vary with benefits offered, we

include indicators for employer-provided health insurance coverage and inclusion in a pension

plan in the previous year in some specifications.        Standard errors are adjusted for non-

independence of the errors within the veteran*year group via clustering.


Identification Assumptions

       In a difference-in-differences model, in order to interpret the results causally, specific

assumptions must be satisfied. In our quasi-experimental setup, it must be true that: (1) wives of

veterans and non-veterans are reasonably similar before the healthcare expansion, (2) only

veterans are affected by the VA expansion, (3) no other shocks occur during this time period that

differentially affect household labor supply choices, and (4) that the two populations would not

trend differentially in the absence of a policy change due to unobservable factors.

                                                17
        Table 1 presents summary statistics demonstrating that the veteran and non-veteran

samples are reasonably comparable in the pre-period in both the CPS and the HRS. The average

veteran is more educated than the average non-veteran. As would be expected with assortative

mating (Mare 1991; Pencavel 1998), wives of veterans are also somewhat more educated than

wives of non-veterans. Because wives of veterans are slightly older than wives of non-veterans

in the pre-period, and the age composition of veterans compared to non-veterans is changing

over time, it is important to include controls for wife’s age in all specifications. National Health

Interview Survey calculations available in Boyle and Lahey (2010) demonstrate that there are no

differences in health between veterans and non-veterans in the pre-period for the cohorts

examined in this study.

        Assumption (2) is valid because non-veterans and their spouses were not affected by the

VA insurance expansion. Although some veterans already had access to VA health insurance, it

was much less comprehensive than the coverage post-expansion, so those individuals are still

substantially impacted by the change. Using textbook definitions of insurance, veterans were

insured once VA coverage was offered (whether or not they formally enrolled) because they

could sign up at any time if coverage was needed. Therefore even if they were not formally

insured, they were insured in an economic sense, and thus were treated in the first stage.

However, if some veterans were unaware of the insurance, our results will provide an

underestimate of the behavioral effect of full government coverage. 11

        The third assumption would be violated if something else besides this expansion affects

veterans and non-veterans or their wives differentially. Policy changes in 1996-1997 such as

welfare reform are unlikely to affect older male veterans and their wives differently than older

11
 According to a 2001 survey, 22% of unenrolled veterans said they were unaware of the program (Department of
Veterans Affairs, 2002).


                                                     18
male non-veterans and their wives. Finally, unobserved systematic differences between the

treatment and control groups could cause the treatment and control to trend differently in the

post-period. However, we find no evidence of pre-existing trends using pre-policy years as a

falsification exercise in Table 2, Panel II. Additionally, results are very similar when the model

is fully interacted with veteran as shown in Table 7, Panel III.



     V.       Results

First Stage Results

          First, we demonstrate that the VA expansion had a direct negative effect on the labor

supply of married men. Table 2, Panel I presents the marginal effects from estimating equation

(1) on outcomes for married men only using the men’s characteristics as controls. 12 Veterans are

less likely than the control group to be working after receiving VA health insurance, with a

significant coefficient of 0.008 points once a full set of controls is added, a 2.3% increase

relative to the pre-period veteran average of 0.35. Veterans also increase part-time work with

significant coefficients of 0.015 points in both specifications, an increase of 14.7% relative to the

pre-period value of 0.102. Table 2, Panel II, provides a robustness check for these results,

demonstrating that there is not a pre-trend by cutting the universe to only include pre-period data

and creating a “fake post” variable that is 1 for 1994-1995 and 0 for 1992-1993. As would be




12
   These results differ slightly from those in Boyle and Lahey (2010) because the universe for that exercise included
single men (who are shown to be more likely to leave the labor market than married men after receiving health
insurance) and, in order to be consistent with the previous job-lock literature, limited to men who were working in
the previous year. We do not condition on previous employment in order to examine the spillover effects on
spouses. Additionally, in Boyle and Lahey (2010) we included industry and occupation controls in the set of full
controls, but in our regressions with wife outcomes, the small size of some of these cells causes observations to drop
out in the probit specifications, potentially resulting in selection biases. Results are nearly identical for the men and
qualitatively similar for the women results with these controls included. Additionally these regressions include
husbands who are not separated but whose wives are not in the household at the time of the survey. Results are
nearly identical when these husbands are removed from Table 2.

                                                           19
expected if there was not a pre-trend, results are not significant, and indeed, are opposite-signed

for the not working outcome.



Main Results

       Having demonstrated that the VA expansion decreased married men’s labor supply, we

turn to the spillover effects of this coverage on their wives who are not eligible to use VA health

care. Figure 1 illustrates the different trends for wives of veterans and wives of non-veterans.

Specifically, it shows changes over time in the raw probability means of not working for wives

of veterans and non-veterans. As shown, in the pre-reform years veteran and non-veteran wives

had very similar rates of non-participation. In the years following the reorganization, however,

veteran wives have a distinct decrease in the probability of not working relative to non-veteran

wives, suggesting that husbands’ access to public insurance does impact wives’ labor supply

decisions.

       We next confirm these extensive-margin trends by estimating equation (1) for wives’

outcomes. As shown in Table 3, Panel I, columns (1) and (2), we find that wives are between 1

and 2 ppt more likely to work once their husbands receive VA insurance. This implies a 3-4%

increase in the probability of working relative to the pre-period average of 0.473, although once

full controls are added this effect is only marginally significant.

       Similarly, we find in Table 3, Panel I, columns (3) and (4) that average hours worked per

week for all women increases by approximately half an hour (between 0.44 and 0.63 hours).

Focusing on the intensive margin only, columns (5) and (6) report the effect of hours worked

conditional on working at all. These are positive, with a magnitude between 0.22 and 0.24




                                                  20
minutes, but not significant. These smaller numbers suggest that the increase in hours is

primarily on the extensive margin.

           In Table 3, Panel I, columns (7)-(10) we examine the effect on women’s weekly wages.13

We construct this measure by dividing the annual income in the previous year by weeks worked

in the previous year. Earnings overall increase by $8.70 to $13.75 (in 2002 dollars), although

this result is not robust to the addition of the full set of controls. Log weekly earnings in Table 4,

Panel I, columns (3) and (4) increase 3% to 4% for all women.

           Overall, results indicate that for wives on average, financial incentives dominate effects

from complementarities of spousal leisure in wives’ retirement decisions following husbands’

receipt of public insurance. Wives increase their labor supply according to several tested

measures, with effects that appear to be driven by changes on the extensive margin. This

behavior indicates that wives potentially enter the labor force in order to secure their own health

insurance coverage or to reach a target level of income or retirement savings for the household,

or potentially both. In the next section, we demonstrate that these results are primarily driven by

lower SES families and we explore reasons for this behavior.


Differences by Socioeconomic Status: What and Why


           As discussed above, we would potentially expect effects to vary for different

socioeconomic groups. Women from lower SES households might be more likely to face

household credit constraints and also potentially have more flexibility to increase their work

hours. Our results appear to be driven by wives with high school or less education, as

demonstrated in Table 3, Panel II, columns (1) and (2). Women with high school education or

less are 3 ppt more likely (a 5.6% increase off a base of 0.53) to work when their husbands are

13
     Results trimming the top 5% of wages are very similar.

                                                          21
offered VA insurance. 14 For women with at least some college education, coefficients are

smaller, insignificant, and change signs when full controls are added, as shown in Table 3, Panel

III, columns (1) and (2).

        Similarly, when hours worked are examined by women’s education level, women with a

high school education or less in Table 3, Panel II, columns (3) and (4), work 0.6 to 0.8 hours

more per week when their husbands are offered health insurance. In contrast, results for women

with some college or more in Table 3, Panel III, columns (3) and (4) are positive but

insignificant. Results on hours on the intensive margin in columns (5) and (6) are again not

significant when broken up by education.

        As might be expected given the effects on work, weekly earnings increase for wives with

high school or less education, with an increase between $23.80 and $27.38, as shown in Table 3,

Panel II, columns (7) and (8). Results are still positive, but smaller and only significant with

minimum controls for wives with some college or more and for all wives in Panel III. Log

weekly earnings in Panel II, columns (9) and (10) show a 6% to 7% increase in weekly income

for less educated wives, while no significant effect on ln(earnings) is shown for more educated

wives.15

        We next investigate whether the increase in labor supply for lower-education wives, who

are more likely to face credit constraints, relates to the households’ financial incentives. Using

data from the HRS, we test for differential responses by the level of household wealth. Table 4


14
   Note that in these and all results separated by education, we have removed women with graduate degrees as they
seem to behave differently than college graduates but sample sizes are not large enough to examine them separately.
Results are robust but somewhat attenuated when these women are included.
15
   In results not shown, annual earnings follow a similar pattern with less educated women earning $982.25-
$1293.48 more per year on average (in 2002 dollars). Similarly, hourly wages (also not shown), created by dividing
weekly wages by usual hours worked, find a 2-4% increase for ln(hourly wages) for women with high school or less
education, although the remaining outcomes do not yield significant results. These results on wage, taken as a
whole, suggest that wage movements are primarily occurring on the extensive margin However, they are also
consistent with increased measurement error introduced by greater levels of variable construction.

                                                        22
presents results for wives in households with low and high non-housing wealth and low and high

pension income. We define “low” wealth as below the median level and “high” as above the

median. 16 We define low and high pension income similarly, but cut at the median for all

households with positive pension income.17 Patterns by household wealth and pension levels are

very similar to results by education level. As shown in Table 4, Panel I, wives in households with

low levels of non-housing wealth have an 8.4 ppt decrease in the probability of not working and

work an additional 3.25 hours per week, while the coefficients for wives in high-wealth

households are smaller and not statistically significant. Wives in households with low levels of

pension income also show a significant increase in the probability of work and hours worked,

which rise by 0.06 and 2.53, respectively. Wives in households with high levels of pension

income, however, do not have significant responses for either outcome. These results suggest

that need to reach a target household income or amount of retirement savings may be part of

what is driving women’s increased labor force participation.

         Another potential reason to increase labor force participation is for women to gain their

own health insurance coverage. Women who had health insurance coverage from their

employers prior to the policy implementation may be more likely to stay employed than those

who did not in order to keep that coverage. However, women who did not have their own health

insurance coverage may need to earn more money to self-insure if they lose their husbands’

coverage, or may seek jobs with employer-provided insurance. We test this idea utilizing

information in the CPS on health insurance coverage in the previous year. Results in Table 5,


16
   Median household wealth is $187,495.92 in 2002 dollars, adjusted using the CPI. Results cutting at the 75th
percentile for wealth show similar patterns. We also explore results for low and high total wealth, which includes
housing wealth. Results are similar for total wealth, but smaller in magnitude, which makes sense given that
housing wealth is less fungible than non-housing wealth. Results are nearly identical when wife’s age is top and
bottom-coded in order to increase cell sizes.
17
   Household pension income is the sum of the husband and wife’s pension. The median for households with
positive pension income is $15,043.24 in 2002 dollars.

                                                         23
Panel I demonstrate that women with health insurance in the previous year are 2.2 ppt less likely

to be not working, a 4.6% decrease off the base of 0.47, but 1.8 ppt more likely to work part-time

when their husbands get health insurance, a 6.4% increase off the base of 0.28 for all wives of

veterans in the pre-period, and a 4% increase off the base of 0.43 for wives with prior health

insurance. Women without health insurance in the previous year are less likely to be not

working, but not significantly so and are 4.9 ppt less likely to be part-time, a 12% decrease off

the base of 0.40 for wives without health insurance in the previous period. As shown in Table 5,

Panel II, for women with employer-provided health insurance, hours do not change significantly

overall but decrease significantly conditional on working at all with a coefficient of -0.59. For

women without their own health insurance in the previous year, hours increase significantly

overall, with a coefficient of 0.71, and increase conditional on working any hours with a

coefficient of 0.96. Earnings increase significantly for women without employer-provided health

insurance both conditional on having any earnings and unconditional, but there is no significant

change for women with health insurance. These results suggest that women with health

insurance are more likely to stay employed but are not as focused on additional earnings,

whereas women without health insurance increase their hours and earnings, possibly to afford

health costs.

           As described above, women in full-time career jobs may respond differently to

husbands’ public insurance receipt than those in more flexible employment positions. We

therefore utilize a multinomial logit framework to investigate whether wives’ responses differ

depending on their labor force activity in the previous year. Table 6 reports marginal effects

from multinomial logit regressions that examine transitions into and out of not working, full- and

part-time work and self-employment. Panel I replicates our main regression in a multinomial



                                                24
logit framework for all wives in our sample (i.e. not conditioning on the wife’s labor force

experiences in the previous year).18 Consistent with the main results, wives are about 1.95 ppt

more likely to work, and much of this change appears to be women increasing their full-time

labor force participation. However, these transitions are different for women who were

unattached to the labor force in the previous period. Panel II limits our sample to women who

were not working at all in the previous year. These individuals are 0.61 ppt more likely to enter

the labor force upon the husbands’ receipt of VA insurance, and they appear to predominately

enter part-time work for an employer (0.37 ppt) or self-employment (0.34 ppt). Women who

worked part-time in the previous year, on the other hand, as shown in Panel III, do not change

their labor force attachment, but instead work more hours, moving from part-time work into full-

time work, with a decrease from part time work of 3.19 ppt and an increase in full-time work of

3.88 ppt. This transition potentially makes them eligible for employer-provided health insurance

or provides the additional income needed to self-insure. Finally, in Panel IV, we see no effect on

women who were working full-time in the previous year. They neither leave the labor market

nor change their labor force participation. These results as a whole are highly consistent with the

hypotheses that married women value health insurance and seek out their own employer-

provided health insurance or seek greater income in order to pay for potential medical expenses

once their husbands are offered publicly provided health insurance.


Robustness Checks

             Table 7 provides various robustness checks. In our base specification, we included

all wives over the age of 18 in our sample. However, women of younger ages may have


18
  With the exception of 992 women whose part-time vs. full-time status could not be determined because they did
not work in the previous week. Robustness checks assuming these women are either full-time or part-time provide
similar results.

                                                       25
different labor market attachment than older women. Panel I provides results limiting to middle-

aged and older wives. When wife ages are limited to 45-64, the percentage point magnitude of

the results for the not working and hours worked outcomes is very similar to that in the main

specification in Table 3. Limiting women to the same ages as the men in the sample, ages 55-64

provides larger magnitude results than our earlier sample. In this case, women are 3.4 ppt more

likely to work and increase hours worked by 1.12, about twice the magnitude of our base

regressions.

           In Panel II of Table 7, we explore outcomes for wives whose husbands are working

part time or are not working. Our main results in Table 3 include all wives regardless of their

husbands’ labor force attachment because the timing of labor supply changes within couples may

vary upon the husbands’ public insurance receipt. Some husbands with employer-provided

insurance may continue full-time work in spite of the availability of VA insurance, with the

expectation that they will reduce their labor supply once their wives are able to find an alternate

source of insurance (i.e. the wife might change her labor supply before or at the same time as the

husband). Nevertheless, we may expect to see stronger results for couples in which the husband

is either not working full-time or is not working at all, as these are couples for whom the offer is

more likely to have had a direct effect (i.e. for whom the VA coverage potentially caused a

decrease in the husband’s labor supply). Panel II demonstrates results with larger magnitudes for

these two groups. Wives of husbands who are not working full time are more likely to work and

work about 1.37 more hours per week after public health insurance is offered to their husbands.

Similarly, wives of husbands who are not working at all are even more likely to work (decrease

of not working of 4.3 ppt) and increase their hours worked by 1.76 hours per week.




                                                 26
            Panel III provides additional robustness checks. Columns (1) and (2) demonstrate

that fully interacting the independent variables in the model with veteran provides results similar

to the base regression. Columns (3) and (4) demonstrate the same for removing the year 2002

(when diabetic Vietnam veterans potentially exposed to Agent Orange were re-categorized as

having work-related injuries).



   VI.      Discussion and Conclusion

            When husbands approaching the age of retirement obtain public health insurance, the

labor supply of their wives increases, on average. This result is predominantly driven by less-

educated wives and wives in lower-wealth households, who are more likely to enter the work

force when their husbands leave work. Wives with a high school education or less increase their

labor supply 3 percentage points, a 6% increase. These less educated women also work more

hours per week after the policy change and have higher weekly earnings. We find no statistically

significant change in probability of work for wives with higher levels of education.

            The results by education level are consistent with findings for women in households

with low non-housing wealth and low total pension income. Wives in low-wealth or low pension

income households have a statistically significant increase in the probability of work and in

hours worked, while wives with high-wealth or high pension income have no significant change

in the probability of work or number of work hours. This suggests that financial incentives, in

particular credit constraints and a need to reach a target family income, are one important factor

in wives’ work and retirement decisions.

         As discussed above, wives may also adjust their labor supply in order to gain access to

their own health insurance coverage. As anticipated, results differ by the wife’s access to

employer-provided health insurance in the previous year. Women without this health insurance
                                                 27
increase their hours to a greater extent than women with this insurance in the previous year once

their husbands are offered public health insurance. Although all women on average increase

full-time work and labor force participation, women who were not working in the previous year

are more likely to enter the labor force to participate in part-time work or self-employment.

Women who worked part-time in the previous year are more likely to increase their hours to full-

time work. Women who previously worked full-time do not seem to be as affected by their

husband’s access to publicly-provided health insurance. These results suggest that women in

“career” jobs either cannot or will not adjust their own work behavior compared to women in

more flexible employment.

           We hypothesize that these changes occur because, as found in Boyle and Lahey

(2010), when older men obtain health insurance not linked to their employment, they are more

likely to leave or plan to leave the full-time for-an-employer labor force, and are thus less likely

to be able to provide employer-based insurance to their families. In addition, older men in career

jobs are more likely to have a choice between working full-time or not working, whereas women

of the same cohort are more likely to be able to provide income from more flexible employment

(Johnson 2004; Long & Jones 1981). Thus, in order to reach a target income or to provide

family health insurance or to self-insure medical expenses, women with a high school education

or less increase their labor supply. This effect comes from both women with less education

increasing their labor force participation and from these women being less likely to leave the

labor force.

           We do not find any evidence of work reductions based on complementarity of spousal

leisure. This finding is at odds with earlier literature in the U.S. that finds that wives are more

likely to retire when husbands are given a positive income shock, such as pension or Social



                                                28
Security changes. There are several possible explanations for these differences. First, unlike the

majority of literature on spousal complementarities of leisure, we do not limit to husbands and

wives who are both working, or who are both working full-time. As shown in our multinomial

logit results, we find labor market entry by women who did not work in the previous year and

increased hours for those who worked part-time in the previous year. Although none of our

results are significant when limiting to women who worked full time in the previous year, the

signs are suggestive of decreased full-time work, increased self-employment, and decreased

labor-force participation, and thus not inconsistent with previous work.         Additionally, the

average age of the wives in our sample is lower than in much of the work on joint retirement.

Thus, some of the couples in our sample may still be planning joint retirement, but at a later date.

Finally, health insurance is different than a cash benefit. It is not fungible across couples, and

the need to provide health insurance for the wife or to provide additional income to the

household may dominate complementarities of spousal leisure for this specific in-kind benefit.

Findings that European spouses in countries with universal health insurance both respond to each

other’s financial incentives (rather than only the husband responding to the wife’s incentives as

in the U.S.) support the idea that health insurance may be an important element of joint

retirement decisions.

          These results also differ from the results on retiree health insurance or COBRA, which

demonstrate a joint retirement effect for these types of insurance coverage. However, the policy

change is also different than that of coverage that includes the entire family rather than just one

spouse.


Policy Implications




                                                29
        When examining the effects of a policy change on labor supply, it is important to keep in

mind that direct effects of the policy may be exacerbated, or in this case, mitigated, by spillover

effects on family members. Our research suggests that although men’s labor force participation

would decrease as a result of increased public health insurance coverage, some of this decrease

in participation would be made up for by an increase in the labor force participation and hours

worked of their wives. In particular, if we assume that the value of the VA insurance coverage is

equivalent to the average single-coverage health insurance premium for workers in 2002, then

this benefit constitutes a 4.6% positive income shock to the average household in our sample.19

Since our results indicate that husbands are between 1.5% and 2.3% less likely to work as a

result of VA insurance receipt, this finding suggests a labor force participation elasticity of -0.33

to -0.5 for men. Wives, on the other hand are 3% to 4% more likely to work, implying an

elasticity of 0.65 to 0.87. For wives with high school education or less, the suggested elasticity is

approximately 1. 20

        Our results are directly applicable to any policy that provides public health insurance or

other valued in-kind benefits to one family member but not another. In addition to potential

future VA expansions, our findings provide information about potential effects of a Medicare

expansion to earlier ages. Women, who are on average not yet eligible for Medicare when their

spouses become eligible (because men are, on average, older than their wives), will likely need

to continue working in order to be able to cover the costs for their own health insurance or health



19
   Similar to Boyle and Lahey (2010), we base the value of insurance coverage on data from the National
Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the United States, 2002-2003 (U.S. Department of
Labor and Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2003.) We take the total (employer +employee) single-coverage premium of
$3270.60 multiplied by 102% (since COBRA allows employers to charge an extra 2% of the cost for administrative
fees). The average income of households in our sample (in 2002 dollars) is $73,174. Thus, the insurance constitutes
a 4.6% (3336/73174) income shock.
20
   Low education wives have average household income of $58,215.56 in 2002 dollars and are 5.6 to 5.7 percent
more likely to work as a result of the policy change.

                                                        30
care even after the spouse has retired. This need will be especially true for less-educated women,

who are less likely to have access to employer-based retiree coverage.

       The magnitude of our results could change in the present context either positively or

negatively, given the ACA’s impact on health care markets. On the one hand, the availability of

affordable insurance on the free market suggests less of a need for women, especially higher SES

women, to continue working to provide coverage for themselves.           On the other hand, the

individual mandate increases the cost of foregoing insurance coverage. To the extent that the

mandate binds, we would expect to see increased labor supply among those who may have been

willing to go without health insurance coverage before. Effects on lower SES women may vary

by state, depending upon Medicaid availability. In states that took up Medicaid expansions,

wives might be less likely to enter or remain in the labor force, in order to qualify for Medicaid,

while wives in states not providing Medicaid access might increase their hours in order to qualify

for health insurance subsidies. Finally, health insurance costs have gone up since the 1990s even

absent the ACA, increasing the value of an offer of public insurance.

       In the context of the ACA directly, our results suggest that when job lock is reduced for

one member (or both members) of a couple, it allows for a potential reshuffling of household

labor supply. In some instances, particularly in credit-constrained families, it might be optimal

for one spouse to increase work while the other decreases labor force participation. This could

be the case in households where the husband is older or in poorer health. Thus, this increase in

flexibility in allocating work hours has the potential to enhance household welfare.




                                                31
                 Table 1: Summary Statistics, 1992-2002
                                                  CPS
                               Veterans                     Non-Veterans
                       Pre                Post            Pre         Post
                                               Husbands
Observations          10,272              9,596        8,292         12,964
Age                    59.81              59.25           58.91      59.02
White                  0.94               0.92            0.87       0.87
No HS                  0.16               0.07            0.34        0.24
HS                     0.36               0.36            0.30        0.29
Some College           0.23               0.28            0.14        0.16
College Grad           0.15               0.16            0.10        0.15
Northeast              0.23               0.21            0.25        0.22
Midwest                0.25               0.24            0.24        0.22
South                  0.31               0.31            0.31        0.32
West                   0.21               0.24            0.20        0.23
Not Working             0.35               0.31            0.32      0.30
Part Time (<35 hrs)     0.10               0.10           0.09       0.09
Self-Employed           0.16              0.15            0.18       0.17
Hours Worked           41.86              42.11           42.57      42.90
                                                  Wives
Observations          10,187              9,493           8,164      12,674
Age                    56.08              55.42           55.08      55.27
White                  0.94               0.92            0.87       0.87
No HS                  0.14               0.09            0.26        0.19
HS                     0.47               0.42            0.41        0.37
Some College           0.23               0.27            0.17        0.22
College Grad           0.10               0.14            0.09        0.14
Not Working             0.47               0.38            0.47      0.41
Hours Worked           17.37              20.92           17.54      19.87
                                                 HRS
                                               Husbands
Observations           5,311              6,470        3,772         7,114
Age                    58.60              59.19           57.87      59.01
White                  0.93               0.92            0.85       0.86
No HS                  0.15               0.08            0.32        0.26
HS                     0.38               0.37            0.34        0.30
Some College           0.22               0.28            0.13        0.15
College Grad           0.25               0.27            0.21        0.29
                                                  Wives
Observations           4,963              5,396           3,189      6,040
Age                    56.80              57.69           56.32      57.75
White                  0.94               0.93            0.88       0.88
No HS                  0.15               0.11            0.25        0.20
HS                     0.50               0.43            0.42        0.38
Some College           0.20               0.28            0.19        0.21
College Grad           0.15               0.19            0.14        0.21
Not Working             0.45               0.41            0.41      0.43
Hours Worked           18.45              19.88           20.94      19.99
 Note: Universe is limited to married couples with husbands between the
 ages of 55 and 64 whose wives are not veterans. In the CPS, two
 observations with wives under the age of 18 have been deleted from the
 universe. In the HRS, mea ns are weighted using person weights to
 match the CPS. The pre-period includes years 1992-1995 and the post
 period includes years 1998-2002. The number of observa tions was
 assessed by taking the mode among the listed variables; HRS
 observations are different between husbands and wives because some
 weights are 0.


                                    32
                                                                     Table 2
                          Effect of Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply Outcomes for Veterans
                                    Not Working                                 Part Time                                Self Employed
                              (1)                  (2)                   (3)               (4)             (5)                            (6)
                                                                Panel I: Effects of Insurance Receipt
veteran*post               0.0053              0.0077*               0.0153**           0.0147**        -0.0017                        -0.0012
                          (0.0049)             (0.0034)              (0.0054)           (0.0053)        (0.0042)                       (0.0044)
veteran                   0.0174**             0.0321**               -0.0014            0.0042        -0.0350**                      -0.0241**
                          (0.0037)             (0.0027)              (0.0041)           (0.0040)        (0.0039)                       (0.0044)
Observations               41,124                41,124                26,404            26,404          41,124                         41,124
                                              Panel II: Falsification exercise: 1992-1993 = pre, 1994-1995 = post
veteran*fakepost           -0.0129              -0.0051               0.0100             0.0068          0.0081                         0.0056
                          (0.0079)             (0.0047)              (0.0083)           (0.0072)        (0.0071)                       (0.0085)
veteran                   0.0258**             0.0361**              -0.0057+            0.0014        -0.0387**                      -0.0267**
                          (0.0070)             (0.0044)              (0.0034)           (0.0039)        (0.0049)                       (0.0060)

Full controls?               No                   Yes                   No                   Yes                     No                  Yes
State time trend?            No                   Yes                   No                   Yes                     No                  Yes
Observations               18,564                18,564                11,486               11,486                 18,564               18,564
Notes: Data from Current Population Survey. Coefficient estimates are taken from a probit regression as described in eq. (1). Marginal effects are
reported. Regressions include age, race, state, year and education dummies and a constant. Full controls include health insurance receipt in the
previous year and pension in the previous year for columns (1) and (2) and current year in columns (3)-(4) and a state-specific time trend. The
universe in Panel I includes the years 1992-2002 with 1996 and 1997 omitted. The universe in Panel II includes years 1992-1995, with fakepost
indicating the years 1994-1995. Men whose wives are veterans or under age 18 are removed from the universe. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are clustered on veteran and year.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                         33
                                                                                    Table 3
                                                              Effect of Husband's Insurance on Wife's outcomes
                       Not Working                    Hours Worked                 Hours Worked|hrs>0                    Earnings                        ln(Earnings)
               Min Controls Full Controls      Min Controls Full Controls       Min Controls Full Controls       Min Controls Full Controls      Min Controls Full Controls
                    (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)                (5)               (6)           (7)            (8)              (9)             (10)
                                                                                         I. All Wives
veteran*post     -0.0180*       -0.0136+          0.6336**        0.4365+          0.2207            0.2403        13.7453*         8.7002          0.0404*         0.0275*
                  (0.0071)       (0.0081)         (0.2146)        (0.2071)        (0.2308)         (0.2230)        (6.2424)        (5.8110)         (0.0144)        (0.0128)
veteran          0.0160**       0.0243**         -0.4422**       -0.6665**         0.0262           -0.1534         1.1798          -3.6154          0.0147          0.0115
                  (0.0045)       (0.0046)         (0.1186)        (0.1295)        (0.1616)         (0.1626)        (5.8692)        (4.6083)         (0.0138)        (0.0128)

Observations      40,495          40,495           40,518          40,518           21,802        21,802          35,600           35,600            20,576         20,576
                                                                  II. Wives with High School Education or Less Education
veteran*post    -0.0302**       -0.0298**         0.7967**        0.6303*          -0.0251        0.0708        27.3798**        23.8000**          0.0664*         0.0547*
                 (0.0092)        (0.0113)         (0.2413)        (0.2663)        (0.1825)      (0.1949)         (5.2599)         (6.0277)          (0.0222)        (0.0183)
veteran         0.0218**        0.0330**         -0.6943**       -0.9350**         -0.0921       -0.2837          4.2230           -.4951            0.0062          0.0031
                 (0.0072)        (0.0088)         (0.1620)        (0.1841)        (0.1403)      (0.1735)         (5.4615)         (4.7111)          (0.0212)        (0.0180)

Observations      23,768          23,768           23,827          23,827              11,311        11,311          20,318        20,318            10,321         10,321
                                                                       III. Wives with Some College or College Education
veteran*post     -0.0035          0.0076            0.4789         0.1495              0.5698        0.4861        16.3277**       6.3861           0.0277+          -0.0009
                 (0.0085)        (0.0092)         (0.5074)        (0.4371)           (0.5091)      (0.5123)         (2.7659)      (4.3967)          (0.0132)        (0.0142)
veteran           0.0046         0.0086+           -0.2125         -0.3957            -0.2841       -0.3889        -6.4426**      -9.7987*           0.0163           0.0204
                 (0.0057)        (0.0050)         (0.3385)        (0.2740)           (0.3856)      (0.3982)         (1.6834)      (3.4784)          (0.0122)        (0.0122)

Observations       13,837          13,837           13,881          13,881           8,464            8,464            12,726         12,726            8,308           8,308
Notes: Data from Current Population Survey. Coefficients from estimating equation (1). Universe years for columns (1)-(6) are 1992-2002, omitting 1996 & 1997. Universe years
for columns (7)-(10) are 1992-2001, omitting 1996 & 1997. Columns (1) and (2) report the marginal effects from a probit regression. Columns (3)-(10) report OLS results. Weekly
earnings are created from previous year variables in 2002 dollars using the BLS CPI inflator. Regressions include age, race, state, year and education dummies and a constant.
Full controls include pension and health insurance receipt in the previous year and a state-specific time trend. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered on veteran
and year. Men whose wives are veterans or under age 18 are removed from the universe. Wives with graduate education are not included in Panel III. In columns (1) and (2),
some wife ages predict wife not working perfectly and 23 obs are dropped. + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                                     34
                                                             Table 4
                                        Results by Household Wealth and Pension Income
                   Not Working    Hours Worked Hours Worked|hrs>0          Not Working    Hours Worked Hours Worked|hrs>0
                        (1)             (2)                (3)                   (4)            (5)                (6)
                                                        Panel I: By Non-Housing Wealth
                               Low Non-Housing Wealth                                  High Non-Housing Wealth
veteran*post        -0.0837**        3.2565**            0.7024               -0.0200         0.9175            -0.0333
                     (0.0236)        (0.9142)           (0.7712)             (0.0225)        (0.9121)          (0.8568)
veteran               0.0223         -1.4696*           -1.1788*             0.0639**       -2.8605**          -1.2102+
                     (0.0181)        (0.7042)           (0.5949)             (0.0171)        (0.7009)          (0.6573)
Sig different?                                                                  Yes            Yes                 No
Observations           9,372           9,450              5,029                10,082         10,119              5,751
                                                          Panel II: By Pension Income
                                 Low Pension Income                                      High Pension Income
veteran*post        -0.0578**        2.5284**            0.5932                0.0011        -0.8491             0.8541
                     (0.0174)        (0.6855)           (0.6166)             (0.0484)        (1.7874)          (2.3256)
veteran             0.0599**        -2.7219**           -1.0951*               0.0479        -2.2591            -2.8526
                     (0.0133)        (0.5223)           (0.4678)             (0.0396)        (1.5363)          (2.0115)
Sig different?                                                                  Yes            Yes                 No
Observations          16,693          16,779              9,629                 2,737          2,768              1,147
Note: Data from the Health and Retirement Study. Universe is even years from 1992-2002, omitting 1996. Coefficients from estimating equation (1).
Panel I reports the marginal effects from a probit regression. Panels II and II report results from an OLS regression. Wealth and income measured in
constant-year dollars using the BLS CPI inflator. Low wealth and income are defined as below the median; high wealth and income are above the
median. Regressions include race, and a full set of state, year, age, and education dummies and a constant. Robust standard errors in parentheses are
clustered on veteran and year.
 + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                         35
                                                            Table 5
                                    Results by Wife's Health Insurance Receipt in Prior Year
                   Wife Had Employer-Provided Health Insurance        Wife Without Employer-Provided Health Insurance
                           (1)                     (2)                          (3)                     (4)
                                                         Panel I: Work outcomes

                       Not Working                 Part Time                     Not Working            Part Time
veteran*post            -0.0216**                   0.0181*                        -0.0137              -0.0486**
                         (0.0062)                  (0.0076)                       (0.0092)               (0.0147)
veteran                  0.0249**                  -0.0147*                       0.0143*                 0.0141
                         (0.0035)                  (0.0058)                       (0.0065)               (0.0100)
Sig different?                                                                       Yes                   Yes
Observations              14,063                     11,044                         26,339                10,693
                                                              Panel II: Hours Outcomes

                       Hrs Worked              Hrs Worked|hrs>0                  Hrs Worked         Hrs Worked|hrs>0
veteran*post             0.3765                    -0.5850*                        0.7112*              0.9644+
                        (0.3853)                   (0.2279)                        (0.2702)             (0.4737)
veteran                 -0.5319+                    0.4188*                       -0.5303**             -0.4239
                        (0.2922)                   (0.1811)                        (0.1319)             (0.3621)
Sig different?                                                                       Yes                  Yes
Observations              14,129                     11,083                         26,389               10,719
                                                          Panel III: Earnings Outcomes

                         Earnings                 ln(Earnings)                     Earnings            ln(Earnings)
veteran*post             -4.0686                     -0.0185                      19.6172**              0.0907**
                        (14.4155)                   (0.0120)                       (6.6130)              (0.0203)
veteran                  12.2665                   0.0384**                        -4.5797                0.0032
                        (10.5492)                   (0.0083)                       (6.1298)              (0.0154)
Sig different?                                                                        No                    Yes
Observations              12,664                     10,877                         22,936                 9,699
Note: Data from the Current Population Survey. Coefficients from estimating equation (1). Universe for Panels I & II is
1992-2002, omitting 1996 & 1997. Universe for Panel III is 1992-2001, omitting 1996 & 1997. Panel I reports the marginal
effects from a probit regression. Panels II and III report results from an OLS regression. Earnings are in 2002 dollars
using the BLS CPI inflator. Regressions include race, and a full set of state, year, age, and education dummies and a
constant. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered on veteran and year.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

                                                               36
                                Table 6
                      Pathways: Multinomial Logits
                     (1)         (2)                (3)              (4)
                 Full-Time   Part-Time        Self-Employed   Not Working
                                            I. All Wives
veteran*post     0.0184**      -0.0009            0.0020          -0.0195**
                 (0.0069)     (0.0036)          (0.0040)          (0.0068)
veteran           -0.0003      -0.0027          -0.0144**         0.0174**
                 (0.0042)     (0.0033)          (0.0030)          (0.0046)


Observations       39,526     39,526      39,526           39,526
                        II. Wives who Worked 0 Weeks Last Year
veteran*post      -0.0009+     0.0037*           0.0034*          -0.0061**
                 (0.0005)    (0.0017)           (0.0014)          (0.0022)
veteran           -0.00002    -0.0026*          -0.0034**         0.0061**
                 (0.0006)     (0.0011)          (0.0007)          (0.0015)


Observations       15,028      15,028      15,028            15,028
                        III. Wives who Worked Part-Time Last Year
veteran*post      0.0388*     -0.0319*           -0.0074           0.0006
                 (0.0153)     (0.0200)          (0.0184)          (0.0102)
veteran          -0.0369**    0.0391**           -0.0066           0.0044
                 (0.0045)    (0.0070)           (0.0172)          (0.0097)


Observations       5,081      5,081       5,081             5,081
                       IV. Wives who Worked Full-Time Last Year
veteran*post      -0.0060      -0.0036            0.0057           0.0038
                 (0.0046)     (0.0028)          (0.0038)          (0.0038)
veteran          0.0244**      0.0005           -0.0228**          -0.0022
                 (0.0025)    (0.0023)           (0.0025)          (0.0029)


Observations       15,490      15,490             15,490           15,490
Notes: Data from Current Population Survey. Universe is 1992-2002,
omitting 1996 & 1997. Coefficient estimates are marginal effects from a
multinomial logit regression. Regressions include age, race, state, year and
education dummies and a constant. Part-time in the previous year is
defined as working more than 0 and less than 35 hours/week and at least
40 weeks in the previous year. Full-time in the previous year is defined as
35 or more hours/week and at least 40 weeks in the previous year. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are clustered on veteran and year.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                       37
                                           Table 7
                                   Robustness Checks
                       (1)                  (2)                   (3)                (4)
                  Not Working       Hours Worked          Not Working Hours Worked
                                      Panel I: Different Wife Ages
                              Ages 45-64                                Ages 55-64
veteran*post        -0.0160*           0.7803**            -0.0337**            1.1243*
                    (0.0074)           (0.2506)             (0.0082)            (0.4260)
veteran             0.0164**          -0.5570**             0.0310**            -0.9898*
                    (0.0053)           (0.1329)             (0.0073)            (0.3626)


Observations         36,762             36,762               23,314                23,314
                                       Panel II: Limiting Husbands
                 Husband Not Working Full-Time                Husband Not Working
veteran*post        -0.0353**          1.3721**            -0.0430**            1.7639**
                    (0.0057)           (0.2106)             (0.0095)            (0.2712)
veteran             0.0159**          -0.3735**              0.0055            -0.5967**
                    (0.0048)           (0.1142)             (0.0080)            (0.1939)


Observations         23,732             23,774               12,751                12,827
                                       Panel III: Additional Checks
                      Full veteran interaction                           No 2002
veteran*post        -0.0200**          0.6017*             -0.0263**            0.9216**
                    (0.0070)           (0.2296)             (0.0059)            (0.1562)
veteran             0.9947**            1.7228              0.0155**           -0.4478**
                     (.0082)           (1.5180)             (0.0046)            (0.1287)


Observations         40,477             40,518               34,537                34,587

Note: Data from the Current Population Survey. Universe is 1992-2002, omitting 1996
& 1997. Coefficients from estimating equation (1). Columns (1) and (3) report the
marginal effects from a probit regression. The remaining columns report results from an
OLS regression. Regressions include race, and a full set of state, year, age, and
education dummies and a constant. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered
on veteran and year.

+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                            38
39
                                         Works Cited

Antwi, Ya Akosa, Asako S. Moriya, and Kosali Simon. 2012. “Effects of Federal Policy to
       Insure Young Adults: Evidence from the 2010 Affordable Care Act Dependent Coverage
       Mandate.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #18200.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2007. "Distinguishing Income from Substitution Effects
       in Disability Insurance." American Economic Review 97(2): 119-24.

Averett, Susan L. and Julie L. Hotchkiss. 1995. "The Probability Of Receiving Benefits
      At Different Hours Of Work." American Economic Review 85(2): 276-280.

Baicker, Katherine, Finkelstein, Amy, Song, Jae and Sarah Taubman. 2014. "The Impact
      of Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from
      the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment." American Economic Review 104(5): 322-328.

Baker, Michael. 2002. "The Retirement Behavior of Married Couples: Evidence from the
       Spouse’s Allowance.” Journal of Human Resources 37(1): 1-34.

Blau, David. 1998. “Labor force dynamics of older married couples.” Journal of Labor
       Economics 16(3): 595-629.

Boyle, Melissa. 2009. “Health and Utilization Effects of Increased Access to Publicly Provided
       Health Care: Evidence from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.” Holy Cross
       Working Paper No. 09-02.

Boyle, Melissa and Joanna Lahey. 2010. “Health Insurance and the Labor Supply Decisions of
       Older Workers: Evidence from U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Expansion.” Journal
       of Public Economics 94(7-8): 467-478.

Buchmueller, Thomas C. and Robert G. Valletta. 1999. "The Effect of Health Insurance on
     Married Female Labor Supply." Journal of Human Resources 34(1): 42-70.

Chen, Susan E. 2012. “Spousal Labor Supply Responses to Government Programs: Evidence
      from the Disability Insurance Program.” University of Michigan Retirement Research
      Center Working Paper #2012-261.

Cohn, Jonathan. May 21, 2014. “The Veterans Affairs Scandal Was Decades in the Making.”
       New Republic. http://www.newrepublic.com/article/117855/veterans-affairs-scandal-


                                              40
       was-decades-making. Last accessed: (7/25/14).

Coile, Courtney. 2004. "Retirement Incentives and Couples' Retirement Decisions." The B.E.
       Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 4(1): 1-28.

Currie, Janet. 2003. "U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs" in Means-Tested Transfer
        Programs in the United States, ed. Robert Moffitt, 199-289. Chicago, IL: University of
        Chicago Press.

Currie, Janet and Firouz Gahvari. 2008. “Transfers in Cash and In-kind: Theory Meets the
        Data.” Journal of Economic Literature 46(2): 333-383.

Cullen, Julie B. and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd out
       Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics 18(3): 546-572.

Dave, Dhaval M., Sandra L. Decker, Robert Kaestner and Kosali Ilayperuma Simon. 2013. “The
      Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of
      Pregnant Women.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #19161.

Dague, Laura, Thomas DeLeire, and Lindsey Leininger, 2014. "The Effect of Public
      Insurance Coverage for Childless Adults on Labor Supply," National Bureau of Economic
      Research Working Paper #20111.

Department of Veterans Affairs. 2002. 2001 National Survey of Veterans: Final Report.
      http://www1.va.gov/VETDATA/docs/SurveysAndStudies/NSV_Final_Report.pdf. Last
      accessed: (7/30/14).

Duggan, Mark G., Rosenheck, Robert and Perry Singleton. 2010. “Federal Policy and the Rise in
     Disability Enrollment: Evidence for the VA’s Disability Compensation Program.” Journal
     of Law and Economics 53(2): 379-398.

Ellwood, David and E. Kathleen Adams. 1990. “Medicaid Mysteries. Medicaid and Welfare
      Dynamics.” Health Care Financing Review (Annual Supplement) 119–31.

Gahvari, Firouz. 1994. “In-Kind Transfers, Cash Grants and Labor Supply” Journal of
      Public Economics 55(3): 495-504.

Gahvari, Firouz. 1995. “In-Kind versus Cash Transfers in the Presence of Distortionary
      Taxes.” Economic Inquiry 33(1): 45-53.



                                               41
Garrett, Bowen and Robert Kaestner. 2014. “The Best Evidence Suggests the Effects of the ACA
         on Employment Will Be Small.” Timely Analysis of Immediate Health Policy Issues.
        Urban Institute.

Garthwaite, Craig, Gross, Tal and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2014. “Public Health Insurance,
      Labor Supply, and Employment Lock.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 653-
      696.

Gelbach, Jonah B. 2002. "Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor
      Supply." American Economic Review 92(1): 307-322.

Goux, Dominique, Maurin Eric, and Barbara Petrongolo. 2014. “Worktime Regulations and
      Spousal Labor Supply.” American Economic Review 104(1): 252-76.

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 2000. “Retirement in Dual-Career Families: A
      Structural Model.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(3) 503-545.

Guy, Gery P. Jr., E. Kathleen Adams, and Adam Atherly. 2012. "Public and Private
      Health Insurance Premiums: How Do They Affect the Health Insurance Status of Low-
      Income Childless Adults?" Inquiry 49(1): 52-64.

Ham, John C. and Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2001. “The Impact of Public Health Insurance on
      Labor Market Transitions.” Williams College Working Paper 2001-02.

Ham, John C. And Lara D. Shore-Sheppard. 2005. “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare
      Participation?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 58(3): 452-470.

Hamersma, Sarah. 2013. “The Effects of Medicaid Earnings Limits on Earnings Growth Among
      Poor Workers.” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy. 13(2): 887-919.

Hamersma, Sarah and Matthew Kim. 2009. “The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansions on Job
      Mobility.” Journal of Health Economics 28(4):761-70.

Ho, Jeong-Hwa and James M. Raymo. 2009. “Expectations and Realization of Joint
       Retirement Among Dual-Worker Couples” Research on Aging 31(2): 153-179.

Honig, Marjorie and Irena Dushi. 2005. “Household Demand for Health Insurance: Price
       and Spouse’s Coverage” SSRN working paper: http://ssrn.com/abstract=801787.

Hospido, Laura and Gema Zamarro. 2013. “Retirement Patterns of Couples in Europe.”


                                             42
       Documentos de Trabajo. N 1317. Banco de Espana.

Hurd, Michael D. 1990. “The Joint Retirement Decision of Husbands and Wives.” In Issues in
      the Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise, 231-258. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
      Press.

Jacob, Brian and Jens Ludwig. 2012. “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply:
Evidence from a Voucher Lottery.” American Economic Review 102(1): 272-304.

Johnson, Richard W. 2004. “Do Spouses Coordinate Their Retirement Decisions” Boston
      College Center for Retirement Research Issue in Brief (19): 1-8.

Kapinos, Kandice A. 2009. "Changes in Spousal Health Insurance Coverage and Female Labor
      Supply Decisions." Forum of Health Economics and Policy 12(2): 1-24.

Kapur, Kanika and Jeannette Rogowski. 2011. "How Does Health Insurance Affect the
       Retirement Behavior of Women?" Inquiry 48(1): 51-67.

Klein, Robert E. and Donald D. Stockford. 2001. Data on the Socioeconomic Status of Veterans
       and on VA Program Usage
       www1.va.gov/VETDATA/docs/SpecialReports/sesprogramnet5-31-01.ppt. Last
       accessed: July 29, 2014.

Kolstad, Jonathan T. and Amanda E. Kowalski. 2012. “Mandate-Based Health Reform and the
       Labor Market: Evidence from the Massachusetts Reform.” National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper #17933.

Leonesio, Michael. 1988. In-kind transfers and work incentives. Journal of Labor
       Economics. 6(4): 515-529.

Long, James E. and Ethel B. Jones. 1981. "Married Women in Part-Time Employment,"
       Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 34(3): 413-425.

Mare, Robert D. 1991. "Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating." American
       Sociological Review 56(1): 15-32.

Moffitt, Robert A. 2002. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply,” In Handbook of
       Public Economics vol. 4, ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 2393-2430.
       Amsterdam: New Holland.

Moffitt, Robert A. and Barbara Wolfe. 1992. “The Effect of the Medicaid Program on Welfare
       Participation and Labor Supply.” Review of Economics and Statistics 74(4): 615-626.

                                              43
Montgomery, Edward and John C. Navin. 2000. “Cross-State Variation in Medicaid Programs
     and Female Labor Supply.” Economic Inquiry 38(3): 402-418.

Murasko, Jason E. 2008. "Married Women's Labor Supply and Spousal Health Insurance
     Coverage in the United States: Results from Panel Data." Journal of Family and
     Economic Issues 29(3): 391-406.

Nelson, Charles T. and Robert J. Mills. 2001. “The March CPS Health Insurance Verification
      Question and its Effect on Estimates of the Uninsured.” U.S. Census Bureau.
      http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/publications/verification.html. Last Accessed
      6/28/11.

Olson, Craig A. 1998. "A Comparison of Parametric and Semiparametric Estimates of the Effect
       of Spousal Health Insurance Coverage on Weekly Hours Worked by Wives." Journal of
       Applied Econometrics 3(5): 543-65.

Olson, Craig A. 2002. “Do Workers Accept Lower Wages in Exchange for Health Benefits?”
       Journal of Labor Economics. 20(2): S91-S114.

Pencavel, John. 1998. "Assortative Mating by Schooling and the Work Behavior of Wives and
      Husbands." American Economic Review 88(2): 326-329.

Ross, Joseph S., Salomeh Keyhani, Patricia S. Keenan, Susannah M. Bernheim, Joan D. Penrod,
       Kenneth S. Boockvar, Alex D. Federman, Harlan M. Krumholz, and Albert L. Siu. 2008.
       “Use of Recommended Ambulatory Care Services: Is the Veterans Affairs Quality Gap
       Narrowing?” Archives of Internal Medicine. 168(9): 950-958.

Royalty, Anne Beeson and Jean Abraham. 2006. "Health Insurance and Labor Market Outcomes:
      Joint Decision-Making within Households." Journal of Public Economics 90(8-9): 1561-
      1577.

Stancanelli, Elena. 2012. "Spouses' Retirement and Hours of Work Outcomes: Evidence
       from Twofold Regression Discontinuity," Documents de travail du Centre d'Economie de
       la Sorbonne 12074.

Strumpf, Erin. 2011. “Medicaid’s Effect on Single Women’s Labor Supply: Evidence
      from the Introduction of Medicaid.” Journal of Health Economics 30(3): 531-548.




                                             44
Tomohara, Akinori and Ho Jin Lee. 2007. “Did State Children’s Health Insurance Program
     Affect Married Women’s Labor Supply? Journal of Family and Economic Issues 28(4):
     668-683.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1996. VA Health Care: Efforts to Improve Veterans’ Access to
      Primary Care Services. GAO/T-HEHS-96-134. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
      Printing Office.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 1999. Veterans’ Affairs: Progress and Challenges in
      Transforming Health Care. GAO/T-HEHS-99-109. Washington, D.C: U.S. Government
      Printing Office.

U.S. General Accounting Office. 2003. VA Health Care: Framework for Analyzing Capital Asset
      Realignment for Enhanced Services Decisions. GAO-03-1103R. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
      Government Printing Office.

Weaver, David A. 1994. “The Work and Retirement Decisions of Older Women: A Literature
     Review.” Social Security Bulletin 57(1): 3-24.

Winkler, Anne E. 1991. “The Incentive Effects of Medicaid on Women’s Labor Supply.” The
      Journal of Human Resources 26(2): 308-337.

Yelowitz, Aaron S. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply, and Welfare Participation:
     Evidence from Eligibility Expansions.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 909-
     939.




                                             45
