NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WELFARE IMPLICATIONS OF LEARNING THROUGH SOLICITATION VERSUS
DIVERSIFICATION IN HEALTH CARE
Anirban Basu
Working Paper 20376
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20376
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

I am grateful for comments from Karl Claxton and David Meltzer and support from NIH research
grants RC4CA155809 and R01CA155329. The opinions expressed here are those of the author only.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Anirban Basu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Welfare Implications of Learning Through Solicitation versus Diversification in Health Care
Anirban Basu
NBER Working Paper No. 20376
August 2014
JEL No. C01,C9,D6,I1,I18
ABSTRACT
This paper uses Roy’s model of sorting behavior to study welfare implication of current health care
data production infrastructure that relies on solicitation of research subjects. We show that due to severe
adverse-selection issues, directionality of bias cannot be established and welfare may decrease due
to new data. Direct diversification of treatment receipt may solve these issues but is infeasible. Unifying
Manski’s work diversified treatment choice under ambiguity and Heckman’s work on estimating heterogeneous
treatment effects, the paper proposes a new infrastructure based on temporary diversification of access
that resolves the prior issues and can identify nuanced effect heterogeneity.
Anirban Basu
Departments of Health Services,
Pharmacy and Economics
University of Washington
1959 NE Pacific St
Box - 357660
Seattle WA 98195
and NBER
basua@uw.edu

One of the fundamental challenges in health care markets is lack of information
about the quality of medical care and technology (Arrow, 1963). Unlike other
product markets, such as those of electronics and consumer appliances, when new
health technologies are introduced in the market, minimal information about their
comparative quality with respect to older technology or products is available to
consumers, a.k.a. patients and physicians. It is often difficult to predict or anticipate
such comparative quality information based on product attributes such mechanism
of drug action, bioavailability or other mechanistic features because of the
uncertainty in predicting the interaction of the mechanical, pharmacological or
procedural features of a new medical technology with human biology.
Information on medical product quality is usually generated by employing an
artificial form of ‘learning by doing’ mechanism where a selected group of
individuals (doers) are allowed to consume alternative medical products (e.g. using
standard statistical designs, such as randomized assignment of patients to products).
Wisdom from their experiences is disseminated to other individuals who will face
the choice of using these medical products in the near future and also to inform
social policies on access.1 Most public and private stakeholders that are engaged in
data production on medical quality signals have employed such mechanisms.
Recently, large boluses of public investments were made in the US, under the
umbrella term “comparative effectiveness research” (CER) and patient-centered
outcomes research (PCOR),2 to facilitate production of such data on alternative

There are situations where learning from own's doing is popular, aka the
repeated use of pharmaceutical products in chronic illnesses.

1

Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009, H.R. 3590, 111th Congress
§6301 (2010).

2

medical technologies that are currently being used in clinical practice, albeit with
incomplete knowledge of their comparative qualities.3
In this paper, using a simple Roy’s model (1951) of sorting behavior we prove
that when medical treatments are available to patients under insurance, any data
production infrastructure for comparative medical quality that relies on voluntary
participation of subjects (which, unfortunately is and has been the norm for CER
studies) fails to identify any interpretable treatment effect parameters and therefore
fails to inform either the individual patient on optimal medical care use or a social
insurer on optimal medical care insurance coverage.4
The implications of this finding is substantial. Comparative quality information
influences individual's ex-ante perception of net benefits of treatment and forms the
basis for the market demand curve (Basu 2011). Accurate estimates of this
information carry tremendous welfare value as it reduces decision uncertainty for
individual consumers and help them choose a product that will maximize recovery
from an illness. Consequently, it helps align the market demand curve of a product
with its normative demand curve that is based on true marginal benefits. In contrast,
when comparative quality information generated by CER-type research is
incomplete, it has the potential to misguide treatment choices since ex-ante
perception of benefits do not coincide with the ex-post accrual of the same, and
result in welfare losses. For example, inefficiencies in the choice of medical

Throughout our paper, we assume the CER compares two medical technologies
that have been approved for use based on meeting the minimum safety
thresholds as those set by the Food and Drug Administration of the United
States. Our discussions do not encompass evaluation of experimental therapies.
Such discussions are delegated to future work. Also see Philipson (1995).

3

Note that our assertions about optimality are very general and does not depend
on specific welfare functions. What we prove is that the structural target
parameters on which information is required to maximize any welfare function is
not informed by current data production infrastructure.

4

products due to incomplete information can accentuate the inefficiencies due to
moral hazard stemming from health insurance that separates demand prices from
supply prices of medical products (Arrow, 1963; Pauly, 1968). Such added
inefficiencies can translate to higher premiums and less protection against risk in
both competitive and non-competitive insurance markets.
We begin in the next section by laying out the role of perfect and complete
information on decision making and on outputs from the health care markets. In our
paper, a social planner is not charged with prescribing treatment to each individual
but is rather asked to decide on whether to pay for a treatment through insurance.
Individuals, with their idiosyncratic and, perhaps, evidence-based, beliefs about
treatment outcomes choose treatments. In Sections 2 and 3 we highlight the current
data production infrastructure and prove why it would produce incomplete
information. We study the implications for such incompleteness on decision
making and welfare.
In Section 4, we introduce a new framework for data production that can
efficiently resolve the biases inherent in the current data production infrastructure
by using diversification of access to create a conduit for learning about meaningful
and decision-relevant effect parameters. This work unifies two broad themes in the
econometric literature, one based on Manski’s work on treatment choice under
ambiguity (Manski 2000, 2004, 2009) that utilizes the concept of diversification of
treatment as posited in Manski (2009) and the other based on Heckman, Vytlacil
and others’ works on estimating heterogeneous treatment effects (Heckman 1997,
2001; Heckman and Vytlacil 1999, 2001; Heckman et al. 2006). We prove how this
framework can help overcome inefficiencies in health care markets that stem from
incomplete information. We discuss many implications of instituting such a data
production framework such as how it can fix incentives for investment in data

production for public and private stakeholders in the long-run and its potential to
fuel global completion in data production for medical quality.

I. The Role of Perfect Quality Information
Let us begin with a problem of evaluating the comparative effectiveness of a
new (approved) treatment compared to a control/standard treatment for a
population of N patients indexed by i. Standard treatment may also include the donothing option. Let the individual-level true treatment effect represent the benefits
(net of harms) of the new treatment over the control and is denoted by bi. Let p
denote the price of the new treatment which is also the marginal cost for
manufacturing the new treatment.5
Patients are members of risk classes Ω, Ω=1,2,..k; k ≤ N, which determine
heterogeneity in treatment effects across individuals through a production function
b(), i.e. bi = b(Ω). Risk classes may be defined by the combination of various risk
factors such as severity of illness, patient demographics, their genetic makeup,
preferences and many others factors. In order to predict an individual-level
treatment effect, one requires knowledge about both the patient's risk class Ω and
the production function b(). CER is responsible for estimating the production
function. Consider, for example without loss of generality, a production function
that is expressed as a formulation of splines:
bi  k k  I (i  k )

Eq. 1

where I() is an indicator function and k is interpreted as the comparative effect of
the new treatment over the standard treatment in risk class k. Let’s assume that this
comparative effect is expressed in monetary terms. That is the effectiveness unit is
5

Assume for now that the marginal cost is constant.

multiplied with the some predefined threshold representing the monetary value of
the marginal unit of benefit.6
A population level average effect parameter is given as
  k Pr(  k )  k

Eq. 2

There are two types of decision makers, 1) the patient-physician dyad, which we
will refer to as the individual decision maker, is assumed to always have knowledge
about their risk class; and 2) an insurer or social planner who decides the
coinsurance rate for providing health insurance coverage for the new treatment.

A. First-Best Scenario
Under complete information, both the insurer and the individuals are aware of
the risk classes and the production function and are able to perfectly predict bi.
Here, individuals will choose treatment only if bi - p ≥ 0, when they are exposed to
the full price of treatments. This is efficient, assuming that the generic social
welfare function we will aim to maximize consumer surplus net of expenditure (i.e.
a Net-Benefit criterion). If individuals had full insurance they would choose
treatment if bi ≥ 0. Since the insurer can fully anticipate this individual behavior,
she can provide full coverage for treatment only for those individuals who would
experience benefits greater than cost and not provide coverage for the rest. Thus,
there is no efficiency loss due to moral hazard. The question on economic
evaluation about providing coverage on the new treatment can be answered in an
individualized fashion based on individualized comparative effectiveness
information.

Under the welfare economic foundations, this threshold is the inverse marginal
utility of income (Weinstein and Zechhauser, 1977; Garber and Phelps, 1997;
Meltzer, 1997).
6

B. Second-Best Scenario
The traditional theory of health insurance recognizes that such a complete
information scenario is not realistic. Specifically, it assumes that there exist
asymmetry of information where, even though, individuals are assumed to be aware
of Ωk and b() and to be able to combine them to predict bi perfectly, the insurer
cannot as they have either no or only partial information on Ωk (Arrow 1963; Pauly
and Blavin 2008). Consequently, the insurer cannot exclude patients from coverage
who would get treatment benefits lower than the cost of treatment (i.e. bi - p < 0).
This leads to moral hazard (Pauly, 2008) and the insurer may offer coverage with a
fractional coinsurance rate (r), which is the fraction of price a patient must pay in
order to receive treatment. When r =1, the new medical product is not covered
through insurance.
We assume individuals choose treatment by maximizing a generic Net-Benefit
criterion that is based on their perceived benefits from treatment net of the
demand price they face in acquiring the treatment. We also assume that the social
insurer’s goal is to maximize consumer surplus as is realized ex post based on
individual level choices. Therefore, throughout this paper, we will express the
realized population level benefits under different levels of coverage for the new
treatment as changes to the total outcomes had all patients taken the standard
treatment. Under any co-insurance rate r, r  [0,1], this population level benefits,
H0, is given as
H 0  i k I (k  r  p  0)  k  I (i  k ) .

Eq. 3

That is, when individuals have complete information they choose to receive the
new treatment only if k  r  p . The population level benefit is then expressed as
an aggregation of k across those individuals. Note that under the second-best

scenario, individuals who would expect to get harmed by treatment (i.e. k  0 )
would not select treatment even if it were available to them for free, thereby selflimiting the magnitude of moral hazard.
For a social insurer’s point of view, an optimal co-insurance rate may be
expressed as a solution to maximizing H0 net of costs and taking into account the
social value of risk protection provided by the insurance, V2nd(r):
r *  arg max V2nd (r )  i k I (k  r  p  0)  (k  p )  I (i  k )

Eq. 4

r

In equilibrium, the welfare loss due to moral hazard due should equate to the social
value of risk protection (Manning and Marquis, 1996). Consequently, the moral
hazard (welfare loss) under optimal coinsurance rate in a second-best scenario is
given as
L2nd (r * )   i k I (r *  p  k  p )  ( p  k )  I (i  k )  p r *  p N k  ( p  k ) ,
k

Eq. 5
which constitutes the welfare loss due to the total number of individuals in each
risk group (Nk) who would choose treatment given the lower demand price (r·p)
but ultimately obtain benefits lesser than the price of treatment, i.e. r *  p  k  p
.

II. Data Production and Incompleteness in Quality Information
Reality, however, deviates from both the first and second best scenarios,
because both individual and the social decision makers face incomplete
comparative information. To understand this incompleteness, one must study the
data production mechanisms in place. We consider and compare the circumstances
before and after a CER study. We begin by understanding the consequences of

incomplete information before a CER is conducted and why added investments for
data productions, such as those provisions by the latest legislations, are called for.
We then study how the current mechanisms of CER may continue to propagate and
even enhance the welfare losses due to incomplete information.

A. Pre-CER information and choices
Before CER is conducted it is safe to assume that k is not known with
certainty both at the individual and the societal level. However, prior knowledge,
obtained from evidence (of size n) generated during the process of approving the
use of this new medical product would determine an individual patient’s anticipated
belief about the incremental benefits of treatment given one’s own risk class. Let
this evidence suggest that the average effect of treatment is  that is a random draw
from Normal( ,  2 n ),7 where  is the average effect parameter defined in (2) and
  is the heterogeneity and the standard deviation of the effect in the population.

Let individual beliefs, i , be given as a single draws from the distribution Normal(
 , s 2 ) where s is the estimated standard deviation from prior evidence. It is

assumed that s 2 is a consistent estimator of  2 . The schedule of i across
individual patients determines the marginal benefits curve in the population in the
absence of a CER. Moreover, the social insurer may not have perfect information
on either k or i . However, she may have information about the average effect,  .
The best a social insurer can do at this point is to calculate the average net monetary
benefits of treatment,

7

We take a conservative approach is assuming that  and i are consistent

estimators of  . To the extent this is not true, the welfare losses described below
may be higher.

p

Eq. 6

and recommend coverage if   p  0 .8
Without loss of generality,
Assumption 1: Let  >0, the true population average treatment effect is positive,
but k ’s span the whole real line.
Assumption 2: Let   p  0 and full coverage was recommended, i.e. r* = 0.
Theorem 1: Under Assumptions 1 and 2, LPRE (0) > L2nd(r*) for r *  [0,1] if

i  0, i . The welfare loss under pre-CER information with full insurance
coverage is strictly larger than the welfare loss under any second-best scenario as
long as all individuals perceive a positive benefit from treatment.
Proof: Under the Pre-CER scenario, the welfare loss is due to two groups of
people making inefficient choices. The first group consists of people who fail to
receive treatment because their i <0 but they belong to risk group where the
treatment produces incremental benefits that are more than the price of the
treatment (i.e. k  p ). The second group consists of individuals who would
consume the medical product but obtain a benefit less that its price. Therefore total
welfare loss is given by:
LPRE ,CER    i k I (i  0)  I (k  p  0)  (k  p )  I (i  k )
+   i k I (i  0)  I (k  p  0)  ( p  k )  I (i  k )

This is, in fact, the standard method used in most cost-effectiveness modeling
studies that try to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a new approved treatment for
which there is no head-to-head comparison with its alternatives.

8



  k  p 1  (
s



 
)  N k  (k  p )   pk  (

 s


)  N k  ( p  k ) ,


Eq. 7

where (.) is a cumulative normal distribution. Note that the second expression in
(7) would include all individuals who would obtain negative benefit from
consuming the medical product (i.e. k  0 ) but are led to believe that they would
get a positive benefit ( i  0 ) due to incompleteness in information. Comparing
(7) to (5),

 
LPRE ,CER  0  – L2nd  0    k  p 1  ( )  N k  (k  p )
s 

 

  pk 0 ( )  1  N k  ( p  k )
 s


Eq. 8

  
  0k  ( )  N k  ( p  k )
 s 

The first and the third terms in (8) are the incremental losses due to incomplete
information pre-CER. The first term is the same as in (7) and comprises of
individuals who fail to take treatment but would benefit more than its price. The
loss represented in the third term emanate from risk groups where k  0 and a
fraction of individuals in these risk groups take treatment based on their perceived
benefits, which was not the case under the second-best scenario.
The second term in (8) is a pervasive benefit of incomplete information
compared to the second-best scenario (expressed as negative loss). The benefit
emanate from risk groups where 0  k  p and a fraction of individuals in these
risk groups forgo treatment based on their perceived benefits (i.e. their i  0 ),
which was not the case under the second-best scenario, thereby generating welfare
gains.

Under assumptions 1 and 2, if one assumes that i  0, i , that is every
individual perceives a positive benefit from treatment, Theorem 1 is proved from
(8) as the second term drops out and LPRE (0) > L2nd(0). Thus, naturally, VPRE(0) >
V2nd(r*) for r *  [0,1] .

■
B. An ideal role for CER

Often an ideal CER is construed as one having larger sample size. In fact much
of the value of information literature in medicine has focused estimating the
marginal value of a trial with additional patients enrolled (see literature on the
Expected Value of Sample Information, EVSI). However, it is not clear whether,
in the presence of heterogeneity, such an approach to CER, is welfare enhancing.
  2 . Consequently, the welfare loss
For example, as n   ,  
  , s 2 
p
p

post CER of infinite sample will be:

  
 
LPOST ,CER (n  )  k  p 1  ( )  N k  (k  p )  pk  ( )  N k  ( p  k ) ,
 

  

Eq. 9
Note that if (





) < (


s2

) , a CER of infinite size will decrease the magnitude of

loss in the second term but increase the magnitude of loss in the first term as
compared to LPRE and vice versa. Therefore, the value of such a CER study is
indeterminate.
An ideal role for CER would be when, even though the social insurer continue
to believe in the average effect  , it can enable individual belief, i to be a draw
from the distribution Normal( k ,  k2 ) where  k2 is variance for risk-group-specific

effects.9 If coverage is recommended based on the criteria in (6), welfare losses
under post ideal-CER scenario will be a modification of (7) to

  
 
L POST *  k  p 1  ( K )  N k  (k  p )  pk   ( K )  N k  ( p  k )
k 

 k 

Since, (
(

K
)<
k

Eq. 10

K

) > ( ) for  K > p as by construction  K >  for all  K >p and
k
s
(


s

)

for  K ≤ p as by construction  K < 

for all  K ≤p,10

LPOST * (r )  LPRE (r ) r *  [0,1] . This unambiguous dominance of an ideal CER over

pre-CER scenario arises because individuals are able to better self-select their
optimal treatment based on the risk group specific knowledge generated from an
ideal CER. In fact, as  k  0 , (

k

)  1 for k  0 and ( k )  0 for k  0.
k
k

Consequently, LPOST*(r)  L2nd(r). Therefore, one can potentially approach a
second-best scenario under any level of insurance coverage if new CER studies are
able to generate information that can enable individuals to better self-select
treatments based on their risk classes, even if the social insurer is unaware of these
heterogeneous effects. The growing awareness of the potential value of such has
led to considerable federal investment in CER. New legislation has also identified
the need to risk stratify comparative effectiveness.
However, the current data production infrastructure for CER may not be aligned
with the goals of such legislation. The gold standard of data production in medical
care involves controlled experiments, where alternative treatments under
investigation are allocated to a selected group of patients by a chance mechanism.
9

In practice, even in the absence of CER such a situation may arise, when individuals learn by
repeated consumption of therapy (e.g. pharmaceuticals) or physicians are able to anticipate
effect heterogeneity based on baseline risks.
10
Assuming σk = s for all k.

We will refer to such a mechanism as a randomized clinical trial (RCT) henceforth.
We consider two issues within this data generating infrastructure that contributes
towards the inability of current CER infrastructure to resolve incompleteness in
information: selection in RCT enrollment and target parameters for RCTs.

C. Non-ideal design and implementation of CER studies – understanding
selection into randomized trials
Unlike evaluation of experimental therapy where enrollments may be more
likely driven by altruistic motives, CER and economic evaluation is about approved
and existing therapies available to patients. Therefore, there must be a strong
implicit selection process for patients who provide consent to enroll in a CER RCT,
in which they have a non-trivial probabilistic expectation of receiving a treatment
(most likely the new treatment) that they have some difficulty in accessing outside
of the RCT. Such difficulties must be because the cost of accessing the new
treatments outside RCT must be high either due to differential insurance coverage
of the treatments or due to strong physician preferences for one therapy over other.
Consequently, this selection process implies that the anticipated expected
incremental benefits for patients who enroll in a CER RCT must be less than the
cost of acquiring the treatment outside of RCT.11 Otherwise they would have taken
the treatment without enrolling in an RCT. In other words, patients who anticipate
large incremental benefits or incremental harms from new treatment compared to
standard care are less likely to enroll in RCTs.
This brings to question whether the anticipated benefits of treatment ( i ) are
related in any form to the true benefits of treatment bi, even in the absence of formal

Often enrollees are paid a monetary sum to compensate for their time spent
participating in the RCTs.
11

CER. Obviously, if i = bi, then the value of any additional CER becomes zero as
each patient already know their true benefits. On the other hand, the value of CER
is maximized when i ╨bi, where ╨ denotes statistical independence. In practice,
however, it is not uncommon to find some dependency between i and bi. Such
dependencies may arise from biological knowledge about the treatment’s
mechanism of actions, past experiences by physicians on using similar treatments
on certain patient risk-groups and by patient’s own learning by doing mechanism
in a chronic disease setting. Under such dependencies, effect of selection into RCT
becomes non-trivial. Specifically, we show
Theorem 2: A CER randomized trial produces an unbiased estimate of the
population average treatment effect  (in Eq. 2) if and only if i ╨bi. If Corr( i ,
bi,)> 0, RCTs will typically find small positive benefits of treatment.
Proof: We formalize selection into a CER RCT following Roy’s model (1951)
of self-selection using the following notation
Si  I (U i*  0) ,

Eq. 11

where S is an indicator for enrolling in an RCT that is driven by the latent utility U*
for enrolling. Again, without loss of generality, Ui* is interpreted as the anticipated
incremental net benefits (net of costs) of enrolling versus not enrolling in an RCT
for individual i given that the individual anticipates a positive benefit from
treatment (i.e. i  0 )12
U i*  ( R  i  C RCT )  (i  COUT )  (COUT  C RCT )  (1   R )  i, if i  0

Eq. 12

12

If individual anticipates a negative benefit from treatment he would not consider enrolling in
the first place.

where CRCT and COUT are the costs of accessing the treatment within and outside an
RCT respectively;  R is the known random probability of receiving the new
treatment within the CER RCT.
In the presence of uncertainty, the population probability of an RCT enrollment
is given by
  Pr(Si )  E (U i*  0)  Pr(0  i  (COUT  C RCT ) /(1   R ))

Eq. 13

Therefore, only patients with anticipated benefits are positive and less than the
expected incremental cost of accessing treatment outside RCT would enroll.
Interestingly, when COUT  CRCT , enrollment in CER can be quite difficult.
Similarly, as  R decreases, it reduces the cost differential between accessing the
new treatment outside and within the RCT, thereby lowering the probability of RCT
enrollment. These factors severely limit the generalizability of results from CER
RCTs. For example, in one of the few surveys ever conducted to understand the
factors that determine RCT enrollment, it was found that only 2.7% of eligible
patients enrolled in clinical oncology trials (Movsas et al. 2007).
Target Parameters for RCT The target for most RCTs, if not all, is to estimate
an average effect of treatment compared to the control among the RCT enrollees.
However, keeping aside the challenges of implementing a protocol driven agenda,
such an average effect is a weighted average of risk-class-specific effects where the
weights are arbitrarily defined based on the risk class-specific propensity to enroll
in the RCT. Therefore, the target parameter for RCT is given by:
RCT  k wk  k

Eq. 14

where the weights wk   k  Pr(  k ) / k  k  Pr(  k ) and

 k  Pr(0  i  (COUT  CRCT )/(1   R )| i  k ) . The degree of selection in the
trial determines the target parameter of an RCT.

When i ╨bi, F( i | i  k ) = F( i ) k , where F() is the cumulative distribution
function. This implies, k =  , k  wk  Pr(  k ), k  RCT =  (according
to Eq (2)). On the contrary, RCT   if i

╨ bi, since the weights would vary

depending on which risk classes are more likely to enroll in the RCT.
In fact, Corr (i, bi )  0  Corr (wk , k )  0 for i  0 and Corr (wk , k )  0 for

i  0 . Individuals who correctly anticipate large positive or negative benefits
from treatment are less likely to enroll in RCTs. In fact, Eq (13) suggest that the
margin of individual who enroll in RCT anticipates a moderated positive
magnitude of benefits from treatment. Given that Corr( i , bi,)≥ 0, it implies that
RCT results would typically find small positive benefits of a newer treatment and
the generalizability of these results to the whole target population remains
severely compromised.13 ■
Consequently, in the presence of any anticipatory knowledge about true
treatment effects, the average effect from an RCT is not a consistent estimator for
either population average effect or the average effect of any segment of the
population: E ( ˆ RCT )   and E ( ˆ RCT )  k k . Next, we study how such results
can mislead individual level decision making and create inefficiencies both
through population-level coverage decisions and individual treatment selections.
Assumption 3: In what follows, we will assume Corr( i , bi,)> 0 even in the
absence of a formal CER.

13

It is possible that under an ideal symmetric condition, the weights are such that equivalent
portions of the risk‐groups with large positive effects and those with large negative effects select
out of enrolling and the average effect among the enrollees still reflects the population average.
However, such a scenario is highly unlikely.

D. Implications of incompleteness for decision making
Theorem 3: (a) Under Assumption 3, CER RCT may misguide a social planner to
provide coverage on treatments with negative average net health benefits and to
withhold coverage on treatments with positive average net health benefits.
(b) Under Assumptions 3, LPOST (0) > = < LPRE(0). The welfare loss
under post-CER information can be larger than that under pre-CER scenario with
full insurance coverage.
Proof: (a) Based on CER RCT results, the social planner updates her belief
over the average effect of the new treatment using a Bayesian updating rule (Basu
et al. 2011):
      (1   )  ˆ RCT )

Eq. 15

where the weight θ is determined by a weighted average of prior uncertainty  2 and
the sampling variance of ˆ RCT , and calculates the average net monetary benefits of
treatment to be   p . Under Assumption 3, Theorem 2 proves that E ( ˆ RCT )  0
but E ( ˆ RCT )     . Therefore, since E ( )   , E(   p ) < E( (   p ) ) if
ˆ RCT )   and E(   p ) > E( (   p ) ) if E ( 
ˆ RCT )   .
E(

This implies that CER RCT may misguide a social planner to provide coverage
on treatments with negative average net health benefits and to withhold coverage
on treatments with positive average net health benefits. This also highlights the fact
that economic evaluations based on CER studies can be misleading. ■
(b)

Individual beliefs, i , about comparative effects following

the CER RCT using a similar Bayesian updating rule (Basu et al. 2011):
i  i  i  (1  i )  ˆ RCT )

Eq. 16

where the weights θi are determined by a weighted average of prior uncertainty s2
and the sampling variance of ˆ RCT . It is important to note that even though original
beliefs may have been consistent, i.e., E(i)  bi , after CER, E(i)  bi . Most
importantly, i  i if i  0 , under Assumption 3, since E ( ˆ RCT )  0 . That is,
some patients who would have had originally anticipated a negative effect from
treatment, may be rightfully so, are now led to believe in a larger, presumably,
positive effect from treatment. Similarly, patients who would have, rightfully
anticipated large benefits from treatment, would have their updated anticipation
moderated by the small effect size estimated in the RCTs. Thus the average result
from a CER study that is based on voluntary participation actually misleads
individuals about their own comparative effectiveness. The welfare loss with the
post CER information is given by:

  ( ) 
 ( ) 
LPOST ,CER   k  p 1  ( k i )  N k  (k  p )   pk  ( k i )  N k  ( p  k ) ,
sk ( i) 

 sk ( i) 

Eq. 17
 ( )

where k (i)  E (i|i  k ) and sk2 ( i)  Var ( i| i  k ) . Since k i < = >
sk ( i)

s

for any k, it proves that welfare loss under post-CER information can be larger than
that under pre-CER scenario with full insurance coverage. Only when
for αk ≥ p and

k ( i) 

sk ( i)
s

k ( i) 

for αk < p, the CER infrastructure is welfare enhancing
sk ( i)
s

(LPOST, CER < LPRE,CER).

III. Learning through Diversification (LtD): A New Framework for Data
Production
As we have shown in the previous sections, current CER framework that relies
on voluntary participation fails to consistently inform either the population-level or
individual-level comparative effect parameters and cannot potentially lead us
towards the second–best solutions (in fact, it may lower welfare through evidencebased misguidance).
Manski (2009) proposed that one way a social decision maker can maximize
welfare is through fractional allocations, where a random fraction of the patient
population received one treatment while the other receives the alternative. Manski
argues that, given the ambiguity of evidence on counterfactual outcomes, such an
allocation would maximize a broad set of utilitarian welfare function for the social
decision maker. Manski (2009) also points out that such an allocation automatically
creates randomized experiments, which are particularly important for learning
treatment responses. The current proposal builds on this idea of “diversified
treatment” proposed by Manski (2009). However, our proposal takes into account
two realities in the context of health care.
First is that it is almost impossible, at least in the United States, to completely
restrict “receipt” of a treatment that has crossed the regulatory and evidentiary
hurdles and has been approved on the basis of safety and efficacy. Therefore
diversification of treatment allocation in terms of “receipt”, which is essential to
answer CER and PCOR type question, is usually not possible.
Second, the social decision maker in the context of health care is typically
involved on deciding on insurance coverage of medical treatment, while individual
subjects are typically left to decide on the choice of treatment given insurance
coverage. Therefore, a social decision maker’s problem can be viewed to be a twostep process (Deheja 2005). Under any information set, first physician decides

whether to prescribe treatment for each individual. Second, given this allocation,
the social decision maker decides on the level of coverage for treatment. To the
extent that one can combine the ideas of diversified treatment for the purpose of
learning to that of the two-step process of social decision making on optimal
coverage, one can improve the decision making for both the individual patients and
the social decision maker. This is what the “Learning through Diversification”
(LtD) infrastructure seeks to accomplish and potentially mimic the ideal CER
designs discussed in Section II-B.

Fractional Coverage
via Technology drafts
Full Coverage
for sub‐groups

Outcomes Evaluation

No Coverage
for sub‐groups
Sufficiency of
Crossing Evidentiary
Thresholds

Figure 1: The Learning through diversification (LtD) infrastructure.
The idea behind this new data production infrastructure for CER in illustrated
in Figure 1 and can be expressed in the following bullet points:
1. Fractional Coverage can be achieved using a technology lottery, Đ: For
each new product, develop a random order based on birth dates so that this
new product with uncertain effectiveness profile will be paid at varying
levels by insurance in the first year. That is, such coverage creates a

completely stochastic distribution of co-insurance rates in the population,
F(bi | Đ) = F(bi). Note that the lottery is done anew for each new technology
so that the probability that any one person would be denied coverage for all
new technologies will approach zero with increasing number of
technologies. Thus, the initial decision by a social insurer follows the idea
proposed by Manski (2009) to make fractional treatment allocation.
However, instead a binary assignment of access, we use a continuously
varying cost of access, which will be important for assessing treatment
effect heterogeneity (as shown below).
2. Outcomes Evaluation: Using the randomization inherent in the lottery,
evaluating patient outcomes across different levels of coinsurance rates will
directly answer the economic evaluation questions on expanding coverage
for the target population. Additionally, the lottery would serve as a perfect
instrumental variable to study the comparative effectiveness of receiving
the new product versus its competitor and the heterogeneity in these effects
in the population. To the extent such analyses can discover nuanced
subgroups with higher than average benefits, subgroup-specific economic
evaluations can be conducted to examine whether full coverage is warranted
in these sub population. Obtaining precise information on comparative
effectiveness within specific subgroups can itself drive demand to be
selective in a positive way.
3. Sequential Decision Making: Based on the outcome evaluation results,
fractional allocation rules can be adapted over time for specific risk groups.
For example, among risk groups where estimated ˆk is expected to be
positive above a certain evidentiary threshold may receive full payments for
the treatment under the insurance and vice versa. Fractional allocation
would continue within risk groups where ambiguity persists.

A. Key Features of the Learning through Diversification Infrastructure
Coinsurance (demand price) as an instrument
The outcomes evaluation part of the LtD framework employs the lottery as an
instrumental variable (IV) to study comparative effectiveness of the new
technology compared to controls and also explore treatment effect heterogeneity
(Heckman 1996; Heckman 1999, 2001; Heckman and Vytlacil, 1999; Heckman et
al., 2006, Basu 2012). A good instrumental variable must be orthogonal to the
confounders (i.e. they are not contaminated) and is a strong predictor of treatment
receipt. Traditional IV analyses focus around the debate on whether a chosen
instrument is contaminated, given that the strength of the instrument is testable. In
the LtD framework, the lottery, by design, is orthogonal to all confounders and
therefore side-steps the typical debates in this literature. What is more interesting
is that the strength of the instrument is driven by variation in out-of-pocket
payments by patients that in turn will depend on the market price of the new
technology and the price elasticity of demand. Although this is a testable feature of
analyses, two issues are worth pointing out. First, the LtD infrastructure would be
most efficient in data production for CER for new technologies that come at a high
price tag, which aligns with the notion that most welfare can be generated if we can
properly identify people would and would not benefit from the most expensive
technologies. Second, the response of manufacturers of expensive technologies to
artificially reduce price in order to undermine the LtD infrastructure may act against
their bottom-line as they would send a wrong signal about the quality of their
product and also delay production of evidence that would enable them to demand a
higher price from payers.

The target parameters in the LtD infrastructure
The LtD infrastructure can be used to generate consistent estimates of both k
and  by following the theory and methods of local instrumental variable
approaches (Heckman and Vytlacil 1999, 2001; Heckman et al. 2006, Basu 2014).14
In summary, the probability of treatment choice given the lottery can be represented
by p(Đ,  ) and estimated from data at hand. For any outcome, Y, under regular IV
assumptions, the marginal treatment effects (Heckman and Vytlacil 1999) are
identified by
E (Y | Đ , )
 E ((Y1  Y0 )| ,V  v )  MTE (,v ) ,
p

Eq. 18

where Y = D*Y1 + (1 - D)*Y0 is the observed outcome and V~Uniform[0,1] by
construction.
MTE is perhaps the most nuanced estimable effect. It identifies an effect for
an individual who is at the margin of choice such that one’s levels of  and Đ are
just balanced by one’s level of unobserved factors V, i.e. P (Đ , )  V . Basu
(2014) extends the LIV methods to identify Person-centered treatment (PeT)
effects, which, for persons who choose treatment, follow
EV|,P ( Đ ),D E (Y1  Y0 | , P (Đ ), D  1)
P (Đ )
P (Đ )1 0 MTE (,v )dv
= E (Y1  Y0 |,V  P (Đ )) =

Eq. 19

Similarly, conditional effect for a person who did not choose treatment is
obtained by integrating MTEs over values of V greater than p. Mean treatment

14

Note that it is important to pay close attention to dealing with essential heterogeneity within
the LtD infrastructure. This is because treatment receipt will be correlated with factors such as
income (because of the price differentials that the lottery creates), which in turn may be
correlated with gains and losses from the new treatment.

effect parameters, αk (Eq. 1) or  (Eq. 2) are readily obtained by average PeT
effects over respective subgroups (Basu 2014). Thus the LtD structure can be
used to recover consistent estimates of the decision relevant parameters.
Welfare effects
Let’s take a two period model in which the first period is the Pre-CER period
during which a CER study is being conducted. As the end of the first period the
CER study results are disseminated and therefore the second period represents the
post-CER world. Therefore, under assumptions 1, 2 and 3, total welfare loss over
the two periods in a CER-based data production world is given as:
LCER = LPRE,CER + LPOST,CER

Eq. 20

where LPRE,CER and LPOST,CER are given in Eq(7) and Eq(17) respectively.
Under the LtD framework of data production, welfare losses in both periods will
be different. Let the total welfare loss over the two periods in a LtD-based data
production world is given as:
LLtD = LPRE,LtD + LPOST,LtD
Since the LtD infrastructure allows for consistent estimation of the mean treatment
effect parameters, in the second period, subjective beliefs about the benefits of
treatment will align with the true values for subjects in each risk groups, E (ˆk )  k
. Moreover, given that these estimates were generated using data at the population
scale, (

ˆk
ˆ
)  1 for k  0 and ( k )  0 for k  0. Consequently,
ˆk
ˆk


LPOST,LtD    p 1  (
k



ˆk 
)  N k  (k  p )  p
ˆk 

k



 ˆk 
( )  N k  ( p  k )  0
 ˆk 

Eq. 21

Therefore, an LtD infrastructure will always be welfare enhancing compared to the
CER infrastructure as long as:
= (LPRE,LtD + LPOST,LtD ) - (LPRE,CER + LPOST,CER) <0

LLtD – LCER

 (LPRE,LtD ) < (LPRE,CER + LPOST,CER)
That is fractional allocation should be designed in a way that the loss during the
initial data generation process is not greater than the combined losses under the
CER infrastructure both during and after the data generation process. For the most
power for analyses and consistency within the LtD infrastructure, it may be useful
to set the mean coinsurance rate to be 0.5. The welfare losses, if any, during the
data production period (that may can one or few years) can be easily recuperated
from the welfare gains from LtD in the post data production period that typically
lasts for many years.

Requirements of insurance system for implementation of the LtD
infrastructure
It is natural for the LtD infrastructure to thrive within nationalized health care
systems and integrated health care delivery systems to prevent attrition of patients.
However, even in a competitive health insurance market an LtD infrastructure can
be implemented when a central body helps generate the lotteries and all the private
and public payers offer coverage following the lottery. In fact, no one payer would
find it to be in their interest to break away from this commitment as otherwise it
would invite adverse selection into their plan due to the providing generous
coverage of new technologies.

A new era for outcomes research
The power of the LtD infrastructure not only allows the study of one CER
question by a central body. It opens up a new era of outcomes research for all
applied researchers. Any prospective or retrospective observational study
evaluating a new technology in terms of either safety or effectiveness or both using
novel patient-centered outcomes would benefit from the power of the lottery to
generate variations that would enable them to make causal inferences (Heckman
1996). The LtD infrastructure can have the sufficient sample size to test
heterogeneous treatment effects across nuanced subgroups, which is impossible
within a traditional trial framework. Moreover, with the growth of people with
multiple comorbid diseases, the LtD infrastructure can provide precise answers to
how different treatments interact with each other and how to create the optimal
bundle of treatment strategies in order to treat complex patients. Thus the LtD
infrastructure has the potential to impact almost all fields of study in social sciences,
public health and medicine, and help in the formulation of payment reforms that
are based on episodes of care.

The expanded role of Health IT
Naturally, strong synergies exist between the LtD infrastructure and the Health
IT systems that are designed to capture detailed data. Large national electronic
databases are already being assembled in the context of CER. However, serious
challenges remains as to how to detect signals from such databases based on which
patient care can be changes. A fundamental problem is the identification of causal
effects from such data. The LtD infrastructure can naturally lend tremendous
identification properties for all types of evaluative questions.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
New medical treatment often gets approved based on its potential safety
profile and its incremental efficacy compared to either placebo or a basic control
treatment. Often superiority of the new treatment is not established and its
comparative effectiveness compared to current clinical practice remains
ambiguous. Nevertheless, the treatment is introduced for consumption at a
substantial price in anticipation of a positive effectiveness claims based on
efficacy results. Variability in effectiveness profile remains far from known.
Under such ambiguity, a social insurer faces the challenge of deciding whether to
pay for the treatment. In the US, public health insurance provider like the
Medicare usually extend full coverage of these new treatments as long as there is
positive efficacy signals. In UK and other countries, that formally look at the
budget impact of coverage by comparing the costs of treatments (inclusive of its
price) to the projected effectiveness based on efficacy signals. When coverage is
allowed, a large welfare loss may ensue even when the new treatment can
genuinely produce higher effectiveness in a certain margin of the population. This
is due to the lack of evidence of how to match patients to alternative treatments.
In this paper, I show that under the status quo policy of extending coverage to
a new treatment in the absence on complete information on its effectiveness
profile, welfare loss can be substantial. These losses can be minimized by
investments in studies that aims at generating such evidence. However, I also
show, following a Roy’s model of sorting behavior, that the current infrastructure
on data production for this purpose, suffer for severe self-selection issues since
the incentives to enroll in research studies is eroded by the low demand prices of
obtaining medical care outside these studies. Consequently, the parameters
identified from these studies do not inform any of the decision-relevant

parameters, either at the individual or the population level. I show that if one takes
the normative approach of social insurer who is forward looking and wants to
maximize any given social welfare function over a duration of time period
(typically over the longevity of the new technology being considered), then it
makes sense for the social insurer, irrespective of what coverage decision is made
today, to device ways to learn about variations in incremental effectiveness of
treatment in the population so that she can encourage/discourage appropriate
subgroups to uptake/discard the new treatment. In fact, generation of such public
evidence can directly inform individuals within the population to use this new
treatment appropriately without additional effort by the social insurer, thereby
approaching the second-best solutions. Based on this normative framework, I
propose a positive Learning through Diversification (LtD) infrastructure, through
which a social insurer can achieve her objectives.
The LtD infrastructure comprises of introducing the new treatment with
fractional coverage based random individual-level co-insurance rates. One then
uses these co-insurance rates as an artificially created but an almost perfect
instrumental variable to study treatment effect heterogeneity based on a spectrum
of econometric tools available to researchers. Both clinical guidelines and
coverage decisions can then be sequentially revised to reflect this evidence. I
show that under very non-stringent conditions, the LtD infrastructure will be
welfare enhancing compared to the current data production infrastructure, such as
CER.
One aspect of the LtD infrastructure that would appear to be politically
challenging is the notion of fractional coverage, albeit it is for a short time during
the introduction of the new treatment. Although a full legal and ethical
consideration of such random allocation is beyond the scope of this paper, an
important note to point out is that unlike earlier discussion in this line of

reasoning that revolved around quasi-random treatment prescription (Manski
2008), the LtD infrastructure does not withhold treatment from anyone but rather
changes the cost of accessing it in a random fashion. The potential for patient
welfare and the richness of scientific and policy question that this infrastructure
can answer should play a part in deciding its ultimate feasibility.

References
ARROW, K.J. (1963): Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical
Care. The American Economic Review, 53(5), 941-973.
BASU, A. (2011): Economics of individualization in comparative
effectiveness research and a basis for a patient-centered health
care. Journal of Health Economics, 30(3), 549-559.
BASU, A. (2014): Person-Centered Treatment (PeT) effects using
instrumental variables. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No w18056. Journal of Applied Econometrics, (In
press).
BASU, A., A.B. JENA, and T.J. PHILIPSON (2011): The impact of
comparative effectiveness research on health and health care
spending. Journal of Health Economics, 30(4), 695-706.
DEHEJIA, R.H. (2005): Program evaluation as a decision problem.
Journal of Econometrics, 125, 141-173.
GARBER, A., and C. PHELPS (1997): Economic foundations of costeffectiveness analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 16, 1-31.
HECKMAN, J.J. (1996): Randomization as an instrumental variable. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(2), 336-341.
HECKMAN, J.J. (1997): Instrumental variables: A study of implicit
behavioral assumptions used in making program evaluations.
Journal of Human Resources, 32(3), 441-462.
HECKMAN, J.J. (2001): Accounting for heterogeneity, diversity and
general equilibrium in evaluating social programmes. The
Economic Journal, 111, F654-F699.
HECKMAN, J.J., S. URZUA, and E. VYTLACIL (2006): Understanding
instrumental variables in models with essential heterogeneity.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 389-432.
HECKMAN, J.J., and E. VYTLACIL (1999): Local instrumental variables
and latent variable models for identifying and bounding treatment
effects. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96(8),
4730-34.
HECKMAN, J.J., and E. VYTLACIL (2001): Local instrumental variables.
In C. Hsiao, K. Morimue, and J.L. Powell (Eds.) Nonlinear
Statistical Modeling: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International
Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics: Essays in the
Honor of Takeshi Amemiya, Cambridge University Press: New
York, 1-46.

HECKMAN, J.J., and E. VYTLACIL (2005): Structural equations,
treatment effects and econometric policy evaluation. Econometrica,
73(3), 669-738.
MANNING, W.G., and M. S. MARQUIS (1996): Health insurance: the
trade-off between risk pooling and moral hazard. Journal of Health
Economics, 15 (5), 609–639.
MANSKI, C. (2000): Identification problems and decisions under
ambiguity: empirical analysis of treatment response and
normative analysis of treatment choice. Journal of Econometrics
95, 415–442.
MANSKI, C. (2004): Statistical treatment rules for heterogeneous
populations. Econometrica 72, 1221–1246.
MANSKI, C. (2009): The 2009 Lawrence R. Klein Lecture: Diversified
treatment under ambiguity. International Economic Review, 50(4),
1013-1041.
MELTZER, D. (1997): Accounting for future costs in medical cost-effectiveness
analysis. Journal of Health Economics, 16, 33-64.
MOVSAS, B., J. MOUGHAN, J. OWEN, L. R. COIA, M. J. ZELEFSKY, G.
HANKS, and J. F. WILSON (2007): Who enrolls onto clinical
oncology trials? A radiation Patterns Of Care Study analysis.
International Journal of Radiation Oncology*Biology*Physics, 68(4),
1145-50
PAULY, M.V. (1968): The economics of moral hazard: Comment. The
American Economic Review, 58(3), 531-537.
PAULY, M.V. (2008): Adverse selection and moral hazard: Implications for
health insurance markets. In Sloan F, Kasper H (eds.), Incentives
and Choice in Health and Health Care, MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
PAULY, M.V., and F.E. BLAVIN. (2008) Moral hazard in insurance, valuebased cost sharing, and the benefits of blissful ignoring. Journal of
Health Economics, 27, 1407-1417.
PHILIPSON, T. J. (1997): The evaluation of new health care technology:
The labor economics of statistics. Journal of Econometrics, 76,
375-395.
ROY, A.D. (1951): Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford
Economic Papers 3(2): 135-146.
WEINSTEIN, M., and R. ZECKHAUSER (1973): Critical ratios and efficient
allocation. Journal of Public Economics, 2, 147-58.

