                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                            Jianjun Miao
                                            Pengfei Wang
                                               Tao Zha

                                        Working Paper 20377
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20377


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




We thank Mark Bils, Larry Christiano, Marty Eichenbaum, Jordi Gali, Lars Hansen, Simon Gilchrist,
Pat Higgins, Lee Ohanian, Sergio Rebelo, Richard Rogerson, Giorgio Valente, Gianluca Violante,
Wei Xiong, and seminar participants at University of Pennsylvania, University of North Carolina,
the NBER Summer Institute, the AFR Summer Institute of Economics and Finance, the PBC Finance
School of Tsinghua University, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, University of Toronto, Vanderbilt
University, and University of Rochester for helpful discussions. The research is supported in part by
the National Science Foundation Grant SES 1558486 through the NBER and by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China Research Grants (71473168, 71473169, and 71633003). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta or the Federal Reserve System or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20377.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Jianjun Miao, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Discount Shock, Price-Rent Dynamics, and the Business Cycle
Jianjun Miao, Pengfei Wang, and Tao Zha
NBER Working Paper No. 20377
August 2014, Revised January 2020
JEL No. E22,E32,E44

                                              ABSTRACT

The price-rent ratio is highly volatile and predicts future returns for commercial real estate. Price-rent
variations in commercial real estate also tend to comove with investment and output. We develop a
general equilibrium model that explicitly introduces a rental market and incorporates collateral constraints
on production as a key ingredient. Our estimation identifies discount-rate shocks as the most important
factor in (1) driving price-rent variations, (2) producing the long-horizon predictability of real estate
returns, and (3) linking the dynamics in commercial real estate to those in the production sector.


Jianjun Miao                                         Tao Zha
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Boston University                                    Emory University
270 Bay State Road                                   Rich Memorial Building
Boston, MA 02215                                     1602 Fishburne Drive
miaoj@bu.edu                                         Atlanta, GA 30322-2240
                                                     and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
                                                     and also NBER
                                                     tzha@emory.edu
Pengfei Wang
Department of Economics
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Hong Kong
and HSBC Business School
Peking University
Shenzhen, China
pfwang@phbs.pku.edu.cn
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                              1

                                              I. Introduction

  The rise and fall of real estate prices in the past decades and the 2008 financial crisis
triggered by the collapse of real estate prices have generated a great deal of research on the
impact of real estate prices on the macroeconomy. Most research has focused on consumers’
behavior and the residential real estate market. When we study firms’ investment dynamics,
it is often the commercial real estate market that becomes relevant. In a recent paper,
Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2012) provide micro evidence that links the commercial real
estate price to investment. They estimate that a $1 increase in a representative U.S. firm’s
value of real estate raises its investment by $0.06. At the aggregate level, however, the link
between commercial real estate prices and investment dynamics has been largely unexplored.
  In this paper we develop a medium-size dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE)
model and show that this model is capable of reproducing quantitatively a variety of stylized
facts about the commercial real estate price and the business cycle if one incorporates two
key ingredients: shocks to households’ discount rate and collateral constraints on firms’ pro-
duction. We confront our model with financial and macroeconomic time series and estimate
the model using the Bayesian method to account for the following facts:
    (1) Volatility: Commercial real estate price fluctuates much more than rent and output
         do. Over the past 20 years, while the volatility (measured by the standard deviation
         of quarterly changes) is 1.245% for rent and 0.697% for output, the volatility of real
         estate prices is 4.171%.
    (2) Long-horizon predictability: Price-rent variation predicts long-horizon real estate re-
         turns.1 Simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions of real estate returns at
         different horizons on the rent-price ratio (the valuation ratio) show that the slope
         coefficients are significantly positive and they increase with the horizon and that the
         fit measure, R2 , also increases with the horizon. Figure 1 plots the contemporaneous
         price-rent ratio against real estate returns of the subsequent five years to capture the
         key fact: high prices relative to rents have preceded many years of low returns and
         low prices have preceded high returns.
    (3) Comovement: The price-rent ratio tends to comove with output as demonstrated by
         Figure 2. The contemporaneous correlation between output and price-rent ratio is
         0.83 for log level and 0.48 for year-over-year growth.2
  How to reproduce all these macro-finance facts within one structural framework has been a
central but challenging task in the macro-finance literature. Our model builds on the DSGE

  1See   Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov (2012) for an extensive survey of this literature.
  2When    output and the price-rent ratio are log-linearly detrended, the correlation is 0.47. When these
series are hp-filtered, the correlation is 0.63.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                        2

literature with a combination of two distinctive features: we introduce a rental market
of commercial real estate and assume that firms face collateral constraints when financing
working capital. Without modeling the rental market explicitly, the existing macroeconomic
models (Iacoviello, 2005; Iacoviello and Neri, 2010; Liu, Wang, and Zha, 2013; Liu, Miao, and
Zha, 2016, for example) show that real estate price and rent move in comparable magnitude
so that there is little price-rent variation in comparison to the data. But price-rent variation
is central to both the long-horizon predictability of real estate returns (Cochrane, 2011;
Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov, 2013) and the business cycle (Figure 2).
  By controlling for an array of commonly used shocks such as technology and labor supply
shocks, we find that shocks to the discount rate are the key to generating the data dynamics
that quantitatively reproduce stylized facts (1)-(3). The key intuition is that the rental price
of commercial real estate is determined by the marginal product of the real estate property
in firms’ production, but the real estate price is a forward looking variable, equal to the
discounted present value of future rents. Shocks to such a discount are intertemporal and
affect future appreciations of the price; they do not directly affect the current rent.
  The discount-rate shock is a parsimonious way of modeling the variation in discount rates
stressed by Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), Campbell and Ammer (1993) and Cochrane
(2011) and can sometimes be interpreted as a sentiment shock as in Barberis, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998) and Dumas, Kurshev, and Uppal (2009). In the macroeconomic literature
(Smets and Wouters, 2003; Primiceri, Schaumburg, and Tambalotti, 2006; Galı́, 2015, for
example), the discount-rate shock is called a “preference” shock to capture shifts in aggregate
demand; its asset pricing implications were first discussed by Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, Luo,
and Rebelo (2016), who construct a general equilibrium model of an endowment economy to
show that discount-rate shocks can generate the observed risk premium and weak correlation
between consumption growth and stock returns. In their model, however, these shocks do
not affect macroeconomic movements or generate the long-horizon predictability of excess
stock returns.
  We follow Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, Luo, and Rebelo (2016) by introducing discount-
rate shocks and extend their model to a production economy with an emphasis on the
implications of commercial real estate prices on investment and the business cycle. One key
contribution of our paper is to show that in our production economy model, discount-rate
shocks can generate price-rent fluctuations over the business cycle. Because firms’ collateral
assets provide the collateral (liquidity) premium, discount-rate shocks can also generate the
long-horizon predictability of excess real estate returns. These discoveries are important
for several reasons. First, the long-horizon predictability is prevalent in the asset pricing
literature in general and the real estate literature in particular. Which shock in general
equilibrium models can generate the data dynamics reproducing the predictability result has
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                    3

been an open and challenging issue. Second, the discount-rate shock in our model is an
macroeconomic shock commonly used in the literature. What is new in our paper is the
finding that the collateral channel for firms’ production, as documented by Chaney, Sraer,
and Thesmar (2012), is essential for reproducing facts (1)-(3). Third, our estimation shows
that the discount-rate shock is an empirically important source for the linkage between the
real estate market and the business cycle. Moreover, the quantitative importance of the
real estate value for investment at the macro level is consistent with the findings of Chaney,
Sraer, and Thesmar (2012) at the micro level.
  The existing general equilibrium models with real estate markets typically fail to generate
price-rent variation.3 One exception is Favilukis, Ludvigson, and Nieuwerburgh (2017), who
study a calibrated two-sector overlapping-generations model of housing and non-housing
production in which heterogeneous households face limited opportunities to insure against
aggregate and idiosyncratic risks. They examine how a relaxation of financing constraints
leads to a large boom in house prices. Another exception is Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante
(2017), who study house prices and their impact on household consumption by incorporating
several macroeconomic shocks. They introduce a rental market in residential real estate and
find that shocks to agent beliefs about future demand of real estate are the main driver of
price-rent variation. Their belief shocks are similar to our discount-rate shocks in the sense
that both types of shocks affect the expectations of future house price appreciation.
  Our emphasis is different: we develop a general equilibrium model with a production
economy that is tractable to be estimated against the data and focus on some key asset
pricing aspects of the general equilibrium model. We find that discount-rate shocks are
the only macroeconomic shocks driving the large movements of commercial real estate price
relative to rent. In our model, moreover, price-rent variation generated by discount-rate
shocks is central to the dynamic interactions between the commercial real estate price and
the business cycle. Traditional business-cycle shocks, such as shocks to technology and
labor supply, cannot explain price-rent movements that are quantitatively comparable to
the observed time series.
  Although price-rent variation is necessary for the long-horizon predictability of real estate
returns, it is by no means sufficient. We show that in response to discount-rate shocks,
firms’ real estate values used as collateral play a key role in generating both the long-horizon
predictability and the high volatility of real estate prices observed in the data. The rise

  3
   See Campbell, Davis, Gallin, and Martin (2009); Piazzesi and Schneider (2009); Kiyotaki, Michaelides,
and Nikolov (2011); Caplin and Leahy (2011); Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2011); Pintus and Wen
(2013); Head, Lloyd-Ellis, and Sun (2014); Justiniano, Primiceri, and Tambalotti (2017) for models of hous-
ing. This literature focuses on residential housing but does not reproduce all the three facts (1)-(3) simulta-
neously in the dynamic general equilibrium framework.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                          4

of real estate prices relaxes a firm’s collateral constraint and thus facilitates its production,
while the rental price determined by the marginal product of real estate property does not
move much. This result underlies the comovement between price-rent ratio and output. In
the decomposition of real estate price, our estimation reveals that collateral values contribute
to one third of the volatility of real estate prices while rents contribute very little.
  Our estimated discount-rate shock itself exhibits an extremely small volatility (0.067%),
but this small persistent shock contributes to not only all of the observed large price-rent
fluctuation (3.91%) but also 48% of the observed investment fluctuation (1.68%) and a quar-
ter of the observed output fluctuation (0.70%). Although the discount-rate shock connects
the dynamics in the real estate market to those in the production sector, it is the model’s
internal transmission mechanism that amplifies this small shock into the large volatilities
of price-rent ratio, investment, and output. Thus, our findings demonstrate the importance
of incorporating discount-rate shocks and firms’ collateral values in an otherwise standard
DSGE model, in order to account for various asset pricing facts and their relationship to the
business cycle.
  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II we construct a medium-size
general equilibrium model with a production economy. In Section III we estimate the model
against several U.S. time series, report the estimated results, analyze the impulse responses,
and discuss the linkage between price-rent dynamics and aggregate fluctuations. Section IV
presents the empirical results of the predictability of real estate returns and the volatilities of
real estate price, investment, and output. Section V studies a simplified version of the model
to gain intuition into our empirical findings by deriving the closed-form theoretical results.
Section VI concludes the paper. Detailed derivations, proofs, and estimation procedures are
provided in appendices.




                                        II. The model

  We study an economy with a representative household, a continuum of intermediate-goods
producers, and a continuum of heterogeneous final-goods firms. The representative household
maximizes its utility and accumulates physical capital. There are a variety of intermediate
goods and each good is produced by a continuum of identical competitive producers. The
heterogeneous final-goods firms are indexed by idiosyncratic productivity shocks. They trade
commercial real estate properties among themselves and rent out real estate properties to
intermediate-goods producers. Financial frictions occur in the final-goods sector; firms in
this sector borrow against their real estate value to finance working capital.
                DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                              5

II.1. Households. The representative household maximizes the expected lifetime utility
                          ∞
                                                         Nt1+ν
                         X                                    
                                 t
                      E0     Θt β log (Ct − γCt−1 ) − ψt         ,
                         t=0
                                                         1+ν
where Ct and Nt represent consumption and labor supply. The parameters β ∈ (0, 1) and
γ ∈ (0, 1) represent the subjective discount rate and habit formation. The variables θt ≡
Θt /Θt−1 and ψt are exogenous shocks to the discount rate and labor supply and follow the
AR(1) processes as

                              log θt = (1 − ρθ ) log θ + ρθ log θt−1 + σθ εθ,t ,                       (1)
                            log ψt = (1 − ρψ ) log ψ + ρψ log ψt−1 + σψ εψ,t ,                         (2)

where εθ,t and εψ,t are iid standard normal random variables. Albuquerque, Eichenbaum,
Luo, and Rebelo (2016) introduce discount-rate shocks like ours as demand shocks in their
endowment economy to study asset pricing implications.4 In our model with a production
economy, we will test the importance of discount-rate shocks in linking price-rent variation
to the business cycle.
  The household chooses consumption Ct , investment It , the capital utilization rate ut , and
government bonds Bt+1 subject to intertemporal budget constraint
                                 It   Bt+1
                          Ct +      +      ≤ wt Nt + Rkt (ut Kt ) + Dt + Bt ,
                                 Zt   Rf t
where Kt , wt , Dt , Rkt , and Rf t represent respectively capital, wage, dividend income, the
rental price of capital, and the risk-free interest rate. The variable Zt represents an aggregate
investment-specific technology shock that has both permanent and transitory components
(Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell, 1997; Krusell, Ohanian, Rı́os-Rull, and Violante, 2000):

                                        Zt = Ztp vzt , Ztp = Zt−1
                                                              p
                                                                  gzt ,
                           log gzt = (1 − ρz ) log gz + ρz log(gz,t−1 ) + σz εzt ,                     (3)
                                    log vzt = ρvz log vz,t−1 + σvz εvz ,t ,                            (4)

where εz,t and εvz ,t are iid standard normal random variables.
  Investment is subject to quadratic adjustment costs (Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans,
2005). Capital evolves according to the law of motion
                                           "                 2 #
                                                Ω     It
                      Kt+1 = (1 − δt ) Kt + 1 −          − gI      It ,
                                                 2 It−1
where δt ≡ δ(ut ) is the capital depreciation rate in period t, gI denotes the steady state
growth rate of investment, and Ω is the investment adjustment cost parameter.
  4Preference   shocks used by Galı́ (2015) and other macroeconomic models relate to the log level of Θt .
The shock process of log θt relates to the discount rate β itself. We call it a discount-rate shock.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                              6

II.2. Intermediate-goods producers. There is a continuum of intermediate goods. Each
intermediate good j ∈ [0, 1] is produced by a continuum of identical competitive producers
of measure unity. The representative producer owns a constant-returns-to-scale technology
to produce good j by hiring labor Nt (j), renting real estate property Ht (j) from final-goods
firms, and renting capital Kt (j) from the household. The producer’s decision problem is

                      max              PXt (j)Xt (j) − wt Nt (j) − Rct Ht (j) − Rkt Kt (j),
                Nt (j),Ht (j),Kt (j)

                 h                 iα
where Xt (j) ≡ At Kt1−φ (j) Htφ (j) Nt1−α (j), PXt (j) represents the competitive price of
good j, and Rct is the rental price of commercial real estate. The aggregate neutral technology
shock At consists of permanent and transitory components (Aguiar and Gopinath, 2007):

                                          At = Apt νa,t , Apt = Apt−1 gat ,
                          log gat = (1 − ρa ) log ga + ρa log(ga,t−1 ) + σa εat ,                  (5)
                                       log νa,t = ρva log νa,t−1 + σva εva,t ,                     (6)

where εat and εva,t are iid standard normal random variables.

II.3. Final-goods firms. There is a continuum of heterogeneous competitive firms. Each
firm i ∈ [0, 1] combines intermediate goods xit (j) to produce final consumption goods with
the standard aggregation technology
                                                                  Z   1                   
                                        yti   =       ait   exp            log xit (j)dj       ,   (7)
                                                                   0


where ait represents an idiosyncratic productivity shock drawn independently and identically
from a fixed distribution with pdf f (a) and cdf F (a) on the (0, ∞) support. Firm i pur-
chases intermediate good j at the price PXt (j). The total spending on working capital is
R1
 0
   PXt (j)xit (j)dj. The firm finances its working capital with the standard collateral constraint
as in Jermann and Quadrini (2012) and Buera and Moll (2013),
                                          Z       1
                                                      PXt (j)xit (j)dj ≤ λpt hit ,                 (8)
                                              0

where 0 < λ < 1, hit is commercial real estate held by firm i, and pt is the real estate
price. We do not introduce an exogenous shock to λ because this shock cannot generate
the observed variation and persistence of real estate price as shown by Liu, Wang, and Zha
(2013) and Kaplan, Mitman, and Violante (2017). The collateral constraint is not always
binding; whether a particular firm’s collateral constraint binds depends on the realization of
its individual productivity.
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                        7

  Firm i trades real estate properties and rents some of them to the producers. The firm’s
income comes from profits and rents; its flow-of-funds constraint is given by
                                              Z 1
                   i        i      i       i
                  dt + pt (ht+1 − ht ) = yt −     PXt (j)xit (j)dj + Rct hit ,                              (9)
                                                                 0

where dit denotes dividend and the initial condition hi0 is given. Subject to (7), (8), and (9),
the firm’s objective is to maximize the discounted present value of future dividends
                                                                 ∞
                                                                 X β t Λt
                                            max             E0              dit ,
                                        xit (j),hit+1 ≥0
                                                                 t=0
                                                                       Λ0
where the marginal utility of consumption is
                                            Θt               Θt+1
                                 Λt =              − βγEt
                                        Ct − γCt−1        Ct+1 − γCt
and β t Λt /Λ0 is the household’s stochastic discount factor (SDF).

II.4. Equilibrium. The markets clear in real estate, government bond, and intermediate-
goods sectors:
 Z 1         Z 1                       Z             1                          h                 iα
      i
     ht di =     Ht (j)dj = 1, Bt = 0,                   xit (j)di = Xt (j) = At Kt1−φ (j) Htφ (j) Nt1−α (j) .
  0             0                                0

Since the equilibrium is symmetric across intermediate-goods producers, we have

                       PXt (j) = PXt , Ht (j) = Ht , Nt (j) = Nt , Kt (j) = ut Kt ,
                                                 h                iα
                               Xt (j) = Xt = At (ut Kt )1−φ Htφ Nt1−α

for all j. The household’s dividend income and aggregate output are
                                    Z 1                Z 1
                                         i
                               Dt =     dt di and Yt =     yti di.
                                             0                              0

  The competitive equilibrium consists of price sequences {wt , Rct , Rkt , pt , Rf t , PXt }∞
                                                                                             t=0 and
allocation sequences {Ct , It , ut , Nt , Yt , Bt+1 , Kt+1 , Xt , Dt }∞
                                                                      t=0 such that (a) given the prices,
the allocations solve the optimizing problems for households, intermediate-goods producers,
and final-goods firms and (b) all markets clear.

                                   III. Estimation and analysis

III.1. Data and estimation. We take the Bayesian approach and estimate the log-linearized
version of the model presented in Section II. The model has six commonly used macroeco-
nomic shocks represented by AR(1) processes (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6). It is estimated
against a number of key U.S. time series over the period from 1995Q2 to 2017Q2:5 the price-
rent ratio in commercial real estate, the quality-adjusted relative price of investment, real
  5The   repeated sales price of commercial real estate is available from 1996Q2 until present. We allow four
lags in estimation. Therefore, the sample including four lags begins in 1995Q2.
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                8

per capita consumption, real per capita investment (in consumption units), and per capita
hours worked.6 Since our model features long-run growth, we detrend our model to make it
stationary. We use x̃t to denote the detrended variable of xt and use x̂t ≡ log x̃t − log x̃ to
denote the log deviation from the steady-state value x̃. The detailed description of data and
estimation method are provided in Appendices A and B.7
  There are five structural parameters to be estimated: the inverse Frisch elasticity ν, the
collateral elasticity χ, the steady-state elasticity of capacity utilization δ 00 /δ 0 , the habit for-
mation γ, and the investment adjustment cost Ω. In particular, the collateral elasticity pa-
rameter χ measures a percentage change in the endogenous total factor productivity (TFP)
in response to a one-percent change in the collateral value relative to output (see Appendix
C for interpretations). The other structural parameters are either calibrated or indirectly
estimated by solving the steady state (see Appendix B and Supplemental Appendix G for
details).
  The five directly estimated parameters are reported in Table 1, along with 90% probability
intervals. The posterior probability intervals indicate that all these structural parameters are
tightly estimated. The estimated inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply is 0.34, consistent
with a range of values discussed in the literature (Keane and Rogerson, 2011). The collateral
elasticity is tightly estimated around 0.045. According to Appendix C, we calculate that
aggregate investment through the endogenous TFP increases by 0.2% for a 1% increase in
the collateral value (relative to output).8
  The steady state elasticity of capacity utilization δ 00 /δ 0 is 0.85, in line with a range of
values reported in the literature (Jaimovich and Rebelo, 2009). The small value means that
an increase in the marginal cost is small when capacity increases, which implies that capacity
is responsive to shocks. The estimated habit formation γ and capital-adjustment cost Ω are
very small. Hence, these factors are not important in driving the dynamics of consumption
and investment.
  Table 2 reports the estimated persistence and standard-deviation parameters of exogenous
shock processes. Among all shocks, the discount-rate shock is the most persistent. But its
estimated standard deviation is considerably smaller than those of all other shocks except the
stationary investment-specific shock. The probability intervals for the estimated standard

  6In   Chaney, Sraer, and Thesmar (2012), commercial real estate prices are approximated by house prices
because these two series are highly correlated (the correction is over 0.90). All our empirical results hold
for house prices as well; see our previous working paper (Miao, Wang, and Zha, 2014). In this paper, we
construct the time series of commercial real estate price ourselves.
  7The complete equilibrium system, the detrended stationary equilibrium system, the steady state, and

the log-linearized equilibrium system are presented in Supplemental Appendices E, F, G, and H.
   8This estimated elasticity is in line with the observed evidence during the Great Recession period when

investment dropped by 11% while commercial real estate price (relative to output) dropped by 39%.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                      9

deviation of the discount-rate shock are particularly tight. Such a small standard deviation
implies that any large effects on real estate price and aggregate variables must come from
the model’s internal propagation mechanism, which is discussed in Section III.3.


III.2. Impulse responses of discount-rate and technology shocks. Our focus in this
paper is on the financial and real impacts of discount-rate shocks after controlling for all
other common shocks studied in the literature. Among other common shocks, the permanent
neutral technology shock is most important in driving the business cycle. We thus compare
the estimated dynamic responses to a discount-rate shock with those to a technology shock
in Figures 3 and 4. Although the discount-rate shock process is assumed to be of AR(1) and
the estimated capital-adjustment cost is extremely small, the discount-rate shock generates
a sizable hump-shaped response of investment in magnitude comparable to the dynamic
response to a technology shock. In the following subsection (Section III.3), we explain the
model’s propagation mechanism for generating such a hump shape.
  The dynamic responses of labor hours to discount-rate and technology shocks also have a
similar magnitude, although the initial two-quarter response of hours to a technology shock is
negative due to the wealth effect of a permanent nature of this shock. Large differences show
up in the dynamic responses of real estate price, rent, and consumption. To a technology
shock, the dynamic responses of these three variables are comparable in magnitude, but
the comparability breaks down for the responses to a discount-rate shock (Figure 4). The
dynamic response of real estate price to a discount-rate shock is considerably larger than the
response to a technology shock, while the dynamic response of rent to a discount-rate shock
is much smaller than the response to a technology shock. As a result, the price-rent ratio
responds more to a discount-rate shock than to a technology shock by orders of magnitude.
It can be seen from Figures 3 and 4 that the price-rent ratio comoves with investment and
therefore output in response to a discount-rate shock, as we observe in the data (Figure 2).
  The dynamic response of aggregate output to a discount-rate shock is about one third
of the response to a technology shock (top row of Figure 3). This difference is because the
consumption response to a discount-rate shock is much smaller than to a technology shock.
Although the consumption response to a discount-rate shock is negative initially for the first
year, it rises subsequently for most of the five-year horizon. Without financial frictions,
by contrast, the consumption response to a discount-rate shock is negative for almost the
entire forecasting period of five years while the responses of investment and hours remain
positive (solid lines in Figure 5). Moreover, the response of real estate price from the model
without financial frictions is significantly smaller than the response from the benchmark
model. Thus, the two ingredients commonly used in the modern macroeconomic literature,
credit constraint and endogenous TFP, are essential to mitigating the opposite movements
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                10

between consumption and investment responses as well as to generating a large volatility of
real estate price.

III.3. Propagation mechanism. A tractable feature of our heterogeneous model is that
one can obtain a closed-form solution to the aggregation problem. The closed-form solution is
essential to make our estimation and empirical analysis feasible. In Supplemental Appendix E
we list all the equilibrium equations for solving and estimating the model. In this subsection
we emphasize the key equilibrium dynamics and highlight the role of financial frictions in
the transmission mechanism.
  Denote the average cost of intermediate goods by
                                    Z 1              
                             ∗
                           at ≡ exp      log PXt (j)dj = PXt .                                        (10)
                                                  0

The following two key propositions establish the close link between asset prices and the
production economy.

Proposition 1. The optimal output for firm i is given by
                                   ( ai
                               i      λ a∗t pt hit if ait ≥ a∗t
                              yt =       t                      ,
                                           0       otherwise

where the average cost a∗t and aggregate output Yt are determined jointly by the two simul-
taneous equations:
                                              Z       ∞
                                         pt
                                        λ ∗               af (a)da = Yt ,                             (11)
                                         at   a∗t

and                                                           "                                 #
                                                                                 Z   ∞
                                                                      1
                     Yt = At (ut Kt )α(1−φ) Htαφ Nt1−α                                   af (a)da ,   (12)
                                                                  1 − F (a∗t )   a∗t

where the term in square brackets is the endogenously determined TFP.

Proof. See Appendix D.1.                                                                                

Proposition 2. The asset pricing equation is
                               "                     Z ∞                     #
                         Λt+1                               a − a∗t+1
                pt = βEt        Rct+1 + pt+1 + λpt+1                  f (a)da                         (13)
                          Λt                          a∗t+1   a∗t+1

and the rental price of real estate is determined by

                               Rct = αφa∗t At (ut Kt )α(1−φ) Htαφ−1 Nt1−α .                           (14)

Proof. See Appendix D.2.                                                                                
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                          11

  Proposition 1 states that the average cost of intermediate goods, a∗t , is also a threshold
productivity level, above which productive firms choose to produce. For a given value of Yt ,
equation (11) describes the relationship between the threshold productivity a∗t and the real
estate price pt . This relationship is represented by an upward sloping curve on the (a∗t , pt )
graph (see the bottom panel of Figure 6). Since equation (11) is derived from the collateral
constraint, we call this relationship the collateral constraint curve.
  The asset pricing equation (13) in Proposition 2 departs from the standard one in that
the SDF and rent are not the only factors moving the real estate price. In addition to the
future rent, the future collateral premium represented by
                                          ∞
                                                a − a∗t+1
                                      Z
                                                          f (a)da
                                        a∗t+1     a∗t+1

also influences the real estate price. For productive firms (ait+1 ≥ a∗t+1 ), the collateral
premium reflects the average profit generated by a one-dollar credit. Our estimation shows
that the collateral premium, not the rent, accounts for at least one third of the volatility in
the real estate price.
  Equation (14) shows that the discount-rate shock does not affect the current rent Rct
directly. It has an indirect effect through its impact on other variables such as Nt and a∗t .
On the other hand, the discount-rate shock has a direct effect on the expected appreciation
of future prices through its impact on the SDF (βΛt+1 /Λt ) as in equation (13). Consequently,
the discount-rate shock has the potential to explain the high volatility of price-rent ratios.
  The relationship between a∗t and pt represented by the asset pricing equation is negative,
holding everything else fixed. An increase in the current threshold productivity level a∗t raises
the future threshold productivity level a∗t+1 . As a∗t+1 rises, the future collateral premium falls.
Since the real estate price is a forward looking variable, the current price falls as well. Thus,
the asset pricing curve representing (13) is downward sloping on the (a∗t , pt ) plane. The two
curves, collateral constraint and asset pricing, determine a∗t and pt jointly in the financial
market as plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 6.
  To make transparent the connection between the real estate market and the production
economy, one should note that the real wage and labor hours are jointly determined by the
labor supply equation
                                           Λt
                                              wt = ψt Ntν
                                           Θt

and the labor demand equation
                                                  R∞   a
                                                   a∗t a∗t
                                                           f (a)da
                                 (1 − α)Yt =                       w t Nt .
                                                   1 − F (a∗t )
                DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                  12

Using these two equations to eliminate wt , we obtain the equilibrium equation that deter-
mines labor hours:
                                                                  Λ
                                         1 − F (a∗t ) (1 − α) Yt Θtt
                              Nt1+ν   = R∞ a                         .                    (15)
                                         a∗ a∗
                                               f (a)da     ψt
                                           t   t

The top panel of Figure 6 plots two curves on the (Nt , Yt ) graph, with the convex curve
representing the production equation (12) and the concave curve representing the labor-
market equation (15).
  A discount-rate shock affects both real and financial sectors simultaneously. Figure 6
illustrates the transmission mechanism of this shock. Suppose that the initial equilibrium is
Point A at the steady state. According to equation (13), a positive shock to discount rate
delivers a direct impact on the real estate price through the SDF (βΛt+1 /Λt ), shifting the
asset pricing curve upward and raising the threshold productivity. As
                                                  Z ∞
                                           1
                             T F Pt ≡                  af (a)da
                                      1 − F (a∗t ) a∗t

is driven by the response of a∗t to the discount-rate shock, a rise of threshold productivity
increases aggregate output through the endogenous TFP and thus demand for investment
and credit to finance working capital. An increase of aggregate output shifts the collateral
constraint curve upward according to equation (11). The direct effect of the discount-rate
shock on asset prices dominates the indirect effect on aggregate output so that the net effect
on the threshold productivity is positive (bottom panel of Figure 6). The equilibrium moves
from Point A to Point B on impact, with an increase of both threshold productivity and real
estate price.
  As an increase of threshold productivity raises aggregate output on impact and shifts the
production curve upward, it simultaneously shifts the labor-market curve upward so long as
the endogenous TFP relative to the average cost a∗t
                                           Z ∞
                                    1           a
                                                    f (a) da
                                1 − F (at ) a∗t a∗t
                                        ∗


increases with a∗t and its impact on consumption (and its marginal utility Λt ) is relatively
small.
  With capital accumulation, it is optimal for households to postpone consumption for
investment. Thus, the hump-shaped response of investment propels a further increase of
aggregate output and thus shifts the asset pricing curve further in subsequent periods. As
a result of higher investment and output, the collateral constraint curve moves up further,
generating an even higher real estate price. As long as the discount-rate shock is persistent
as in our estimation, both the asset pricing curve and the collateral constraint curve continue
to shift upward, moving the equilibrium from Point B to Point C (bottom panel of Figure 6),
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                   13

with a persistent increase in the real estate price. In equilibrium, however, the threshold
productivity level a∗t does not have to move much as shown in the figure.
  At the same time, a higher level of investment continues to shift the production curve and
the labor-market curve upward, moving the equilibrium from Point B to Point C (top panel
of Figure 6) and generating even higher output. The ripple effect through such interactions
between the financial setor and the production sector is the key feature of this propagation
mechanism.

                               IV. Predictability and volatility

  The preceding section documents the dynamic responses of key financial and economic
variables to a discount-rate shock and explains the propagation mechanism behind the linkage
between financial and production sectors. In the real estate sector, a key fact is that the price-
rent ratio has a long-horizon predictability of real estate returns (Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous,
and Valkanov, 2013). The observed linkage between real estate and production sectors is the
comovements between price-rent ratio, investment, and output. These comovements imply
that the volatility of price-rent ratio and the volatilities of investment and output are not
isolated. From the lense of our general equilibrium model, the discount-rate shock is the
only shock that relates price-rent variation to the volatilities of investment and output. An
important question is how much of the observed predictability and volatility can be explained
by the dynamics generated by discount-rate shocks.

IV.1. Empirical results of predictability. Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov (2013)
argue that the price-rent ratio should have power in predicting real estate returns and propose
to run the predictive regression

                                  rt→t+k = α0 + α1 log (Rct /pt ) + εt,k ,

where the real estate return from t to t + k is defined as rt→t+k = log (pt+k /pt ) and the
slope coefficient α1 is positive.9 Table 3 reports the regression results of the slope coefficient
α1 and the fit measure R2 from both actual and model-simulated data at different horizons
(k = 8, 12, 16, 20, 24). Using the posterior mode estimates of model parameters, we simulate
a sample of time series of model variables with only discount-rate shocks for 88 periods (the
same length as the actual sample size). For each simulated sample, we run the previous
predictive regression. We repeat the simulation 100,000 times and compute the median
  9Following   Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov (2013) and the real estate literature, we use returns
without rent in our empirical estimation. Since the time series data on real estate price and rent are available
only in index format, we are unable to construct returns with rent. But in the simulated data from our model,
we can calculate returns with rent as well as excess returns and our predictability results do not change much.
See Section V.3 for further disccusions.
                DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                  14

values of α1 and R2 as well as the corresponding 90% probability intervals. As one can see,
the 90% probability interval of R2 contains the regresson estimate from the actual data at
each horizon. Conversely, the 90% confidence interval of α1 from the actual data contains
the median value of α1 from the simulated data at each horizon. Both α1 and R2 increase
with the forecasting horizon k.10 Overall, the model results are consistent with the data,
especially for the model’s ability to predict long-horizon real estate returns by the price-rent
ratio.
  The samples generated by other shocks in our model do not have such a predictive power.
Table 4 reports the regression results from the samples simulated by growth technology
shocks. At each horizon (k = 8, 12, 16, 20, 24), the median estimate of α1 is negative and
outside the 90% probability interval implied by the actual data. The median values of R2
are all less than 0.05 and their 90% probability intervals implied by the simulated data do
not contain the value of R2 calculated from the actual data except for the short horizon
of 8 quarters. Thus, the samples generated by technology shocks do not have a power in
predicting future real estate returns.11 The failure to predict applies to the samples generated
by other shocks as well. A comparison of Tables 3 and 4 indicates clearly the essential role
of discount-rate shocks in predicting the long-horizon returns of real estate by price-rent
variation.

IV.2. Empirical results of volatility. Using the same samples simulated with discount-
rate shocks as in the preceding section, one can compute the volatilities of investment,
consumption, output, rental price, real estate price, and price-rent ratio. Table 5 reports
these volatilities for the simulated data against the actual data. For the model-simulated
data, the table reports the median values of volatilities with 90% probability intervals (the
last three columns). Judging by the median values, one can see that although discount-rate
shocks account for only 11% of the observed volatility for consumption and 7% for rent, these
shocks explain 48% of the observed volatility for investment, 25% for output, 94% for real
estate price, and 100% for price-rent ratio. The volatility of discount-rate shocks is by itself
diminutive, with the median value of 0.00067. Through the model’s propagation mechanism
discussed in Section III.3, however, these shocks are capable of generating the dynamic data
that link the volatilities in the financial sector to those in the production sector.12

  10In   Section V we use a simplified version of our general equilibrium model to obtain a closed-form solution
to the first-order approximation. This solution enables us to provide a formal proof of this empirical result.
  11A    formal proof is given for the simplified model discussed in Section V.
  12Since   the interest rate is determined by 1 = βRf t Et ΛΛt+1
                                                                t
                                                                  , the volatility of the interest rate Rf has a
magnitude similar to the volatility of the discount rate. Indeed, its median estimate is 0.0005 with the tight
90% probability interval [0.00046, 0.0006]. The relatively small fluctuation of Rf is the reason why our model
is capable of generating the long-horizon predictability of excess returns, as discussed in Section V.3.
                   DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                  15

  In the counterfactual economy with no financial frictions, by contrast, discount-rate shocks
can explain only 63% of price-rent variation or the volatility of real estate price as shown in
Table 6. To see how financial frictions play such an important role in the real estate sector,
we establish the following proposition by log-linearizing equation (13).
                                  a∗ f (a∗ )
Proposition 3. Define η =         1−F (a∗ )
                                             .   Under a suitable normalization of distribution f , the real
estate price can be decomposed into three components:

                                                  p̂t = p̂1t + p̂2t + p̂3t ,

where
                                                              
                                  p̂1t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 − Λ̂t + βEt p̂1t+1 ,

                                             β R̃c
                                         p̂2t =    Et R̂ct+1 + βEt p̂2t+1 ,
                                               p̃
                                                                             
                                             (1 + µ)(µ − χ) 
                   p̂3t = λ(1 − β)Et p̂t+1 −                     p̂t+1 − Ŷt+1 + βEt p̂3t+1 .
                                                      µ2
Proof. The decomposition uses a log-linearized method similar to the Campbell and Shiller
(1988) decomposition. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix D.3.                                           

  The first component p̂1t is the contribution from the stochastic discount factor, which is
mainly driven by discount-rate variation. The second component p̂2t reflects the contribution
from rent. The third component p̂3t represents the contribution from the collateral premium.
  Using the simulated data with discount-rate shocks alone, we calculate std(p̂t ) = 12.91%,
std(p̂1t ) = 8.20%, std(p̂2t ) = 0.34%, and std(p̂3t ) = 4.40%, where std stands for standard
deviation. In this case,

                                  std(p̂t ) ≈ std(p̂1t ) + std(p̂2t ) + std(p̂3t ).

The estimated volatility contribution from the collateral premium is about one third:13
                                             std(p̂3t )    4.4
                                                        =       = 0.34.
                                             std(p̂t )    12.91
This estimation result reveals that the collateral premium is an important force in driving the
fluctuation of real estate price. The absence of the contribution from the collateral premium,
therefore, is the main reason for the only 63% explanation of the volatility in the real estate
sector as reported in Table 6 for the counterfactual economy without financial frictions.
  13We     perform a similar exercise for the growth rate of real estate price from our simulated data. The
corresponding volatilities are std(∆p̂t ) = 3.9%, std(∆p̂1t ) = 2.46%, std(∆p̂2t ) = 0.10%, and std(∆p̂3t ) =
                                                                                                  std(∆p̂3t )
1.36%. Thus, the volatility contribution from the collateral premium is also about one third:     std(∆p̂t )    =
1.360
3.910   = 0.348.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                        16

                 V. Understanding amplification and predictability

  To understand how discount-rate and technology shocks play disparate roles in predicting
real estate returns and in amplifying the fluctuations of real estate variables relative to the
volatility of output, we simplify our model by fixing the supply of labor at Nt = 1 and
removing investment from the original model. This simplification enables us to solve for
a closed-form solution to the log-linearized model and thus gain insight into the empirical
results we have obtained in this paper.

V.1. The simplified model. In the simplified stationary model we focus on two exogenous
shocks: the technology shock At and the discount-rate shock θt . The household maximizes
                                                    ∞
                                                    X
                                               E0          β t Θt u (Ct )
                                                    t=0

                                                                                     Θt
subject to Ct = wt + Dt , where u (Ct ) = log Ct . Hence, Λt =                       Ct
                                                                                        .   The intermediate-goods
producer’s problem is

                              max          PXt (j)Xt (j) − wt Nt (j) − Rct Ht (j),
                           Nt (j),Ht (j)

subject to Xt (j) ≡ At Htα (j)Nt1−α (j). The problem for final-goods firms remains the same
as in the original model. With this simplification, we have the following closed-form results.

Proposition 4. The log-linearized solutions for â∗t , Ŷt , p̂t , and R̂ct are
                                                          π
                                                  â∗t =     θ̂t ,                                            (16)
                                                        1+η
                                                               ηµ ∗
                                           Ŷt = Ĉt = Ât +       â ,                                       (17)
                                                             1+µ t
                                              p̂t = Ât + [1 + η] â∗t ,                                      (18)
                                                  R̂ct = Ât + â∗t ,                                         (19)

where
                                       1 + η 1 + µ ρθ
                                           π=χ            ,
                                         η     µ 1 − ρθ κ
                                                                         χ (1 + µ)2
                                                           
                                                     1+µ
        κ = 1 − (1 − β)(1 − λ) − χ(1 − β)(1 − λ) 1 −          − λ(1 − β)            .
                                                       µη                η    µ2
Proof. See Appendix D.4.                                                                                        

V.2. Theoretical results of volatility. The volatility derivation follows directly from
Proposition 4. For the data generated by technology shocks, we have
                                      std(p̂t )            std(p̂t − R̂ct )
                                                  = 1,                        = 0.
                                     std(R̂ct )               std(Ŷt )
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                 17

The real estate price and the rental price fluctuate in the same magnitude so that technology
shocks are unable to produce price-rent variation. For the time series generated by discount-
rate shocks, by contrast, we have
                                 std(p̂t )               std(p̂t − R̂ct )
                                              = 1 + η,                      = η.
                                 std(R̂ct )                 std(Ŷt )
Clearly, the real estate price is always more volatile than the rental price and as long as
η > 1, which is the case in our estimation, the price-rent ratio is more volatile than output.
The intuition is that, unlike technology shocks, discount-rate shocks are intertemporal shocks
that do not influence the current rent or output directly. They have a smaller indirect effect
on rent through endogenous TFP as revealed by the term â∗t , but a larger effect on the future
appreciation of real estate price.

V.3. Theoretical results of predictability. To gain economic intuition behind our em-
pirical predictability results, we begin with the standard asset pricing equation

                                              Et Mt+1 Rit+1 = 1,

where Rit+1 denotes the one-period return of any asset i and the pricing kernel, denoted by
Mt+1 , is
                                          θt+1 βu0 (Ct+1 )
                                         Mt+1 =            .
                                               u0 (Ct )
Because the asset pricing equation also holds for the risk-free interest rate

                                               Rf t Et Mt+1 = 1,                                        (20)

the log-linearized solution leads to

                                              Et R̂it+1 − R̂f t = 0.

For standard models, therefore, there is no equity premium and hence no predictability.14
  The asset pricing equation in our model is different as it involves the collateral premium
for the first-order solution. For the risk-free interest rate, equation (20) continues to hold.
But for the real estate return, we rewrite the asset pricing equation represented by (13) as
                                            re
                                                       
                                 Et Mt+1 Rt+1   + Lt+1 = 1,                              (21)
       re
where Rt+1 denotes the real estate return
                                              re      pt+1 + Rct+1
                                             Rt+1 ≡
                                                           pt
  14When    taking into account second-order Jensen term, Albuquerque, Eichenbaum, Luo, and Rebelo (2016)
show that the equity premium remains constant in their baseline model even when the valuation ratio
fluctuates with discount-rate shocks. This result implies no predictability for excess returns. The reason is
simple: discount-rate shocks drive returns and risk-free rates in the same magnitude and hence cancel out
both terms.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                         18

and Lt+1 denotes the collateral (liquidity) premium
                                      pt+1 ∞ a
                                          Z
                           Lt+1 ≡ λ            (      − 1)f (a)da.
                                       pt a∗t+1 a∗t+1
We now use the closed-form solution to show that predictability is related to the collateral
premium. Log-linearizing equation (21) leads to
                         Rre       re      L
                        re
                              Et R̂t+1 + re  Et L̂t+1 + Et M̂t+1 = 0.
                      R +L              R +L
Log-linearizing equation (20) gives us

                                       R̂f t + Et M̂t+1 = 0.

It follows from the preceding two equations that
                                re            L                 
                           Et R̂t+1 − R̂f t = re R̂f t − Et L̂t+1 .
                                             R
One can see from Proposition 4 that θ̂t+1 has a direct impact on a∗t+1 and hence on L̂t+1 .
Since the stochastic process for θ̂t is very persistent, the discount-rate shock θ̂t moves the
excess return of real estate directly by influencing both Rf t and Et L̂t+1 . While this result is
intuitive, it is challenging to turn this intuition into the theoretical result of predictability.
                                                                re
Specifically, if one runs the OLS regression of excess return R̂t+k − R̂f t on the valuation ratio
v̂t ≡ R̂ct − p̂t , is the coefficient of the valuation ratio positive? For our model, the answer is
affirmative and the following proposition establishes this predictability result.

Proposition 5. For the time series generated by discount-rate shocks, the regression coefficient
                                         h                i
                                              re
                                 α1 ≡ E R̂t+k − R̂f t | v̂t

is positive for k ≥ 1 with the parameter values obtained by our estimation.

Proof. See Appendix D.5.                                                                         

  We use the simulated data generated by discount-rate shocks with our estimated parameter
                                       re
values and run the OLS regression of R̂t+k − R̂f t on the valuation ratio v̂t ≡ R̂ct − p̂t for
different horizons k. The results have a pattern remarkably similar to what is reported in
Table 3 (thus, not reported to save the space). Since the rent and price time series in actual
data are available only in terms of index, the real estate return is often computed without
rent in the real estate literature (Ghysels, Plazzi, Torous, and Valkanov, 2013). For the
theoretical underpinning of the empirical results pertaining to the real estate return without
rent as reported in Table 3, we have the following proposition.

Proposition 6. Denote the k-period return of real estate (without rent) by r̂t+k ≡ p̂t+k − p̂t .
For the time series generated by discount-rate shocks, the following two results hold:
                                       η
     • α1 ≡ E [r̂t+k | v̂t ] = 1 − ρkθ 1+η v̂t ,
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                          19

                1
        2
                           
     • Rr,v =   2
                                     2
                    1 − ρkθ , where Rr,v is the R2 measure for the OLS regression of r̂t+k on v̂t .
For the time series generated by technology shocks, however, α1 ≡ E [r̂t+k | v̂t ] = 0.

Proof. See Appendix D.6.                                                                         

  According to Proposition 6, there is no predictability of real estate returns from the time
series driven by technology shocks. For discount-rate shocks, the opposite is true. The
regression coefficient α1 increases with the forecast horizon but is always less than one; the
fit measure R2 increases with the forecast horizon to around 0.5 for long forecast horizons.
These closed-form results are in line with our empirical results obtained from the more
realistic benchmark model (Table 3).
  In summary, the simplified model illustrates the special role played by discount-rate shocks
in generating the data dynamics that feature the two distinct asset pricing properties ob-
served in actual data: predictability and volatility. To be sure, the simplified model excludes
investment and is incapable of explaining the relationship between price-rent variation and
the business cycle (fact (3) discussed in the introduction). But the insight gained from
the closed-form results provides a theoretical explanation of the empirical results we have
obtained in this paper.

                                        VI. Conclusion

  We argue to imbed households’ discount-rate shocks and firms’ collateral constraints in
the dynamic general equilibrium framework. This addition keeps the model tractable to be
estimated and at the same time substantially improves the model’s performance in accounting
for (i) the large volatility of price-rent ratio relative to investment and output, (ii) the long-
horizon predictability of real estate returns, and (iii) the dynamic relationship between price-
rent variations and the business cycle. For dynamic general equilibrium models, the long-
horizon predictability has proven difficult to obtain. We find that the collateral premium is
the most important factor in generating the predictability result as well as the comovements
among financial and economic variables. Fluctuations of discount-rate shocks are extremely
small in magnitude but the model’s internal propagation mechanism translates these small
shocks into the large volatilities of price-rent ratio, investment, and output.
  Because the 2008 financial crisis was triggered by the collapse of real estate prices and
the sharp fall of investment, this paper focuses on commercial real estate and its relation
to investment and inevitably abstracts from other dimensions that merit further study in
the future. One such dimension is to include mortgage markets for households. Another
dimension is to extend the model to explain asset pricing facts in the stock market. We hope
that the mechanism and insight developed in this paper lays the groundwork for extending
the model along these and other important dimensions.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE               20

                    Table 1. Posterior estimates of structural parameters

                                                            Posterior estimates
                    Parameter Representation                Mode Low       High
                    ν               Inv Frisch elasticity   0.343 0.088 1.100
                    χ               Collateral elasticity   0.045 0.044 0.045
                     00    0
                    δ /δ            Capacity utilization    0.850 0.676 1.243
                    γ               Habit formation         0.558 0.480 0.634
                    Ω               Capital adjustment      0.245 0.164 0.386

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for each
parameter.


                          Table 2. Posterior estimates of shock parameters

                                                               Posterior estimates
             Parameter Representation                        Mode    Low      High
             ρz                Permanent investment tech     0.0941 0.0274    0.2765
             ρνz               Stationary investment tech    0.0000 0.0114    0.4779
             ρa                Permanent neutral tech        0.5664 0.4294    0.7403
             ρνa               Stationary neutral tech       0.8211 0.7560    0.8835
             ρθ                Discount rate                 0.9994 0.9986    0.9997
             ρψ                Labor supply                  0.9941 0.9838    0.9967
             σz                Permanent investment tech     0.0053 0.0044    0.0059
             σν z              Stationary investment tech    0.0001 0.00007 0.0019
             σa                Permanent neutral tech        0.0027 0.0019    0.0038
             σν a              Stationary neutral tech       0.0087 0.0078    0.0108
             σθ                Discount rate                 0.0002 0.00018 0.0003
             σψ                Labor supply                  0.0080 0.0065    0.0124

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for each
parameter.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                       21

       Table 3. Prediction of real estate returns by the price-rent ratio at different
       horizons with model results based on simulated data from estimated discount-
       rate shocks

                  Predictive regression: rt→t+k = α0 + α1 log (Rct /pt ) + εt+k
        Horizon       Data (α1 )         Model (α1 )     Data (R2 )          Model (R2 )
    Quarter (year)                       Median                       Median Low High
          8 (2)       0.20 (0.07, 0.33) 0.37             0.08         0.20        0.04 0.39
         12 (3)       0.37 (0.20, 0.54) 0.55             0.15         0.30        0.07 0.52
         16 (4)       0.58 (0.39, 0.78) 0.70             0.26         0.38        0.09 0.62
         20 (5)       0.77 (0.58, 0.96) 0.82             0.40         0.42        0.11 0.69
         24 (6)       0.82 (0.65, 1.00) 0.89             0.50         0.51        0.13 0.74

Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of α1 and R2 from both actual data and
model-simulated data. The numbers in parentheses in the column headed by Data (α1 )
represent the 90% confidence interval of the estimated coefficient. The real estate return
from t to t + k is defined as rt→t+k = log (pt+k /pt ). “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of
the 90% probability interval of the simulated data from the model.


       Table 4. Prediction of real estate returns by the price-rent ratio at different
       horizons with model results based on simulated data from estimated technology
       shocks

                  Predictive regression: rt→t+k = α0 + α1 log (Rct /pt ) + εt+k
        Horizon       Data (α1 )         Model (α1 )     Data (R2 )          Model (R2 )
    Quarter (year)                       Median                       Median Low High
          8 (2)       0.20 (0.07, 0.33) -0.26            0.08         0.02        0.00 0.09
         12 (3)       0.37 (0.20, 0.54) -0.34            0.15         0.03        0.00 0.10
         16 (4)       0.58 (0.39, 0.78) -0.41            0.26         0.03        0.00 0.12
         20 (5)       0.77 (0.58, 0.96) -0.46            0.40         0.03        0.00 0.13
         24 (6)       0.82 (0.65, 1.00) -0.48            0.50         0.04        0.01 0.14

Note: The table reports the OLS estimates of α1 and R2 from both actual data and
model-simulated data. The numbers in parentheses in the column headed by Data (α1 )
represent the 90% confidence interval of the estimated coefficient. The real estate return
from t to t + k is defined as rt→t+k = log (pt+k /pt ). “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of
the 90% probability interval of the simulated data from the model.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                    22

                 Table 5. Volatilities explained by discount-rate shocks (%)

  Description          Volatility           Data                   Model
                                                      % Explained Median Low        High
  Investment           std (∆ log It )      1.679        48.1    0.808     0.734    0.884
  Output               std (∆ log Yt )      0.697        25.1    0.175     0.159    0.191
  Consumption          std (∆ log Ct )      0.444        11.9    0.053     0.045    0.061
  Rental price         std (∆ log Rct )     1.245         6.7    0.084     0.077    0.091
  Real estate price std (∆ log pt )         4.171        93.7    3.910     3.611    4.193
  Price-rent ratio     std (∆ log(pt /Rct )) 3.909       100     3.923     3.625    4.211
  Discount rates       std (log θt )                             0.00067 0.00046 0.001

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 68% probability interval of the
simulated data from the model.


       Table 6. Real estate volatilities explained by discount-rate shocks (%) in the
       model with no financial frictions

   Description          Volatility           Data                  Model
                                                      % Explained Median Low       High
   Real estate price std (∆ log pt )         4.171        62.5    2.607     2.409 2.796
   Price-rent           std (∆ log(pt /Rct )) 3.909       63.2    2.472     2.285 2.656

Note: “DR” stands for discount rate. “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90%
probability interval of the samples generated by discount-rate shocks in the model without
financial frictions.
       DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                          23

0.5
                                             PR ratio
                                             RE return
0.4


0.3


0.2


0.1


  0


-0.1


-0.2


-0.3


-0.4
   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006     2008      2010   2012   2014   2016   2018

Figure 1. “PR” stands for the price-rent ratio and “RE” stands for real
estate. The PR ratio is in log value and scaled to make it visually comparable
with the returns. The real estate return is over the next five-year horizon. The
price-rent ratio is in log at the current time.
                              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                        24

                       0.6                                                                                  15.7
                                    Price-rent
                                    Output


                       0.4                                                                                  15.65




                       0.2                                                                                  15.6
Log price - log rent




                                                                                                                    Log output
                         0                                                                                  15.55




                       -0.2                                                                                 15.5




                       -0.4                                                                                 15.45




                       -0.6                                                                                 15.4
                          1996   1998    2000    2002   2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018

 Figure 2. The time series of the log price-rent ratio in the U.S. real estate
 sector (the left scale) and the time series of log output in the U.S. economy
 (the right scale).
                    DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE          25

             1.5                                      0.5


               1                                      0.4
Output

             0.5                                      0.3


               0                                      0.2


             -0.5                                     0.1
                    0     5      10    15     20            0   5     10       15   20



               2                                      1.8

             1.5                                      1.6

               1                                      1.4
Investment




             0.5                                      1.2

               0                                       1

             -0.5                                     0.8

              -1                                      0.6
                    0     5      10    15     20            0   5     10       15   20



             0.2                                    0.25

             0.1                                      0.2

               0                                    0.15
Labor




             -0.1                                     0.1

             -0.2                                   0.05

             -0.3                                      0

             -0.4                                   -0.05
                    0     5      10    15     20            0   5     10       15   20
                                                                    Quarters

Figure 3. Impulse responses (%) to a one-standard-deviation shock to neu-
tral technology growth (left panel) and to discount rates (right panel). The
starred line represents the estimated response. The dashed lines represent the
0.90 probability error bands.
                     DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE         26

               1.4                                     5

               1.2
                                                      4.5
 Price          1

               0.8                                     4

               0.6
                                                      3.5
               0.4

               0.2                                     3
                     0     5      10    15     20           0   5     10       15   20



               1.5                                    0.3


                1                                     0.2
Rent




               0.5                                    0.1


                0                                      0


           -0.5                                      -0.1
                     0     5      10    15     20           0   5     10       15   20



               1.5                                    0.2

                                                     0.15
 Consumption




                1                                     0.1

                                                     0.05

               0.5                                     0

                                                    -0.05

                0                                    -0.1
                     0     5      10    15     20           0   5     10       15   20
                                                                    Quarters

Figure 4. Impulse responses (%) to a one-standard-deviation shock to neu-
tral technology growth (left panel) and to discount rates (right panel). The
starred line represents the estimated response. The dashed lines represent the
0.90 probability error bands.
                           DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                27

                 1.8                                                5

                 1.6
                                                                   4.5

                 1.4
    Investment


                                                                    4




                                                           Price
                 1.2
                                                                   3.5
                  1

                                                                    3
                 0.8

                 0.6                                               2.5
                       0        5      10      15    20                  0   5     10       15   20
                                    Quarters                                     Quarters


                 0.2                                               0.4


                                                                   0.3
                 0.1
Consumption




                                                                   0.2
                                                          Labor




                  0
                                                                   0.1

              -0.1
                                                                    0


              -0.2                                                -0.1
                       0        5      10      15    20                  0   5     10       15   20
                                    Quarters                                     Quarters

              Figure 5. Impulse responses (%) to a one-standard-deviation shock to dis-
              count rates. The starred line represents the estimated response. The dashed
              lines represent the 0.90 probability error bands. The solid line represents the
              counterfactual response for an economy without financial frictions.
     DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                         28




                                ;<,!),&6!7,1-()!
      4 -!                                                        %&'()!*&)+,-!

                                                       "!
                                                            #!



                                                       $!                  .)(/01-2(3!




                                                                              5-!
                               ;<,!=23&312&6!7,1-()!
      8-!

                                                             "(66&-,)&6!1(37-)&23-!!




                                          "!


                                         #!


                                    $!
                                                                   $77,-!8)21239!


                                                                             &- :



Figure 6. An illustration of the propagation mechanism: the production
and labor-market equations are (12) and (15) and the collateral constraint
and asset pricing equations are (11) and (13).
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                      29

                                          Appendix A. Data

  All the quarterly time series used in this paper were constructed by Patrick Higgins at
the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, some of which were collected directly from the Haver
Analytics Database (Haver for short). In this section, we describe the details of data con-
struction.
  The model estimation is based on six U.S. aggregate time series: the real price of com-
mercial real estate (pData
                      t
                                                      Data
                           ), the real rental price (Rct   ), the quality-adjusted relative price
of investment ((1/Zt )Data ), real per capita consumption (CtData ), real per capita investment
(ItData ), and per capita total hours (HtData ). All variables except hours and relative price
of investment are deflated by the price of nondurable consumption goods and non-housing
services.
  These series are constructed as follows:
                            pCommRE
     • pData
        t    =      PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
                                              .
             Data          TortoTotalRent
     •    Rct     = PriceNonDurPlusServExHous  .
                  Data       GordonPriceCDplusES
     •    (1/Zt )      = PriceNonDurPlusServExHous .
     •    CtData = (NomConsNHSplusND)/PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
                                 POPSMOOTH USECON
                                                                  .
           Data     (CDX USNA + nominveqipp)/PriceNonDurPlusServExHous
     •    It      =                 POPSMOOTH USECON
                                                                       .
                            AggHours
     •    HtData = POPSMOOTH       USECON
                                           .
  Sources for the constructed data, along with the Haver keys (all capitalized letters) to the
data, are described below.
pCommRE: Commercial real-estate price index. The construction of this series is based on
          the series named as “FL075035503” from the Flow of Funds Accounts database pro-
          vided by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.15 Note that the price
          index through 1996Q1 is not based on repeated sales but instead relies on a weighted-
          average of three appraisal-based commercial property price series (per square foot):
          retail property, office property, and warehouse/industrial property. These series come
          from National Real Estate Investor (NREI). The weights applied to the NREI are not
          revised and are calculated using annual data from the Survey of Current Business.
          From 1996Q2 on, the commercial property price index is the Costar Commercial
          Repeat Sales Index published by “National Real Estate Investor.”
TortoTotalRent: Rental price index for commercial real estate. Tornqvist aggregate of
          Torto Wheaton Research Index for rental prices of retail properties, Torto Wheaton
          Research Index for rental prices of office properties (commercial excluding retail), and

  15See   the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ website http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/
fof/SeriesAnalyzer.aspx?s=FI075035503&t=. Unpublished tables for level time series are available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/datadownload/Choose.aspx?rel=Z.1
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                   30

          Torto Wheaton Research Index for rental prices of industrial properties. Detailed
          description of the series is available at http://www.cohenasset.com/pdfs/
          Torto%20Wheaton%20Research%20Methodology.pdf. The data, downloaded
          from the CBRE Econometrics Advisors website, were constructed by the Torto
          Wheaton Research (TWR) hedonic approach (Wheaton and Torto, 1994) and (Malpezzi,
          2002, Chapter 5).
PriceNonDurPlusServExHous: Consumer price index. Price deflator of non-durable
          consumption and non-housing services, constructed by Tornqvist aggregation of price
          deflator of non-durable consumption and non-housing related services (2009=100).
GordonPriceCDplusES: Price of investment goods. Quality-adjusted price index for con-
          sumer durable goods, equipment investment, and intellectual property products in-
          vestment. This is a weighted index from a number of individual price series within
          this category. For each individual price series from 1947 to 1983, we use Gordon
          (1990)’s quality-adjusted price index. Following Cummins and Violante (2002), we
          estimate an econometric model of Gordon’s price series as a function of time trend
          and several macroeconomic indicators in the National Income and Product Account
          (NIPA), including the current and lagged values of the corresponding NIPA price
          series. The estimated coefficients are then used to extrapolate the quality-adjusted
          price index for each individual price series for the sample from 1984 to 2008. These
          constructed price series are annual. We use Denton (1971)’s method to interpolate
          these annual series at quarterly frequency. We then use the Tornqvist procedure to
          construct the quality-adjusted price index from the interpolated individual quarterly
          price series.
NomConsNHSplusND: Nominal personal consumption expenditures. Nominal nondurable
          goods and non-housing services (SAAR, billion of dollars). It is computed as CNX USNA
          + CSX USNA - CSRUX USNA, where CNX USNA is nominal non-durable goods
          consumption (SAAR, million of dollars), CSX USNA is nominal service consump-
          tion (SAAR, million of dollars), and CSRUX USNA is nominal housing and utilities
          consumption (SAAR, million of dollars).
POPSMOOTH USECON: Population. Smoothed civilian noninstitutional population
          with ages 16 years and over (thousands). This series is smoothed by eliminating
          breaks in population from 10-year censuses and post-2000 American Community
          Surveys using the “error of closure” method. This fairly simple method is used by
          the Census Bureau to get a smooth monthly population series and reduce the unusual
          influence of drastic demographic changes.16
  16The    detailed explanation can be found at http://www.census.gov/popest/archives/
methodology/intercensal_nat_meth.html.
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                          31

CDX USNA: Consumer durable goods expenditures. Nominal personal consumption ex-
          penditures: durable goods (SAAR, million of dollars).
nominveqipp: Nominal equipment and intellectual property products investment (SAAR,
          million of dollars).
AggHours: Total hours in the non-farm business (NFB) sector. It is calculated as (Average
          hours per workers in NFB sector) times (Total civilian employment from Household
          Survey). The series is normalized to one at 1948Q1.


                             Appendix B. Estimation procedure

  We apply the Bayesian methodology to the estimation of the log-linearized medium-scale
structural model, using our own C/C++ code. The advantage of using our own code instead
of using Dynare is the flexibility and accuracy we have for finding the posterior mode. We
generate over a half million draws from the prior as a starting point for our optimization rou-
tine and select the estimated parameters that give the highest posterior probability density.
The optimization routine is a combination of NPSOL software package and the csminwel
routine provided by Christopher A. Sims.
  In estimation, we use the log-linearized equilibrium conditions, reported in Appendix E, to
form the posterior probability function fit to the six quarterly U.S. time series from 1995Q2 to
2017Q2: the price-rent ratio in commercial real estate, the quality-adjusted relative price of
investment, real per capita consumption, real per capita investment (in consumption units),
and per capita hours worked. Excluding the four lags, the sample for estimation begins with
1996Q2 when the repeated-sales price of commercial real estate became available.
  We fix the values of certain parameters as an effective way to sharpen the identification of
some key parameters in the model. The capital share α(1 − φ) is set at 0.33, consistent with
the average capital income share. The share of land in production is estimated at φ = 0.07 by
solving the steady state (see Appendix G). The growth rate of aggregate investment-specific
technology, gz = 1.01, is consistent with the average growth rate of the inverse relative price
of investment goods. The growth rate of aggregate output, gγ = 1.003, is consistent with the
average common growth rate of consumption and investment. The interest rate Rf is set at
1.01. The steady state capacity utilization u is set at 1. The steady-state labor supply as
a fraction of the total time is normalized at N = 0.3. To solve the steady state, we impose
three additional restrictions to be consistent with the data: 1) the capital-output ratio is
1.125 at annual frequency; 2) the investment-capital ratio is 0.22 at annual frequency; and
3) the rental-income-to-output ratio is 0.1.17

  17The   output data used in our model is a sum of personal consumption expenditures and private do-
mestic investment. Consumption is the private expenditures on nondurable goods and nonhousing services.
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                 32

  We estimate five structural parameters as well as all the persistence and volatility param-
eters that govern exogenous shock processes. The five structural parameters are the inverse
Frisch elasticity of labor supply ν, the collateral elasticity χ, the elasticity of capacity uti-
lization δ 00 (1)/δ 0 (1), the habit formation γ, and the investment-adjustment cost Ω. The
remaining parameters are then obtained from the steady state relationships that satisfy the
aforementioned data ratio restrictions. These parameters are: the capital depreciation rate
(δ = 0.0437), the subjective discount factor (β = 0.993), the collateral elasticity (χ = 0.045),
the capacity utilization rate (δ 0 (1) = 0.0638), and the labor disutility (ψ = 4.027).
  For the estimated parameters, we specify a prior that covers a wide range of values that are
economically plausible (Table 7). The prior for ν, χ, γ, or Ω has a distribution with the shape
hyperparameter a = 1. This hyperparameter value is specified to allow a positive probability
density at the zero value. The implied 90% prior probability bounds are consistent with the
values considered in the literature. The prior distribution for δ 00 (1)/δ 0 (1) is designed to cover
the range consistent with Jaimovich and Rebelo (2009).
  The prior for the persistence parameters of exogenous shock processes follows the beta
distribution with the 90% probability interval between 0.01 and 0.45. Such a prior favors
stationarity. The prior for the standard deviations of shock processes follows the inverse
gamma distribution with the 90% probability interval between 0.0001 and 2.0. The standard
deviation prior specification is far more diffuse than what is used in the literature.

                             Appendix C. Collateral elasticity

  In this appendix we derive the expression for the collateral elasticity χ and interpret its
economic meaning. Log-linearizing the endogenous TFP
                                                 Z ∞
                                         1
                            T F Pt =                  af (a)da                                         (A1)
                                     1 − F (a∗t ) a∗t
yields
                                       a∗ f (a∗ ) ∗     (a∗ )2 f (a∗ ) ∗
                               TFPt =
                               [                  â − R ∞            â .
                                      1 − F (a∗ ) t      a∗
                                                            af (a)da t
Define
                                                   a∗ f (a∗ )
                                             η=               .
                                                  1 − F (a∗ )
From equations (10) and (12) we deduce the markup as
                                            R∞
                                 Yt           a∗
                                                 af (a)da
                         µt =        −1= ∗ t                 − 1.
                              PXt Xt       at (1 − F (a∗t ))

Investment is the private expenditures on consumer durable goods and fixed investment in equipment and in-
tellectual property. Accordingly, we measure capital stock using the annual stocks of equipment, intellectual
products, and consumer durable goods.
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE              33

             Table 7. Prior distributions of structural and shock parameters

                  Parameter Distribution          a      b         Low     High
                  ν           Gamma(a,b)          1.0    3.0       0.017   1.000
                  χ           Gamma(a,b)          1.0    30        0.0017 0.100
                  δ 00 /δ 0   Gamma(a,b)          4.6    17        0.100   0.500
                  γ           Beta(a,b)           1.0    2.0       0.026   0.776
                  Ω           Gamma(a,b)          1.0    0.5       0.100   6.000
                  ρz          Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρνz         Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρa          Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρνa         Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρθ          Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρξ          Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  ρψ          Beta(a,b)           1.0    5.0       0.010   0.450
                  σz          Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σν z        Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σa          Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σν a        Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σθ          Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σξ          Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000
                  σψ          Inv-Gam(a,b)        0.3261 1.45e04 0.0001 2.0000

Note: “Low” and “High” denote the bounds of the 90% probability interval for each
parameter.



The steady-state markup is                 R∞
                                            af (a)da
                                             a∗
                                     µ=                − 1.
                                      a∗ (1 − F (a∗ ))
With the definitions of η and µ, we have
                                      a∗ f (a∗ )  µ ∗        ηµ ∗
                              T[
                               FPt =                  ât =     â ,
                                               ∗
                                     1 − F (a ) 1 + µ       1+µ t
Log-linearizing the stationary version of equation (11) gives us
                                         1+µ              
                                 â∗t =           p̂t − Ŷt .                       (A2)
                                        1+η+µ
It follows that
                                               ηµ
                                   T[
                                    FPt =          (p̂t − Ŷt ).
                                             1+η+µ
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                      34

We define the collateral elasticity as
                                                                    ηµ
                                                         χ=             .
                                                                  1+η+µ
From the previous expression, one can see that χ measures a percentage change of endogenous
TFP in response to a one-percent change in the collateral value (relative to output). From
the log-linearized version of the aggregate output equation

  Ŷt = α(1 − φ)(ût + K̂t )+
                                            ηµ                α(1 − φ)
                     (1 − α)N̂t +                 p̂t − Ŷt −              (ĝzt + ĝvzt + ĝat + ĝvat ) ,
                                          1+η+µ               1 − α(1 − φ)
one can see that it also measures a percentage change in output, holding everything else
constant. From the log-linearized version of the resource constraint equation
                                                        C̃      I˜
                                                           Ĉt + Iˆt = Ŷt ,
                                                        Ỹ      Ỹ
it follows that χỸ /I˜ measures a percentage change in aggregate investment in response to a
one-percent change in the collateral value.

                                    Appendix D. Proposition proofs

D.1. Proof of Proposition 1. We rewrite firm i’s decision problem as the Bellman equation
                                                                               Λt+1
                           Vt (hit , ait ) =       max            dit + βEt         Vt+1 (hit+1 , ait+1 )   (A3)
                                               xit (j),hit+1 ≥0                 Λt
subject to (7), (8), and (9).
  To solve the firm’s decision problem, we first derive the unit cost of production. Define
the total cost of producing yit as
                                                                      Z
                                        Φ(yti , ait )   ≡ min
                                                           i
                                                                          PXt (j)xit (j)dj
                                                            xt (j)
                     R                     
                           1
subject to ait exp        0
                               log xit (j)dj ≥ yti . Cost minimization implies that

                                                                              a∗t
                                                        Φ(yti , ait ) = yti       ,                         (A4)
                                                                              ait
where the average cost a∗t is given by equation (10) and the demand for each xit (j) satisfies
                                                  Z 1             
                                   i        ∗               i
                           PXt (j)xt (j) = at exp      log xt (j)dj .                    (A5)
                                                                          0

Using the cost function in (A4), we rewrite firm i’s budget constraint as
                                                                                  a∗t
                                    dit + pt (hit+1 − hit ) ≤ yti − yti               + Rct hit .           (A6)
                                                                                  ait
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                        35

Conjecture the value function in the form of

                                   Vt hit , ait = vt ait hit ,
                                                       
                                                                                             (A7)

where vt (ait ) satisfies the first-order condition
                                           Λt+1
                                     βEt        vt+1 (ait+1 ) = pt .                         (A8)
                                            Λt
                                                                                                   
Equation (A8) is an equilibrium restriction on the real estate price. If pt > βEt vt+1 ait+1 Λt+1 /Λt ,
firm i would prefer to sell all real estate so that hit+1 = 0. All other firms would not hold real
estate because the preceding inequality holds for any i as ait is an iid process. This would vio-
                                                                                              
late the market clearing condition for the real estate market. If pt < βEt vt+1 ait+1 Λt+1 /Λt ,
all firms would prefer to own real estate as much as possible, which again violates the market
clearing condition.
  We rewrite the credit constraint (8) as
                                                  a∗t
                                            yti       ≤ λpt hit .                            (A9)
                                                  ait
Substituting equations (A6) and (A7) into equation (A3), we rewrite the firm’s problem as
                                           a∗t
                                              
                  i
                     i
              vt at ht = max         yt 1 − i + Rct hit − pt (hit+1 − hit ) + pt hit+1 ,
                                      i
                                                                                         (A10)
                         yti , hit+1       at

subject to (A9). The optimal solution to (A10) is
                                    ( ai
                                i     λ a∗t pt hit if ait ≥ a∗t
                              yt =       t                      .                          (A11)
                                           0       otherwise

Aggregating individual firms’ output in (A11) gives
                                   Z ∞
                                                                    pt ∞
                    Z 1                                Z 1
                                             ait
                                                                       Z
                          i                          i      i
               Yt =      yt di = λ            ∗ t
                                                 p dat     ht di = λ ∗     af (a)da.       (A12)
                     0              ait ≥a∗t at         0           at a∗t
From equations (7), (8), and (A5) one can see that the total production cost is given by
                       Z 1Z 1                  Z ∞
                                                       a∗t i
            PXt Xt =               i
                              PXt xt (j)didj =            y di = λpt [1 − F (a∗t )] .
                                                         i t
                        0   0                    i   ∗ a
                                                at ≥at t
                                       h               iα
Using PXt = a∗t and Xt (j) = Xt = At (ut Kt )1−φ Htφ Nt1−α , we derive
                                             h               iα
                                       a∗t At (ut Kt )1−φ Htφ Nt1−α
                               λpt =                                   .                   (A13)
                                                     1 − F (a∗t )
Combining this equation and (A12) gives the aggregate production function
                                                    R∞
                              h               iα
                                                     a∗
                                                        af (a)da
                       Yt = At (ut Kt )1−φ Htφ Nt1−α t            .
                                                     1 − F (a∗t )
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                        36

D.2. Proof of Proposition 2. Substituting equation (A11) into the Bellman equation (A10)
and matching the coefficients, we obtain
                               (  ai    
                                    t
                                    ∗ − 1  λpt + Rct + pt if ait ≥ a∗t
                    vt ait =       at
                          
                                                                       .
                                          Rct + pt        otherwise
Substituting the above expression into (A8) gives the asset pricing equation
                              "                     Z ∞                     #
                         Λt+1                              a − a∗t+1
                pt = βEt       Rct+1 + pt+1 + λpt+1                  f (a)da .
                          Λt                         a∗t+1   a∗t+1

  The first order condition for intermediate goods producers’ optimal problem with respect
to real estate gives

                       αφPXt (j)At Kt (j)α(1−φ) Nt (j)(1−α) Htαφ−1 (j) = Rct .

Given the symmetric equilibrium in the intermediate goods sector and the market clear
conditions, the previous equation becomes

                             Rct = αφa∗t At (ut Kt )α(1−φ) Htαφ−1 Nt1−α .               (A14)

D.3. Proof of Proposition 3. In Supplemental Appendix G, we derive the log-linearized
equilibrium system. One of the log-linearized equations pertains to the real estate price,
which involves the term
                                               ∞
                                      a − a∗
                                           Z
                                             f (a)da.
                                   a∗    a∗
Since the data does not pin down the distribution f or a∗ , we normalize the distribution
such that
                                       ∞
                                     a − a∗
                                   Z
                                                      1
                                         ∗
                                            f (a)da = − 1.                            (A15)
                                 a∗    a              β
Given this normalization, we log-linearize the stationary version of equation (13) as
                                 β(R̃c /Ỹ )
  p̂t + Λ̂t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 +               Et R̂ct+1 + βEt p̂t+1 +
                                     p̃/Ỹ
                                                                                         
                                   (1 − β)(λp̃/Ỹ )                1+µ 1+µ 
                                                      Et p̂t+1 −             p̂t+1 − Ŷt+1 .
                                          p̃/Ỹ                      µ 1+η+µ
We rewrite the previous equation as
                                     β(R̃ /Ỹ )
                                            c
         p̂t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 − Λ̂t +           Et R̂ct+1
                                         p̃/Ỹ
                                                                    
                                      1+µ 1+µ 
                 +λ(1 − β)Et p̂t+1 −                    p̂t+1 − Ŷt+1 + βEt p̂t+1 .
                                       µ 1+η+µ
Let
                                           p̂t = p̂1t + p̂2t + p̂3t ,
               DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                    37

where
                                      
          p̂1t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 − Λ̂t + βEt p̂1t+1 ,

                   β R̃c
          p̂2t =         Et R̂ct+1 + βEt p̂2t+1 ,
                     p̃
                                                                 
                                           1+µ 1+µ 
          p̂3t   = λ(1 − β)Et p̂t+1 −                p̂t+1 − Ŷt+1 + βEt p̂3t+1 .
                                             µ 1+η+µ
Substituting η = χ(1 + µ)/(µ − χ) into the last equation, we complete the proof of the
proposition.

D.4. Proof of Proposition 4. For our simple model, equation (A12) can be simplified as
                                       λpt ∞
                                          Z
                            Yt = C t = ∗      af (a)da.
                                       at a∗t
Since the collateral constraint (8) binds for firms with ait ≥ a∗t , aggregating this constraint
in a symmetric equilibrium yields

                                    PXt Xt = [1 − F (a∗t )]λpt .

  Since PXt = a∗t and Xt = At Nt1−α = At , we have

                               PXt Xt = [1 − F (a∗t )]λpt = a∗t At .

This equation implies that
                                                a∗t At
                                        λpt =             .
                                             1 − F (a∗t )
  Substituting this equation into the preceding equation for Yt yields
                                               R∞
                                                 a∗
                                                     af (a)da
                                 Y t = C t = At t             .                          (A16)
                                                 1 − F (a∗t )
The log-linearized version of the previous equation is
                                                     ηµ ∗
                                  Ŷt = Ĉt = Ât +     â .
                                                    1+µ t
Similarly, the simplified version of equation (A13) is
                                                    a∗t At
                                       λpt =                   .
                                                [1 − F (a∗t )]
Log-linearizing the previous equation gives

                                      p̂t = Ât + [1 + η] â∗t .                         (A17)

The simplified version of equation (A14) is

                                         Rct = αφa∗t At ,

whose log-linearized version is
                                         R̂ct = Ât + â∗t .
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                    38

  The asset pricing equation, represented by (13), can be simplified to
                                "                      Z ∞                     #
                                                                    ∗
                 1        θt+1                                a − a t+1
              pt    = βEt         Rct+1 + pt+1 + λpt+1           ∗
                                                                        f (a)da .
                 Ct       Ct+1                          a∗t+1   at+1

Log-linearizing the preceding equation and then combining the log-linearized equation with
equation (A17) gives us
                  η+1+µ ∗                                     η+1+µ
                       ât = ρθ θ̂t + [1 − (1 − β)(1 − λ)]          Et â∗t+1
                   1+µ                                         1+µ
                                                           ηµ
                             +(1 − β)(1 − λ)Et (1 −            )â∗
                                                          1 + µ t+1
                                (1 − β) (1 + µ) λ
                             −                    Et â∗t+1 ,
                                         µ
or equivalently
                                     1+µ
                      â∗t = ρθ θ̂t          + [1 − (1 − β)(1 − λ)]Et â∗t+1
                                   η+1+µ
                                                  1 + µ − ηµ ∗
                               +(1 − β)(1 − λ)Et             â
                                                   η + 1 + µ t+1
                                 (1 − β) (1 + µ) λ 1 + µ
                               −                            Et â∗t+1 .
                                         µ        η+1+µ
Given the AR(1) process of a∗t , we have
                                              1+µ        1
                                      â∗t = ρθ                θ̂t
                                            η + 1 + µ 1 − ρθ κ
                                            π
                                         =     θ̂t ,
                                           1+η
where κ and π are defined in Proposition 4. Note that κ < 1 for our estimated parameter
values.

D.5. Proof of Proposition 5. Denote the k-period ahead return by
                                         re        pt+k + Rct+k
                                        Rt,t+k =                .
                                                        pt
Given normalization (A15), we have
                                         Rc           1
                                            = (1 − λ)( − 1).
                                         p            β
Hence, the log-linearized return is given by

               re          (1 − λ)(1 − β)                    β
             R̂t,t+k =                      R̂ct+k +                    p̂t+k − p̂t .   (A18)
                         (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β          (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
From equations (18) and (19) we have

                                       R̂ct − p̂t = −ηâ∗t = −ϕθ̂t ,                    (A19)
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                    39

                       1+µ    ρθ
where we define ϕ = η η+1+µ 1−ρθ κ
                                   . Substituting equations (18), (19), and (A19) into the
preceding equation leads to

                    re                         (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                  R̂t,t+k = p̂t+k − p̂t +                          [R̂ct+k − p̂t+k ]
                                             (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
                                                           (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                             = (η + 1)(â∗t+k − â∗t ) −                     ηa∗ .
                                                         (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β t+k

Then substituting equations (16) and (A19) into the previous equation leads to

                   re
                               h           i    (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                 R̂t,t+k    = π θ̂t+k − θ̂t +                    [R̂ct+k − p̂t+k ]
                                              (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
                               h           i    (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                            = π θ̂t+k − θ̂t −                    ϕθ̂t+k ,
                                              (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
             1+µ    ρθ                  1+µ    ρθ
where ϕ = η η+1+µ 1−ρθ κ
                         < π = (1 + η) η+1+µ 1−ρθ κ
                                                    . It follows that
         n                    o                   (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                                                                       
            re                        k          k
       Et R̂t,t+k   R̂ct − p̂t   = (ρθ − 1)π − ρθ                     ϕ θt
                                                   (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
                                                                       
                                    k   (1 − λ)(1 − β)          k     π             
                                 = ρθ                    ϕ − (ρθ − 1)      R̂ct − p̂t .
                                      (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β              ϕ

where the regression coefficient

                                       (1 − λ)(1 − β)               π
                                    ρkθ                 − (ρkθ − 1)
                                     (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β             ϕ
                                       (1 − λ)(1 − β)               η+1
                               = ρkθ                    − (ρkθ − 1)
                                     (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β               η
                               > 0

increases with k. The corresponding measure of fit is
                                                                      2
                                                       (1−λ)(1−β)
                                  (η + 1)(ρkθ − 1) − (1−λ)(1−β)+β ηρkθ
      R2 = h                          i2             h                                                 i.
                         (1−λ)(1−β)                                                  (1−λ)(1−β)
             (η + 1) − (1−λ)(1−β)+β η (1 − ρθ ) + (η + 1)(ρkθ − 1) −
                                                2k
                                                                                   (1−λ)(1−β)+β
                                                                                                ηρkθ

  The predictability result for real estate returns, as shown above, also holds for excess
returns. One can see from equations (17) and (18) that the risk-free interest rate in response
to the discount-rate shock (i.e., Ât = 0) is

                           R̂f t = Et Ĉt+1 − Ĉt − ρθ θ̂t
                                   ηµ     1+µ          1
                                =                               (ρθ − 1)θ̂t − ρθ θ̂t
                                  1 + µ η + 1 + µ 1 − ρθ κ
                                   ηµ
                                =       (ρθ − 1)â∗t − ρθ θ̂t .
                                  1+µ
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                              40

From equation (A18) we have
                        re                       (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                   Et R̂t,t+k = p̂t+k − p̂t +                      Et [R̂ct+k − p̂t+k ]
                                               (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β
                                                           (1 − λ)(1 − β)
                               = [η + 1] (ρkθ − 1)â∗t −                     ηρk â∗ .
                                                         (1 − λ)(1 − β) + β θ t
The excess return is then given by

                         (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β(η + 1) k
       re
  Et R̂t,t+k − R̂f t =                              (ρθ − ρθ )a∗t
                             (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β
                                                                       λ(1 − λ)(1 − β)2
                                                                                         
                                                  (1 − β) (1 + µ) λ
                                             +                      −                    η ρθ â∗t .
                                                          µ           (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β
Substituting equation (A19) into the preceding equation leads to

       re                (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β(η + 1) ρθ − ρkθ             
  Et R̂t,t+k − R̂f t =                                        R̂ct − p̂t
                             (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β        η
                                           λ(1 − λ)(1 − β)2
                                                                                   
                                                                 (1 − β) (1 + µ) λ               
                                     +                       −                      ρθ R̂ct − p̂t .
                                          (1 − β)(1 − λ) + β               ηµ
Note that ρθ − ρkθ ≥ 0. As long as η is sufficiently large, the term in the square brackets
is positive, which is true for our estimated parameters. Hence if we run a regression of the
excess return on the log value of the rent-price ratio R̂ct − p̂t , the coefficient will be positive.

D.6. Proof of Proposition 6. From the proof of Proposition 4, we have the following
equilibrium condition:
                                       pt             1
                                            =                  .
                                       Rct    λ [1 − F (a∗t )]
Log-linearizing this condition delivers the first-order solutions in closed form as
                                                                  ηπ
                            v̂t ≡ R̂ct − p̂t = â∗t − π θ̂t = −      θ̂t .
                                                                 1+η
Note
                                                                   h           i
                            r̂t+k   ≡ p̂t+k − p̂t = Ât+k − Ât + π θ̂t+k − θ̂t .
With discount-rate shocks, we have
                        h          i
             r̂t+k = π θ̂t+k − θ̂t

                         = (ρkθ − 1)π θ̂t + πσθ [εθt+k + ρθ εθt+k−1 + · · · + ρk−1
                                                                               θ   εθt+1 ].

It follows that

                                     E[r̂t+k | v̂t ] = E[r̂t+k | θ̂t ]
                                                    = (ρkθ − 1)π θ̂t
                                                                 1+η
                                                    = (1 − ρkθ )     v̂t .
                                                                   η
             DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                         41

If we run a regression of r̂t+k on the valuation ratio v̂t , the coefficient will be positive.
  With discount-rate shocks, the correlation between r̂t+k and v̂t is
                                                   q
                                                      1
                                         (1 − ρkθ ) 1−ρ 2
                                                        θ
                             ρr,v = r                           ,
                                             k 2 1
                                                         1−ρ2k
                                       1 − ρθ 1−ρ2 + 1−ρ2    θ
                                                        θ       θ


which implies
                                                   2
                                 2        1 − ρkθ /1 − ρ2θ
                                Rr,v
                                  =            2 1        1−ρ2k
                                       1 − ρkθ 1−ρ     2 + 1−ρ2
                                                              θ
                                                       θ       θ
                                                       2
                                            1 − ρkθ
                                  =            2
                                       1 − ρkθ + 1 − ρ2k   θ
                                                2
                                       1 − ρkθ
                                  =
                                       2 − 2ρkθ
                                      1
                                  =     (1 − ρkθ ).
                                      2
                       2
Thus, the fit measure R increases with the forecast horizon.
  With technology shocks, however, the log value of the rent-price ratio is v̂t = R̂ct − p̂t = 0.
Clearly, there is no predictability for technology shocks.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE              42

                                      References

Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2007): “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle Is
  the Trend,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1), 69–102.
Albuquerque, R., M. Eichenbaum, V. Luo, and S. Rebelo (2016): “Valuation Risk
  and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Finance, 71(6), 2861–2904.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998): “A Model of Investor Sentiment,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 49(3), 307–343.
Buera, F. J., and B. Moll (2013): “Aggregate Implications of a Credit Crunch,” Un-
  published Manuscript, UCLA and Princeton University.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011): “Understanding Booms and
  Busts in Housing Markets,” Unpublished Manuscript, Duke University and Northwestern
  University.
Campbell, J. Y., and J. Ammer (1993): “What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets? A
  Variance Decompositon for Long-Term Asset Returns,” Journal of Fin, 48(1), 3–37.
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1988): “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected
  Dividends,” Journal of Finance, 43(3), 661–676.
Campbell, S. D., M. A. Davis, J. Gallin, and R. F. Martin (2009): “What Moves
  Housing Markets: A Variance Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio,” Journal of Urba,
  66(2), 90–102.
Caplin, A., and J. Leahy (2011): “Trading Frictions and House Price Dynamics,” Journal
  of Money, Credit, and Banking, 43, 283–303.
Chaney, T., D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar (2012): “The Collateral Channel: How Real
  Estate Shocks affect Corporate Investment,” American Economic Review, 102(6), 2381–
  2409.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
  and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
  113, 1–45.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011): “Presidential Address: Discount Rates,” The Journal of Finance,
  66(4), 1047–1108.
Cummins, J. G., and G. L. Violante (2002): “Investment-Specific Technical Change in
  the United States (1947-2000): Measurement and Macroeconomic Consequences,” Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 5, 243–284.
Denton, F. T. (1971): “Adjustment of Monthly or Quarterly Series to Annual Totals:
  An Approach Based on Quadratic Minimization,” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 66, 99–102.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                    43

Dumas, B., A. Kurshev, and R. Uppal (2009): “Equilibrium Portfolio Strategies in the
  Presence of Sentiment Risk and Excess Volatility,” Journal of Finance, 64(2), 579–629.
Favilukis, J., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. V. Nieuwerburgh (2017): “The Macroeco-
  nomic Effects of Housing Wealth, Housing Finance, and Limited Risk Sharing in General
  Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 125(1), 140–223.
Galı́, J. (2015): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
  New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
  New Jersey, second edn., ISBN-10: 0691164789 ISBN-13: 978-0691164786.
Ghysels, E., A. Plazzi, W. Torous, and R. Valkanov (2012): “Forecasting Real
  Estate Prices,” Unpublished Manuscript.
         (2013): “Forecasting Real Estate Prices,” Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2,
  509–580, DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53683-9.00009-8.
Gordon, R. J. (1990): The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. University of Chicago
  Press, Chicago, Illinois.
Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and P. Krusell (1997): “Long-Run Implications of
  Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review, 87, 342–362.
Hansen, L. P., and R. Jagannathan (1991): “Implications of Security Market Data for
  Models of Dynamic Economies,” Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), 225–262.
Head, A., H. Lloyd-Ellis, and H. Sun (2014): “Search, Liquidity, and the Dynamics
  of House Prices and Construction,” American Economic Review, 104(4).
Iacoviello, M. (2005): “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in
  the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), 739–764.
Iacoviello, M., and S. Neri (2010): “Housing Market Spillovers: Evidence from an
  Estimated DSGE Model,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 125–164.
Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2009): “Can News About the Future Drive the Business
  Cycle?,” American Economic Review, 99(4), 1097–1118.
Jermann, U., and V. Quadrini (2012): “Macroeconomic Effects of Financial Shocks,”
  American Economic Review, 102(1), 238–271.
Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2017): “Credit Supply and the
  Housing Boom,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. Violante (2017): “The Housing Boom and Bust:
  Model Meets Evidence,” Unpublished Manuscript.
Keane, M. P., and R. Rogerson (2011): “Reconciling Micro and Macro Labor Supply
  Elasticities: A Structural Perspective,” NBER Working Paper No. 17430.
Kiyotaki, N., A. Michaelides, and K. Nikolov (2011): “Winners and Losers in Hous-
  ing Markets,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 43(2-3), 255–296.
           DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                  44

Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J. V. Rı́os-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): “Capital-
  Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis,” Econometrica, 68(5),
  1029–1053.
Liu, Z., J. Miao, and T. Zha (2016): “Land Prices and Unemployment,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 80, 86–105.
Liu, Z., P. Wang, and T. Zha (2013): “Land-Price Dynamics and Macroeconomic Fluc-
  tuations,” Econometrica, 81(3), 1147–1184.
Malpezzi, S. (2002): “Hedonic Pricing Models: A Selective and Applied Review,” in
  Housing Economics and Public Policy, ed. by A. O’Sullivan, and K. Gibb. Wiley-Blackwell.
Miao, J., P. Wang, and T. Zha (2014): “Liquidity Premia, Price-Rent Dynamics, and
  Business Cycles,” NBER Working Paper No. 20377.
Piazzesi, M., and M. Schneider (2009): “Momentum Traders in the Housing Market:
  Survey Evidence and a Search Model,” American Economic Review, 99, 406–411.
Pintus, P. A., and Y. Wen (2013): “Leveraged Borrowing and Boom-Bust Cycles,”
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 16, 617–633.
Primiceri, G. E., E. Schaumburg, and A. Tambalotti (2006): “Intertemporal Dis-
  turbances,” NBER Working Paper No. 12243.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equi-
  librium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1,
  1123–1175.
Wheaton, W. C., and R. G. Torto (1994): “Office Rent Indices and Their Behavior
  Over Time,” Journal of Urban Economics, 35(2), 121–139.
DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE   45




         Supplementary Appendices
                (Not intended for publication)
           DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                         46

  In the supplementary appendices, all labels for equations, tables, and propositions begin
with S, which stands for a supplement to the main text.

                        Appendix E. Equilibrium conditions

  The equilibrium for this economy is characterized by the following system of equations.
 (E1) Marginal utility of consumption Λt :
                                        Θt               Θt+1
                           Λt =                − βγEt            .                                           (S1)
                                    Ct − γCt−1        Ct+1 − γCt
 (E2) Labor supply wt :
                                         Λt wt = Θt ψt Ntν .                                                 (S2)
 (E3) Real estate rent Rct :
                                                   αφξt Yt /Ht
                                   Rct =       1
                                                     R∞ a           .                                        (S3)
                                            1−F (a∗t )a∗ a∗
                                                            f (a)da
                                                            t    t

 (E4) Investment It :
                               "                           2                                        #
                1            Ω               It                                It                 It
                   = Qkt 1 −                       − gI           −Ω                  − gI
                Zt           2              It−1                              It−1               It−1
                                                                              2
                                                                       
                                   Λt+1                  It+1                It+1
                          +βEt          Qkt+1 Ω               − gI                .                          (S4)
                                    Λt                    It                  It2
 (E5) Marginal Tobin’s Qkt :
                                   Λt+1
                     Qkt = βEt          (ut+1 Rkt+1 + (1 − δ(ut+1 ))Qkt+1 ).                                 (S5)
                                    Λt
 (E6) Capital utilization ut :
                                           Rkt = δ 0 (ut )Qkt .                                              (S6)
 (E7) Real estate price pt :
                             "                      Z                    #
                        Λt+1                                a
               pt = βEt        Rct+1 + pt+1 + λpt+1       ( ∗ − 1)f (a)da .                                  (S7)
                         Λt                          a∗t+1 at+1

 (E8) Rent of capital Rkt :
                                                                        Y
                          Rkt ut Kt = α(1 − φ)              1
                                                                      R ∞t  a           .                    (S8)
                                                         1−F (a∗t )     a∗t a∗t
                                                                                f (a)da
 (E9) Labor demand Nt :
                                                                   Y
                            wt Nt = (1 − α)           1
                                                                 R ∞t    a           .                       (S9)
                                                   1−F (a∗t )        a∗t a∗t
                                                                             f (a)da
(E10) Aggregate output Yt :
                                                            "                                          #
                                                                                Z     ∞
                                                                    1
                Yt = At (ut Kt )α(1−φ) Htαφ Nt1−α                                         af (a)da .        (S10)
                                                                1 − F (a∗t )        a∗t
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                               47

(E11) Collateral constraint a∗t :
                                              Z   ∞
                                         pt
                                        λ ∗           af (a)da = Yt .                              (S11)
                                         at    a∗t

(E12) Aggregate capital accumulation Kt :
                                                       "                            2 #
                                                      Ω                 It
                      Kt+1     = (1 − δ(ut ))Kt + 1 −                         − gI          It .   (S12)
                                                      2                It−1
(E13) Resource constraint Ct :
                                                       It
                                              Ct +        = Yt .                                   (S13)
                                                       Zt
(E14) Interest rate Rf t :
                                                Λt+1
                                                     .
                                           1 = βRf t Et                                            (S14)
                                                 Λt
  We have 14 equations for the following 14 variables:
 (V1) Λt : Marginal utility of consumption.
 (V2) wt : Real wage.
 (V3) It : Investment.
 (V4) Qk,t : Price of capital.
 (V5) ut : Capacity utilization rate.
 (V6) pt : Real estate price.
 (V7) Rkt : Rental price of capital.
 (V8) Nt : Total labor supply.
 (V9) Yt : Output.
(V10) a∗t : Cutoff value for investment.
(V11) Kt+1 : Capital.
(V12) Ct : Consumption.
(V13) Rct : Rental price of real estate.
(V14) Rf t : Risk-free interest rate.

                   Appendix F. Stationary equilibrium conditions

  We make the following transformations of variables:
                                Ct ˜        It          Yt              Kt
                          C̃t ≡    , It ≡       , Ỹt ≡ , K̃t ≡                ,
                                Γt        Zt Γt         Γt           Γt−1 Zt−1
                                          wt           Rct          pt
                                    w̃t ≡ , R̃ct ≡         , p̃t ≡
                                          Γt           Γt           Γt
                                                                     Λt
                               R̃kt ≡ Rkt Zt , Q̃kt ≡ Qkt Zt , Λ̃t ≡    Γt ,
                                                                     Θt
                α(1−φ)        1
               1−α(1−φ)
where Γt = Zt             At1−α(1−φ) . The other variables are stationary and there is no need to
transform them.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                     48

               Zt                  At
  Let Gzt =   Zt−1
                     and Gat =    At−1
                                       .   Then

                                     log Gzt = log gzt + log gνz,t ,
                                     log Gat = log gat + log gνa,t .

where

                                   log gνz,t = log νz,t − log νz,t−1 ,
                                   log gνa,t = log νa,t − log νa,t−1 .

Denote by gγt ≡ Γt /Γt−1 the gross growth rate of Γt . We have
                                    α(1 − φ)                  1
                      log gγt =                log Gzt +              log Gat .                          (S15)
                                  1 − α(1 − φ)           1 − α(1 − φ)
Denote by gγ the nonstochastic steady state of gγt , which satisfies
                                     α(1 − φ)                 1
                       log gγ ≡                 log gz +              log ga .                           (S16)
                                   1 − α(1 − φ)          1 − α(1 − φ)
On the nonstochastic balanced growth path, investment and capital grow at the rate of
gI ≡ gγ gz ; consumption, output, real wages, price of commercial real estate, and the rental
rate of commercial property grow at the rate of gγ ; and the rental rate of capital, Tobin’s
marginal Q, and the relative price of investment goods decrease at the rate gz . Below we
display the corresponding equilibrium equations for the stationary variables.
(SE1) Marginal utility of consumption:
                                        1                               1
                       Λ̃t =                       − βγEt θt+1                     .                     (S17)
                                C̃t − γ C̃t−1 /gγt             C̃t+1 gγt+1 − γ C̃t
(SE2) Labor supply:
                                               Λ̃t w̃t = ψt Ntν .                                        (S18)
(SE3) Real estate rent:
                                                            αφỸ
                                      R̃ct =      1
                                                            R ∞ at               .                       (S19)
                                               1−F (a∗t )    a∗t a∗t
                                                                       f (a)da
(SE4) Investment:
                                                      !2                           !                
                            Ω       I˜t                             ˜
                                                                   It                     ˜
                                                                                         It
        1 = Q̃kt 1 −                   Gzt gγt − gI     −Ω            Gzt gγt − gI          Gzt gγt 
                            2     I˜t−1                          I˜t−1                 I˜t−1
                                                                       !
                            Λ̃t+1              I˜t+1                     I˜t+1
                                                                            2
                +βEt θt+1         Q̃kt+1 Ω           gγt+1 Gzt+1 − gI           gγt+1 Gzt+1 .            (S20)
                             Λ̃t                 I˜t                       I˜t2
(SE5) Marginal Tobin’s Q:
                                  Λ̃t+1     1
               Q̃kt = βEt θt+1                     [ut+1 R̃kt+1 + (1 − δ(ut+1 ))Q̃kt+1 ].                (S21)
                                   Λ̃t gγt+1 Gzt+1
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                                  49

 (SE6) Capital utilization:
                                               R̃kt = δ 0 (ut )Q̃kt .                                                 (S22)

 (SE7) Real estate price:
                                  "                       Z ∞                  #
                        Λ̃t+1                                     a
              p̃t = βEt       θt+1 R̃ht+1 + p̃t+1 + p̃t+1       ( ∗ − 1)f (a)da .                                     (S23)
                         Λ̃t                               a∗t+1 at+1


 (SE8) Rental rate of capital:

                                                       α(1 − φ)Gzt gγt Ỹt
                                  R̃kt ut K̃t =          1
                                                               R∞ a           .                                       (S24)
                                                      1−F (a∗ ) a∗ a∗
                                                                      f (a)da
                                                                t       t        t


 (SE9) Labor demand:
                                                              (1 − α)Ỹt
                                     w̃t Nt =       1
                                                                R∞ a           .                                      (S25)
                                                 1−F (a∗t )      a∗ a∗
                                                                       f (a)da
                                                                    t       t

(SE10) Aggregate output:
                                                                                               R∞
                                 1                           α(1−φ)
                                                                                                a∗t
                                                                                                      af (a)da
                 Ỹt =                              ut K̃t                      Htαφ Nt1−α                       .    (S26)
                                     α(1−φ)
                         (Gzt Gat ) 1−α(1−φ)                                                    1 − F (a∗t )

(SE11) Collateral constraint:
                                                Z    ∞
                                         p̃t
                                        λ ∗               af (a)da = Ỹt .                                            (S27)
                                         at         a∗t

(SE12) Aggregate capital accumulation:
                                                                                                         !2 
                                          K̃t           Ω                              I˜t                   I˜t .
                 K̃t+1 = (1 − δ(ut ))            + 1 −                                    gzt gγt − gI               (S28)
                                         gzt gγt        2                            I˜t−1

(SE13) Resource constraints:
                                                 C̃t + I˜t = Ỹt .                                                    (S29)

(SE14) Interest rate:
                                                          "                                #
                                                              Λ̃t+1 θt+1 1
                                   1 = βRf t Et                                .                                      (S30)
                                                                  Λ̃t   gγ,t+1


                         Appendix G. Solving the steady state

 (SS1) β or Rf : From (S30),
                                                                gγ
                                                      β=           .                                                  (S31)
                                                                Rf
       Given (Rf )Data = 1.01, we know β.
           DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                                              50

                                                              1                              1
(SS2) Λ̃: From equation (S17), we have Λ̃t =          C̃t −γ C̃t−1 /gγ
                                                                          − βγEt θt+1 C̃                  . Thus,
                                                                                       t+1 gγt+1 −γ C̃t


                                                   gγ − βγ
                                         Λ̃ =                ,
                                                 C̃(gγt − γ)
      which leads to
                                                    gγ − βγ
                                     Λ̃Ỹ =                      ,                                            (S32)
                                                (C̃/Ỹ )(gγ − γ)
      where C̃/Ỹ is given in (S42). In estimation, however, once we are given (I/ ˜ K̃)Data and
                                                         ˜ Ỹ )Data . We need to verify that the
      (K̃/Ỹ )Data , we know in effect (C̃/Ỹ )Data and (I/
      model-based ratio C̃/Ỹ backed out from (S42) must be exactly the same as (C̃/Ỹ )Data
            ˜ Ỹ )Data is given.
      when (I/
(SS3) Q̃k : From equation (S20),
                                                1 = Q̃k .
           ˜ From equation (S28),
(SS4) δ or I:
                                                            !
                                                      I˜
                                     δ =1−         1−           gz gγ .
                                                      K̃
             ˜ K̃)Data , we obtain δ.
      Given (I/
(SS5) R̃k : From equation (S21),
                                      β h                       i
                             Q̃k =         uR̃k + (1 − δ (u))Q̃k .
                                     gγ gz
      With u = 1, we have
                                           gγ gz
                                   R̃k =         − (1 − δ (1)).                                               (S33)
                                            β
      Once we derive δ (1) or δ in item (SS4), we can solve for R̃k .
(SS6) δ 0 (1) or u: From equation (S22), δ 0 (1) is determined by

                                           δ 0 (1) = R̃k ,

      This determination utilizes the normalization u = 1.
(SS7) µ or K̃: The steady-state markup is
                                  R∞ a
                                    ∗  ∗ f (a) da
                              µ= a a              − 1 > 0.
                                    1 − F (a∗ )
      From equation (S24), we have
                                                α(1 − φ)gz gγ Ỹ
                                     R̃k K̃ =                    ,
                                                    1+µ
      which leads to
                                                         Ỹ 1
                                µ = α(1 − φ)gz gγ               − 1.                                          (S34)
                                                         K̃ R̃k
              DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                   51

       Given (K̃/Ỹ )Data , we can solve for µ and φ jointly from (S34) and (S37). Note that
       µ > 0 must hold.
            If we were to estimate µ instead, we would then determine the capital-output ratio
       as
                                      K̃   α(1 − φ)gz gγ
                                         =               .                              (S35)
                                      Ỹ    (1 + µ)R̃k
 (SS8) a∗ : Note that
                                             R∞     a
                                              a∗   a∗
                                                      f (a) da
                                    1+µ=                       .                        (S36)
                                               1   − F (a∗ )
       If we have the value of µ (see below) and specify the probability density f (a), we
       can in principle obtain a∗ . In practice, we do not need f (a) nor a∗ for first-order
       dynamics and thus we do not derive either one explicitly.
 (SS9) φ or Rc : (S19) implies that
                                                    Y
                                        Rc = αφ        .
                                                   1+µ
       In principle, we can solve for the rent of real estate property Rc . In estimation,
       however, we use the relationship

                                          R̃c    αφ
                                              =     .                                   (S37)
                                          Ỹ    1+µ
                    Data
       Given R̃c /Ỹ       (we use the ratio of rental income to output because H is normal-
       ized to be 1), we can obtain µ and φ jointly from (S34) and (S37).
(SS10) λ or p̃: From equation (S23),
                                                Z ∞                
                                αφ                    a     
                     p̃ = βθ       Ỹ + p̃ + λp̃         − 1 f (a) da .                 (S38)
                               1+µ                a∗  a∗
       We normalize θ = 1. For a given value of λ, we have
                         p̃                    βαφ
                            =                  R∞        a
                                                                          .           (S39)
                        Ỹ    (1 + µ) 1 − β − βλ a∗       a∗
                                                               − 1 f (a) da

       This expression can be further simplified with normalization (A15).
(SS11) w̃: From equation (S25),

                                                        Ỹ
                                      w̃N = (1 − α)        .
                                                       1+µ
            In principle, once we normalize N and solve for Y , we can obtain w. In practice,
       we do not need to know w or Y for first-order dynamics and therefore we do not need
       to obtain either of these variables explicitly, only implicitly.
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                       52

          As shown in (SS12), the normalization of N enables us to back out the value of
       ψ (steady state disutility level). We use the following relationship to determine ψ in
       (SS12):
                                     w̃    (1 − α)
                                        =           .                                     (S40)
                                     Ỹ   N (1 + µ)
(SS12) ψ or N : From equation (S18), we obtain ψ as
                                            (Λ̃Ỹ ) (w̃/Ỹ )
                                      ψ=                     ,                            (S41)
                                                  Nν
       where Λ̃Ỹ is given by (S32), w̃/Ỹ is given by (S40), and N is normalized to, say, 1/3.
(SS13) Ỹ : It follows from equation (S26) that

                                  Ỹ = ÃK̃ α(1−φ) N 1−α TFP,
                                                         ]

       where                                    Z ∞
                                          1
                              TFP
                              ]=                     af (a) da.
                                     1 − F (a∗ ) a∗
       In principle, once the probability density function f (a) is given and if a∗ is known,
       we know TFP. By dividing K̃ on both sides and given (K̃/Ỹ )Data , we obtain K̃ and
       then Ỹ .
         In estimation, we do not need to solve for Ỹ or K̃ because the scale Ã is arbitrary;
       nor do we need to know TFP
                               ] as it does not affect first-order dynamics. This part is
       written for completeness, even if it is never used or needed for estimation. The scale
                                                  ˜ Ỹ = (I/
       of Ã or Ỹ is implicitly chosen such that I/      ˜ Ỹ )Data .
(SS14) C̃: From equation (S29) we have
                                          C̃        I˜
                                             =1− .                                        (S42)
                                          Ỹ       Ỹ
                                             ˜ we can obtain C̃. In practice, given (K̃/Ỹ )Data
       In principle, after we obtain Ỹ and I,
             ˜ K̃)Data , the ratios I/
       and (I/                      ˜ Ỹ and C̃/Ỹ automatically match the data. First-order
       dynamics only need these ratios.

                         Appendix H. Log-linearized system

  Following is the log-linearized equilibrium system.
  (L1) Marginal utility of consumption:
                          h                           i
  Λ̂t (gγ − βγ) (gγ − γ) = −gγ2 Ĉt + γgγ Ĉt−1 − ĝγt
                                          h                                       i
                                  − βγEt −gγ Ĉt+1 + ĝγt+1 + γ Ĉt + θ̂t+1 (gγ − γ) . (S43)

  (L2) Labor supply:
                                     Λ̂t + ŵt = ψ̂t + ν N̂t .                            (S44)
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                         53

 (L3) Real estate rent:
                                            1 + µ − ηµ           
                               R̂ct = Ŷt +              p̂t − Ŷt .                        (S45)
                                             1+η+µ
 (L4) Investment:
                       h                               i
                     2   ˆ  ˆ
 0 = Q̂kt − Ω (gz gγ ) It − It−1 + ĝzt + ĝvzt + ĝγt
                                                                                         
                                 + βΩ (gz gγ )2 Et Iˆt+1 − Iˆt + ĝzt+1 + ĝγt+1 + ĝvzt+1 . (S46)

 (L5) Marginal Tobin’s Qk :
                                  h                                          i
                   Q̂kt + Λ̂t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 − ĝγt+1 − ĝzt+1 − ĝvzt+1
                                                                      
                                +(1 − β(1 − δ))Et ût+1 + R̂kt+1
                                                          δ 0 (1)
                                                                      
                                +β(1 − δ)Et Q̂kt+1 −              ût+1 .                   (S47)
                                                         1−δ
 (L6) Capacity utilization:
                                               δ 00 (1)
                                      R̂kt =            ût + Q̂kt .                        (S48)
                                               δ 0 (1)
 (L7) Real estate price:
                             β(R̃ /Ỹ )
                                   h
 p̂t + Λ̂t = Et θ̂t+1 + Λ̂t+1 +           Et R̂ht+1 + βEt p̂t+1 +
                                 p̃/Ỹ
                                                                              
                                                       1+µ 1+µ 
                                λ(1 − β)Et p̂t+1 −                p̂t+1 − Ŷt+1 . (S49)
                                                        µ 1+η+µ
 (L8) Rental rate of capital:
                                                              1 + µ − ηµ           
               R̂kt + ût + K̂t = Ŷt + ĝzt + ĝγt + ĝvzt +              p̂t − Ŷt .      (S50)
                                                               1+η+µ
 (L9) Labor demand:
                                                    ηµ ∗
                           ŵt + N̂t = Ŷt + [1 −       ]â
                                                  1+µ t
                                              1 + µ − ηµ            
                                      = Ŷt +               p̂t − Ŷt .                     (S51)
                                               1+η+µ
(L10) Aggregate output:

 Ŷt = α(1 − φ)(ût + K̂t )+
                             ηµ                α(1 − φ)
           (1 − α)N̂t +            p̂t − Ŷt −              (ĝzt + ĝvzt + ĝat + ĝvat ) . (S52)
                           1+η+µ               1 − α(1 − φ)
(L11) Collateral constraint:
                                             1+µ           
                                   â∗t =          p̂t − Ŷt .                              (S53)
                                            1+η+µ
            DISCOUNT SHOCK, PRICE-RENT DYNAMICS, AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE                        54

(L12) Aggregate capital accumulation:
                              1 − δ ˆ δ 0 (1)
                                                                                   
            (1 − δ)                                              ĝzt + ĝvzt    ĝγt
    K̂t+1 =         K̂t + 1 −         It −       ût − (1 − δ)                +         .   (S54)
             gz gγ            gz gγ        gz gγ                     gz gγ      gz gγ
(L13) Resource constraint:
                                        C̃      I˜
                                           Ĉt + Iˆt = Ŷt .                                (S55)
                                        Ỹ      Ỹ
(L14) Interest rate:                     h                             i
                           0 = R̂f t + Et Λ̂t+1 + θ̂t+1 − Λ̂t − ĝγ,t+1 ,
       which leads to                  h                              i
                             R̂f t = Et Λ̂t − Λ̂t+1 − θ̂t+1 + ĝγ,t+1                       (S56)

  Department of Economics, Boston University, 270 Bay State Road, Boston, MA 02215,
Tel.: 617-353-6675, Email: miaoj@bu.edu, Department of Economics, Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, Tel: (+852) 2358 7612, Email:
pfwang@ust.hk, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Emory University, and NBER, Tel.:
404-498-8353, Email: zmail@tzha.net.
