                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WAGES, EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING AND
                     JOB ATTACHMENT IN LOW WAGE
                      LABOR MARKETS FOR WOMEN




                           Alan Gustman

                       Thomas L. Steirimejer




                      Working Paper No. 2037




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 1986




This research was supported by Grant No. 84O1ASPE114A from ASPE,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The research
reported here is part of the NBERs research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2037
                                                    October 1986




                    Wages, Employment, Training and Job Attachment
                         in Low Wage Labor Markets for Women




                                      ABSTRACT



    This paper analyzes economic behavior and the effects of training and

  income support policies in the low wage labor market for women.    The

  opportunity set takes account of nonlinearities and discortinuities

 associated with career interruption, part—time work, and government

 programs. There are two sectors, one which rewards training and individual

 ability, the other which does not and oers only the minimum wage.

 Effects of policies are found to vary importantly among heterogeneous

 groups of women according to ability and taste for children and household

 work. Some preliminary empirical evidence is presented to narrow the
 choice of specification.




Alan Gustman
Department of Economics                          Thomas L. Steirimejer
Dartmouth College                                Department of Economics
                                                 Texas Tech University
Hanover, NH 03755
                                                 Lubbock, Texas 79409
                                    I.   Introduction

           This paper analyzes economic behavior in the low waqe labor market for

 women, and derives leplications for tralninp end       transfer   policies. On the
 demand side, the opportunity set is based on a two sector model which

 Incorporates the effects of trainino, career interruption and part—time

 work on the path of wage offers over       the life cycle. On the supply side,
 women with different abilities and preferences for children and home time

 sort themselves among available opportunities. The incentive effects of

 policies such as training, transfer and workfare programs are derived.

 implications of the very different effects of policies on women with

 dffprent abilities and tastes, and the implications of the findings for

 the design of policy evaluations are discussed. Preliminary empirical

evidence is presented to narrow the choice between alternative

specifications of the model.

       A number of economic relationships have been identified by previous

investigators as importantly influencing the life cycle pattern of labor

market and household outcomes. Women with different ability levels and

different preferences far children and home time (market work) will be

criakino   decisions   at different margins Surt1ess and Hausman,

1978; Heckman, 1974 a and b; Heckman and Willis, 1977; and Moffitt, 1984).

One strand in the relevant literature has focused on the linkage between

the wage offer and career interruption (Polachek, l975 Mincer and

Polachek, 1974; Weiss and Gronau, 1981; Sandeli and Shapiro, 1978 and 1980;

Corcoran, 1979; Mincer and Ofek, 1982; Corcoran and Duncan, 1983). Another

aspect of the budget equation which has received attention is the the

nonlinear and discontinuous relation of the wage offer to hours of work

Roser. 197, a relationship that among other things may reflect a
reduction in intensity per hour of market work once women have children and

increased household responsibilities (Becker. 1985). Special attention has

also been given to the labor supply—fertility relation, especaliy in

reconciling findings from reduced form and structural specifications of

life cycle models (Rosensweig and Wolpin, 1980; Lehrer and Nerlove, 1981;

Carliner, Robinson and Tomes, 1984.

       The model developed in the present paper incorporates those features

from previous studies which are relevant to an. analysis of policy in the

lOW wage labor market for women.     In addition, the opportunity set is

expanded to include two separate sectors (as in Dickens and Lang,    1985?.


The features of   the market generate interactions among training
opportunities, ability and the minimum wage, and suggest the importance of

taking   proper account of heterogeneity.

       To be more specific about the opportunity set, the model of demand and

supply for low wage women specifies two types of full—time jobs.     Those in

the primary sector offer wages which reflect individual specific

differences in productivity. The wage offers in the primary sector also

reflect the costs and benefits of general training and any shared casts and

benefits of specific training. Jobs in the secondary sector pay all who

hold them at or close to the minimum wage and thus do not reward ability or

training to any significant degree.       Still further complications are

assumed   to arise for   those subject to an effective minimum wage, which for

some   interferes with on—the—job training, resulting in opportunity sets
that differ amoria women of different abilities not only in degree but in
kind.    Jobs in the secondary sector are assumed to be available to all who

want them. Thus the model abstracts from the problem of unemployment.
 However, there is limited access to primary sector jobs, and training
 subsidies are assumed to be    effective in increasing access for workers of
  marqinal ability. Part—time ob
                                      opportunjtj are also considered, and the
  issue of whether or rot   waaes in such obe     are related to ability    is   seen
  to play an Important role in the nature of the model which
                                                             emerqes.
         number of insqhts into the effects of labor market policies
                                                                     emerpe
  from the analysis. Once the
                              reIatjonship of ability and preferences to
  the choice of the   dosi rant segment of the budget constraint
                                                                 is determjned
  it   becomes possible to analyze how and why a qiven
                                                            policy change will
  affect   women in accordance with their abilities
                                                         and preferences. The model
  suqget for example, th possibility that for women with a certain
                                                                   range
 of abilities and preferences,
                                 training programs and policies will work
 exactly as intended, with training leading these women to return to full—

 time work earlier than they otherwise
                                            would have, and at an increase in
 earnings. For others, however,
                                   training programs which were perceived by
 the women as working
                        may create an income effect which induces them to

 prolong the period out of the labor force.
                                                 Other women who4 in the absence
 of an effective training
                            program, would work when they had children, mioht
 instead be induced to drop out of the labor force or reduce hours of
                                                                      work
 when they had children. Moreover,
                                      some of those training programs, if
conditioned on parenthood, could
                                   even encourage some women to have
children, The model also makes clear
                                         why it is important to begin policy
analysis for the low wage market for
                                        women with a behavioral model that is
specified in detail. Consider, for
                                       example, the persistent finding of
evaluation studies of labor market
                                      training programs that women receive
much higher returns than men, and that much of these additional retLtrns
                                                                         are
associated with increased time at work (E.g., see Bloom and McLaughlin,

1982, pp. 2O—23 and Bassi et    al, 1984,   pp. 83—84.     Consistent   with the
expectations of careful students of   training   programs,   the model readily
indicates that for some but not other groups of women, there is

considerable danger of confounding movements along a wage—hours or wage

participation locus with shifts in the locus.       This analysis explores how

these effects will vary among those with different ability and preference

combinations and if fully implemented empirically, would allow separation

of true from apparent effects.

        In addition to the theoretical discussion, some suggestive empirical

results are presented. The frequency and explanations for alternative life

cycle    patterns,   e.g.. involving no career interruption, career interruption

                                                         considered and related
with no part—time work, or with part—time work are

to measures of ability and mx ante measures of preference for homework and

children. The empirical findings help to answer certain questions

pertaining to the role of opportunities for part—time work.

        The organization of the paper is as follows.     The next section

discusses the specification of the opportunity set and the utility function

 for a model of female labor supply and fertility decisions. The following

 section characterizes the solution to the basic model.        Section IV

 considers how individuals in such a model would react to training

 subsidies to changes in the guarantee or benefit reduction rate of a

 transfer program and to workfare under the assumption of rationing of low

 wage jobs. Implications for current evaluations of training policies are

 also noted. The following section discusses various possible extensions to

 the model. Section VI presents the empirical results.         4 final section

 contains further observations about the model and a braef conclusion.


                           II.   Elements of the Basic Model

         The model divides the
                                   I potential working years of a woman into three

 periods, of durations I, T ard T years, respectively. The second


                                            4
 period is considered to Include the years            when      any children that the woman
 eight   have would be at home.          The + iret period corresponds to the years
 before any childbearnq, and the last period encompasses the years after

 the children have left. During each of these periods, the wocan must

 choose the level of her labor force participation and additionally in the

 second period she must choose whether or not to have children.                    These

 decisions are influenced by her earnings possibilities in each of the

 periods and by her relative preferences for income, vs. children and time
                     1
 in the household.


 Earni_nqs 'Jpportuni ties.

      Table 1 details the value of net productivity from full—time work. 4

 trained primary sector worker has a productivity denoted                   by s which
 reflects the individual        ability and motivation. A primary sector worker

with no previous training must undergo training for
                                                                        I years, during
which time her productivity is only the fraction                  1 —   r   of her post—

training productivity.        If the worker has been trained previously in a

primary sector iob, she still must undergo the training for                    Tt years, but
her productivity is instead the fraction             1 —   Yr    of her post—training

productivity. In this expression,             Y   represents the fraction of training

that is specific and must be repeated after an interruption of primary

sector work. Thus in this model it is not depreciation and restoration of

human capital that accounts for reductions in the wage offer after

interruption, but only loss of specific human capital.

     Previously trained primary sector workers may also work part—time at a

wage which depends on their ability and motivation. Denote this part—time

wage by w (s) .    Various assumptions may be made about the nature of the
relationship between w        and   a.      At one extremes it may be assumed that
                         p



                                              C
w () is a constant function whose value is independent of             s.   This would
p
correspond to a situation where part—time work is available only in jobs

(perhaps in the secondary sector) where ability is not of real importance.

At the other extreme, it may be assumed that w (s) =
                                                   p
                                                               . In this case a
trained primary sector worker may cut back her hours without incurring any

waqe penalty. As will be shown shortly, the general nature of the model is

somewhat sensitive to the particular assumptions which are made concerning

the relationship between part—time wafles and ability.

         For the secondary sector all individuals have the same value

of productivitv w_, a value that is at or slightly above the minimum wage,

and any woman who wants work in the secondary sector can qet this wage if

she works full—time. Waes for part—time work in the secondary sector

are given by w which may be taken to be equal to w5 or may be taken

to be somewhat lower.

         Not every woman will have enough ability to earn as much in the

primary sector as she can in the secondary sector. Furthermore, even among

those who could earn more in the primary sector, not all of them will be

able to work there because the minimum wage may interfere with the training

required for employment in that sector.       At first glance, it might appear

that firm; would not be willing to train any woman whose productivity s(l

—   r)    during her training period fails below the minimum wage w5 since

if they did so they would have to be paying her a wage above her

productivity during the training period. However, firms may be willing to

engage in an implicit contract to finance some of the traininq costs and

recoup the costs by paying wages below productivity for a period after the

training period.        To see this note that the total productivity of a

previously untrained woman over a time period T              lonoer than the traininq
                                                       III




period     is given 0
                                  T
                                      t
                                               .I —        r) + '.Ta          —   It      )




  The first term represents the productivity during training and the second

  th productivity in the post-training period. The employer knows
                                                                                              that   in

  order to retain the individual once she has been trained, he must pay her

  at least as much in the post training period as he could earn by going to

 another firm. The amount that an individual could earn at another firm

 after having been trained at the First firm, is given by


                          I
                              t           (1 —      Yr)        +   (I m   —       2   T
                                                                                          t



 Note in this expression that the first term includes only specific and not

 general training costs, since general training will have already been

 provided by the first employer. The difference between these two

 expressions, the value of productivity while in training for the current

 employer plus the difference between productivity at the current firm once

 training is completed and net productivity elsewhere is the maximum amount

 that an employer would be willing to pay to a woman in training. Dividing

the result by Tt qives the following expression as the wage rate that the

employer is willing to pay:4


                                          I:   Cl   —      7(1     —



This,   then, is the quantity which is required to exceed the minimum wage

for an employer to be willing to offer a woman training in the primary

sector. Let         be the value of                   'i       which just equates this expression to
the minimum wage.
                          thus represents minimum ability level required for

training in the primary sector in the absence of any government
            5
programs.




                                                           7
       As a final consideration regarding earnings opportunities. the model

assumes that there are fixed costs C per time period if the woman engages

in either part—time or full—time work. This reflects the costs of getting

to and from work and additionally for women with children, the costs of

arranqing for child care. C thus represents the costs that are incurred

reqardless of the lenqth of the period that is worked. High fixed costs

are expected to make part—time work less attractive relative to full—time

work, since with part—time work there are fewer hours over which to spread

the costs.

The lJti 1 ity Function

       The utility function summarizing preferences may be expressed as

U[y h(t), c 3), where y is total lifetime income,                     h<t) is the time

path of home time in the second period,           c        is a binary variable with a

value of unity if the woman has children in the second period, and 8                     is


an individual effect indicating relative preferences for children and home

tirne.O individuals with a high value of 8 place a hiqh value both on

having children and on home time spent with them, with the opposite being

true for individuals with a low value of              8.


       To provide a basis for a tractable model, we suppose that this utility

function is separable in income:

                                         J ÷T,
                      U   = u(y)   + c           (t) v[ht) 8] dt


The function u, which describes the utility of income, is taken to be

such    that   the elasticity of marginal utility of income is qreater than zero
                             1
but does not exceed one.           The function v describes how the utility of a

woman who has children and home time h(t) compares to utility when there

are no children. For sirnplicity of exposition, it is assumed that the

value    of home time is less than the minimum wage, except for women with
 children at home. Therefore, all women in the modei will work jr                             the   first

 and third periods, with the only question in those periods beinq the chojc

 0+          sectors,       arid women without children will work U11 tlme in the S000fid

 period. The function                       which is assumed to be monotonicallv deciininq,

 milews the value of home time to decline throuqhout the second period as

 any children become older.

              The junction v is lilustrated in Fiure 1.                      In this fiqure, 1,
 1       ,    and   1
                             refer to the amounts of home time associated with full—time
     p                  a

 market work, part—time market work, and no market work at all,

 respectively. For convenience, the actual arument of v is the amount of
 workinq time, defined as h. =
               -
                                            1
                                                1
                                                    n
                                                        —   1..
                                                             i
                                                                  The reference Utility level for
 each woman is               point   A, representinq utility with no children and working

 full—time. A woman with a hlqh desire for children will obtain a areater

Utility witr, children than without even if she has to work full—time, as

indicated by the fact that point B lies above point A. This same

individual would obtain more utility if she could be home part—time with

her children. as at point C. and even more utility if she could be home

full—time, as at point D. A woman with a moderate desire for children, in

contrast, might find it preferable not to have children if she were to work

full—time, as indicated by the fact that point E lies below point A, but

would prefer to have children if she were to work only part—time or not at

all, and thus enjoy utility from children and home time as indicated either

by point F or point B. Finally, a woman who has little desire at all for

children might be characterized by HIJ, wherein utility actually rises when

she is workinq and is away from children (but note that the utility of this

individual never is as hiqh with children as can be obtained without

children)
     The function v is characterized by the relatiars


                         (dadS) [v(h
                                       p
                                           '3) —     'h    +
                                                                '3i]




                         (dadS) [v(h ; 8         —   v(h        '3)] >
                                                           p


These relations suqgest that the qreater the desire for children, the more

valuable additional home time will be.


                      III. The Base Solution to the Model

     The base solution to the model relates the work and fertility

decisions of an individual to her ability, as reflected in the parameter

s,   and her preferences as reflected in the parameter 8.                                More

specifically, the woman must decide in the second period whether to have

children and if so, what parts of the period she wishes to work full—time,

part—time. or not at all.       It will be assumed that , which is monotonic,

is larqe enough relative to the difference between the real waqe and real

interest rate to insure bunchina of work at the beqinninq of the second
          B
period.

      In this circumstance, the work decisions durinq the second period can

be characterized by two numbers            t ,       the amount of time that passes in
                                            p

the second period before the return to the labor force, and t t, the
amount of time before the return to full—time work.                         If   t           t ,        then
                                                                                     p            f


there is no part—time work; otherwise t.t —                    tp      represents the amount of

time spent in part—time work. The decisions regarding both                               t            and

and also the decision recarding chiliren, are functions of                                        and 8.

Perhaps the    easiest   wa.v to characterize the solution is to look                                 at the
choices made by women with      different combinations of                        ano         '3        at some

articular      moment in time, as lIustrated               in Fiqure 2 Trie two panels in
this f iqure   correspond to   the two e<treme assumptions reqardi no part—time


                                             1
  wages which were mentioned before. Panel (a)
                                               represents the situation
  where w      is a constant independent of                             s,     and Danel          (b)   represents the
  situation where w i =                c     arid w5            w            so that part—time waqes
                          p                               P         s                            -   are
 equal to full—time wages.                  There are corresponding figures for every moment

 in time during the second period, and it is cf interest to investigate how

 these figures change as the women move through the
                                                    second period. First,
 though,   let us discuss            how the        di fferent areas in Figure 2 can be derived
 from   the model.

        Suppose that Figure 2 corresponds to an instant of time                                              t after the
 second period has begun. In the left—hand panel, the curve JL represents
 combinations   of            and 8         for         which, at       the    specified moment in time the
 women will have chosen to have children and will be
                                                     just on the borderline

 between being out of the labor force and working full—time. Note that JL

 is to the right of                   so that all full—time work by these women will be
                              €.,

 in the primary sector. For women along this particular borderline, the

possibility of part—time work is irrelevant, and they are solving the

problem of maximizing


         u(y) + c
                     tJ
                                     •(t)   v(h; 8) dt +                 1T1+T.,
                                                                         I
                                                                                     (t)      v(hf; 8)       dt)
                                                                             T1+tf
subject to


             y =              (1 —          —
                     hf              tf)        e       h, [(1 + 1) r                —   (T   —
                                                                                                   tf)   C


where t      (which is equal to t                         in this case) is the time within the
                                                    p
second period that the woman shifts from being out of the labor force to

working full—time and h is the number of hours in a full—time work

period. The middle term in the definition of                                   y reflects the fact that
the fraction    Y    of the training must be done again when the woman reenters



                                                           11
the labor         force, arid   the latter term reflects the fixed costs of working.

      The marginal condition which emerges from this problem is given by


(1)          —
                  u(y     (s hf — C) +              + t)       [v(h; 8) —       v(hf; 8)] =          0



Differentiating this condition with respect                            to s    and 8 respectively,

yields



      dtf         -
                                     h u'(y) +       (   h —     C)    u"(y) s

                                                                                 -       C)2 u"(y)
      3€
                       '(T1+t)       Ev(hz 8) -      v(hf; 8)] + (hf€


        3t                —T        +t )   (3/38)    [v(h ; 8)/38         —   3v(h
                                                                                     +
                                                                                           8)]
      —— =                      1     +                   fl




                       T1+t) [v(hr; 8) - v(h; 8)] + (h€
                                                                                 -       C)2 u'(y)
      38



where        s        3v/3. The sign of 3tf/3€ is strictly required only when C is
sma1i so that (sh - C)s                             These signs imply           that along this margin,

returns          to full—time work begin earlier the greater the level of ability

 (and hence wage) of the individual and begin later the greater the desire

of the woman for children. both are results which would be expected.                                     In


order to derive the slope of JL in the diagram, however, what we want is

d8/d€ holding tf constant at t. Since t is a function of both                                                 s



 and 8,           the derivative of interest can be established by the implicit

 function theorem as

                                                                ,i1-   /,.r
                                    (di3/d€H             = — —----—--            I)
                                                                dt + /dtl
                                                t

 so that the slope of JL is upward slopinq.

        The curves 13 and 3K               in   the left panel and 13 and KL in the right

 panel represent combinations of                         and    8 for which women with children
 will be on the boroerlines between workinp fuli—tice or part—ticne end

 between working nart—tiec nr                   flat at all , respectively at ;oe time t.
 Le f
          p
                     f
                         t
                             be   ot   rd s          aco e          Te 1Qeb- in tt          s :se is
 considerably       more complicated than in the previous example end is left to

 the appendix but there it is shown that t i.E'e                                  is   positive for
                                                                       p
 panel ce and neqatve for the panel (b. and                                 3t/.3e is negative for both
          1 1)
 cases.          This implies that a woman with higher ability will reenter the

 labor force earlier or later, depending on whether or not the part—time

 wage depends on ability, than will a woman. with lower ability, holdinq

 constant the desire for children. In either case the higher ability woman

will start full—time work again sooner. With reoard to the derivatives

 t !.         and   •t,i3,        it   can be shown only that at least one of them is

positive The conditions for both of them to be positive are derived in the

appendix). However, these are the derivatives of the dates of reentering

the labor force and of resuming full—time work with respect to the desires

for children, and we would expect that in the normal case both of these

derivatives would be positive. Hence, in the remainder of the analysis

(except where noted to the contrary) we will assume that the conditions are

in fact met for these derivatives to be positive and refer to such

preferences as "normal,' remembering that cases are theoretically possible

for one (but not both) of them to be negative.

     Given the signs of these derivatives, the slopes of IJ JK and KL are

established ifl much the same manner as that of JL. Again, both                                   t    and

tf
     are functions o e and ,                         so that the implicit function theorem

yields

                                                     t is              1)   for    Panel (a)
                    (de/ds)                 =    —
                                  tn t               dt       /d'
                                       ii                 n            iJ   for    Panel 'b)
                                        t
                                       —-
                  (d3/dmi   t t0
                                   =
                                        •t p idt      0
                            p



Thus for panel (a), and in the case of normal preferences toward children,

IJ is upward slopinq and JF( is downward siopnq. Where they meet, at point

J. defines a point where the woman is indifferent at time t between

workinq full—time, part—time, or not at all. For points beyond 3,            the

choice is between workinp full—time or not at all, as defined alonq the

curve JL. For panel (b) , both 13 and KL are upward sloping. Which has

the steeper slope is theoretically indeterminate, and the panel is drawn

far the situation where KL is steeper.

     For the area to the left of                 the analysas is much the same,

except that neither the full—time waqe nor the part—time wage depends on

the ability level .          For that reason the lines EF and GH, which indicate

the boundaries between full-time work and part—time work and between part—

time work and being out of the labor force respectively, are horizontal.

The line CD, which represents the boundary between women who have children

and those who do not. is also horizontal, primarily ama result of the fact

that the level of           for which the woman is indifferent between full-time

work with and without children in Figure 1 does not depend on

     The exact positions of these boundaries are sensitive to, among other

things. the fixed costs of employment. In the appendix, it is shown that

3ti3C      is   positive and 3tJ3C is negative. Thus, women with higher

fixed costs of employment will begin part—time work. later and full—time

work sooner than will otherwise identical women with lower fixed costs

This is to be exoected. since the nioher faxed costs have a higher

proporti   onal a spact on the returns to part—time work than on the returns to

full—time work.      The resulting effect of higher fixed costs is shown in



                                            14
  Fiqure        In   this   figure, higher-   fixed    costs shift the boundaries froe the
  dashed lines to the solid lines. The figure indicates that the higher

  fixed costs shrinks the areas of part—time employment in both panels. More

  formally, the horizuntal direction of the shift of a segment such as             13 in
  the panel (a, due to a higher value of C,
                                                          holding       and t constant,
  is given by



                                                       dt iac
                              (d€/dC)L         =   —
                                                                    0
                                                       dtf/dS


 Hence, this segment shifts leftwar-d with an increase in C The formal

 derivations for the shifts of the other segments are similar.

        In combination, these boundaries serve to separate the women at time

 t.1   into four oroups: those with children who are working full—time, part—

 time, and not at all, and those without children who are working full—time.

 Over time during the second period, the
                                                   boundaries demarcating the area of
full—time work from the areas of either part—time work or nonparticipatin

and the boundary separating the areas of part—time work and

nonparticipation, must be moving uniformly downward. The only exception

occurs at the beginning of the second period, where the boundaries

involving full—time work in the primary sector [along IJL in Panel (a) of

Figure 2 or along 13 in Panel (b) of the figure] will remain stationary for

a while. this occurs because the retraining costs for dropping out of and

then reentering the primary sector will imply a minimum length for any

periods of nonparticipation and/or part—time work at the beginning of the

second period, with the result that the corresponding boundaries do not

move until this minimum length of time has passed.



                 IV.   Analysis of the Effects of Policy Changes


                                              15
     This section examines the effects upon fertility arid labor force

participation decisions of: a subsidy for the training of mothers with

children, an increase in the income guarantee available to low—income

mothers with children, and an increase in the marginal tax rate on earnings

of individuals who are receiving benefit payments.   In addition, reductions

in the guarantee and tax rate, or more directly a return to the market

situation analyzed earlier where there is no transfer program, may be taken

as an indication of the effects of a simple workfare program which replaces

the transfer for the full term of the life cycle. Note, however, that

because minimum wage jobs are available to all who want them, the

'workfare' is provided by low wage firms in the private sector.     For each

of these policy changes, the effects are to cause some individuals near

particular margins to change their behavior, which in Figure 2 amounts to

shifting some of the boundaries separating the regions at a particular

point in time.   If the policy changes are restricted to some subset of the

general population, then the analysis of this section will apply only to

the potentially eligible subpopuiation. In particular, most of the

programs of the type under consideration apply only to women who are heads

of households. Although the model does consider the decision to have

children as endogenous, marital status is not considered and hence is

effectively taken to be exogenous in determining who is eligible for a

 program and who is not.

      First consider the introduction of a training subsidy to be made

 available to mothers with children. it is assumed that such a subsidy is

 not available in the first period, before the fertility decision is made,

 but is available in both the second and third per1os to individuals who

 elect to have children in the second period. The effects of the training



                                      16
 subsidy are illustrated in Fioure 4.                        in this diagram, the dashed curves
 represent     the situation        before the subsidy is introduced and are copied
 from Figure 2.      The soid lines represent tre situation after the subsidy
 ard hence illustrate how           betavior reacts in response to                            the subsidy.

      ions 3 L in panel ta),                      the    only        change from        the   maximization

 problem analyzed at the beginning of the last section is to include the

 subsidy amount S in the equation defining y:


              y =   Ch   CT —   t]       —   a   hf [(1 +        fl   r         — (1    —
                                                                                            tf)   C +


 Differentiating     the marginal condition given in equation (1) of the last

section with respect to St then gives




                    +tll                                     th - a — C)
     at
          f
              =                              ____
                                                 u (y)
                                                                 t
                                                             _____        __                                    -
                                             ; -h]+ (hfaC)2 uu(y)

The horizontal movement of 3L can be calculated as the change in                                            a


necessary to manta.in the equilibrium relation in response to a change in

     holdino & and tf constant



                                    dS                       —   at ldS
                                         t) i ,t.
                           (d a /                                r——---'--——-   >   0
                                                                 dti.€
                                                                    f


Thus, in response to an increase in                      5r JL' will shift to the right.

     The same kind of exercise based on the analysis of the appendix also

establishes that in panel (a) 13' will shift to the right and 3K will

shift to the left, while in panel (b) 13' and K'L' will both shift to the

right. ThLs, among individuals with ability levels above                                                a somewhat

perverse result emerges. Individuals will tend to stay out of the labor

force longer than without a subsidy, and they will return to full—time work



                                                        17
later. This result stems primarily from the fact that among this qroup the

traininq subsidy induces only an income effect since these individuals

would have been        retrained anyway when they returned to                   full—time work.    It


may be   noted that this result cannot be avoided by restricting the training

subsidies     to individuals     who   have been earninq no         more        than the minimum

waqe immediately prior to the traininq, since even these hiqher ability
individuals     will    have been out of the labor force or engaged in part—time
work in the time span before they wish to be retrained for their return to
full—time work in the primary sector.

        For some individuals with an ability level just below                             the

subsidy may enable them to overcome the minimum wage obstacle and be

trained for work in the primary sector when they return to full—time work

after having their children. Whether or not this happens depends upon

whether an individual would be eligible for another subsidy if she were to

be trained by a second employer.            If the subsidy were available for both

employers, then the equations in the first part of Section II which

describe the total value of the individual to each employer would have to

be augmented by                 Since the amount the first employer is willing to

pay during the training period is related to the difference between these

two amounts, in this case the first employer would not be willing to pay

the individual any more in the training period, and the minimum skill level

for training jr the primary sector would still be                       ,.'         If, on   the other

hand, the subsidy were available only to the first empioyerq then the

minimum skill level for training in the primary sector would have to

sat i   of:
                            c      — rtj — )]       +   5 t /T ti   =   W
                                                                            m


        Ficure 4 is drawn for       this   second case. with the                mniaum skii level

                                               18
  for a woman with children to be trained denoted        by .     However, although
 employers are willing to train all women with skill levels between                  and

    ,     only   women with a sufficiently strong taste for children, that is
 above P1N'       in   the diagram will in 'fact obtain training. Below that line,

 the disutility of working full—time while raising children implies that the

 additional income available as a result of being trained is insufficient to

 compensate for the fact that the receipt of the training subsidy is

 conditional on having children. The analysis thus implies that there is a

 group of women with abilities between             and       above M'N and below

 CD, who will find it advantageous to have children they would not have

 otherwise had in order to qualify for the subsidy.

         In summary, then, the effects of a training subsidy depend critically

 on the individual 's ability level. For ability levels between         E     and
         the effects are as intended, with the trained women returning to full—

time work earlier than they otherwise would and earning substantially more

than they otherwise would have.            For ability levels above         the   effects

of the training subsidy may well be perverse, while for ability levels

below , there             is no effect because the minimum wage will still prevent

these women from obtaining training.

        There are implications of this discussion for econometric studies

designed to evaluate training programs. In the analysis of training

subsidies, the sharply different effects among different groups of women

imply that attempts to evaluate the effects of training programs which do

not carefully consider the differences and discontinuities in the wage

offer with ability interacted with sector of employment, stage of the life

cycle and full—time or part—time work, will produce numbers which are not

measuring what is intended.         If such studies are to isolate true program



                                           19
impacts from the effects of voluntary choices with regard to sector, hours

of work     and career   interruption, the training program effects will have to

be modeled in the conte>t of a structural model specified along the line of

the model outlined above so that those in each group can be distinguished.

FroQram effects can only be measured by comparing outcome differences

between those in the same ability—preference group, and even then, the

estimates should standardize for the           effects   of voluntary changes in labor

supply.      (For related discussions, see Heckman and Robb, 1985.)14

       The other related policy changes to be considered are the effects of

changes     in   transfer policy, and symetrically, reductions of transfers

associated with the introduction of workfare. An increase in the guarantee

of an income transfer program and a change in the benefit reduction rate of

such   a program,     are more straightforward to analyze, and the results of the

analysis     do not appear to contain any real surprises. These two changes
are presumed to be made to a program which pays benefits to mothers who are

not working or       are working   part—time at relatively low wages but which does

not pay benefits to women who are working full—time or are working part—

time   at   relatively high     wages. In such a program,      an   increase   in   the

guarantee        amount, holding the benefit reduction rate constant, will

increase the effective returns to part—time work and to nonparticipation by

the same amount but will not affect the returns to full—time work.                    The

effect of this increase in the guarantee amount is illustrated in Figure                    5.


 in this gure and in the next, the dashed             lines   represent the boundaries

before      the change   and   the solid   lines represent the   boundaries    after the


 change.      in Panel (b) ,    the kinks in the right part of the fqure occur at

 the point where the part—time wage is high enough that a woman working

 cart—time at that wage is no longer eligible to receive              benefits      from the

 program. s         might be expected, the net result is to push        the    boundary

                                               2v
 betiean nonparticipation and part—time work downward, since the increased

 quarantee does not qeasrate any substitution     effects   between

 nonpartlcipation and part—tiee work4     and the income effect favors remaining
 out of the lanor force lonqer. The boundaries invoivin lull—time work are

 also shifted down, both because of the income effect just mentioned and

 because the fact that full—time workers are not eliqibie for benefits means

 that ar increase   in   the quarantee amount will qenerate substitution effects

 away from full—time work.

      The result of an increase in the benefit reduction rate are

 illustrated in Figure 6.      The net effect of such a change is to reduce the

 effective returns to part—time work at relatively lower wages. The returns

 to full—time work or part—time work at relatively higher wages are not

affected4 since there are no benefits to be reduced, and the returns to

nonparticipation are likewise riot affected, since there is no income upon

which the benefit reduction rate will operate. The result is to generate

substitution effects alonqall the boundaries involving part—time work at

relatively lower wages, so that individuals will begin part—time work later

and end part—time work in favor of full—time work sooner. The analyses of

both an increase ir the benefit reduction rate and of an increase in the

guarantee illustrate the importance of the distinction emphasized by Levy

(1981) and others between those whose earnings are beyond the breakeven and

those whose earnings are low enough to leave them eligible for the

program.


                          V.   Extensions of the Model.

     The model that has been analyzed in the previous sections appears to

be amenable to several refinements which would increase its complexity

without changing its basic nature. First, note that the first period could
be eliminated without major changes in the analysis. This would occur if

the woman made the choice between having and not having children at the
beginning of her potential work career. Technically, this would do two

things to the model. One is to eliminate the                1 +    Y term   from the budget

constraint, since under these circumstances any work in the primary sector

would not be broken up        and as a   result retrairlir!q costs would be

irrelevant. The second would be ta eliminate the short period discussed at

the end of the last paragraph during which the boundaries would not move,

since this period of nonmovement was motivated by the retraining costs.

Overall,      though, omitting the first period would         not change the general

nature   of    the   model discussed in this section nor of the results to be
discussed in following sections.
     4 second refinement would be to allow            for productivity to be a

function of tenure, at least in the primary sector. Such an allowance

would have the effect of changing the exact expression of the marginal

conditions defining the boundaries between the various areas but should not

change the      character of the previous analysis          very   much. One change that

would be expected is         that   in such a setting the penalty for dropping out of
the primary sector and then reentering would clearly be much                  larger   than

simply incurring the retraining costs already explicitly included in the
model. As       a    result, the minimum length of     a period     of nonparticipation

and/or part—time work         at the   beginning of the second period should be
considerably         longer than without a   tenure   effect, and the length of time
during which 1JL in panel (a or IJ in panel                    cf Fiqure 2 would remain

stationary would be         correspondingly longer.
     A   third       refinement would be to allow     for   more than one birth in the
first part of the second period. For a            fixed     sequence of births,    it seems
 fairly clear tha.t the analysis before the first birth and after the last

 birth would be largely unchanged, and that during the childbearing period a

 model may well predict alternating labor force states. For instance, a

 woman might drop out of the labor force for a year immediately succeeding

 the birth of each child and then work part—time until the birth of the next

 child.   Considerably more complex would be attempts to model additional

 behavior within the actual childbearing period, including possibly attempts

 to model the joint decisions regarding how many children to have, the

 spacing between children, and the total length of the childbearing period.

      Another refinement would consider the value of home time during

 periods when children are not at home. For a woman who chooses not to have

 children, for whom the value of home time is likely to be changing

 relatively smoothly over time, a traditional life—cycle analysis of labor

force decisions should be applicable. For a woman who does choose to have

children, it is clear that the utility function used in the above analysis

could be extended to cover the first and third periods, probably without

severely affecting the analysis. In particular, this refinement would only

affect those women with children who are still at home or working part—time

at the end of the second period. since any woman working full—time toward

the end of the second period will presumably find it advantageous to work

full—time during the first and third periods, when the value of home time

is presumably less. A complete decision would then entail calculating the

optimal labor force behavior conditional both on having and not having

children, and making the choice regarding children so as to pick whichever

of the two paths yields a higher overall utility.

     Finally, the model could introduce education as an alternative means

to acquire the necessary general training for primary sector workS    A

relatively simple but informative case would allow both the intensity and


                                    23
duration of required general training to be inversely related to the amount

of education an individual has acquired. The monetary cost of the

education would be reflected in the budget constraint, and the time costs

would be reflected in a reduced amount of time available in the first

period. Such a modification would not affect the signs of the slopes

calculated for the various segments in Figures 2 and 3   or the directions of

movement in Figures 4 through 6.   However, the modification does have

implications for the effectiveness of a training subsidy.    In the original

modei there is a discrete utility difference between individuals just

below and just above the critical ablility level required for primary

sector employment, resulting in the implication that a marginal training

subsidy may result in non—marginal utility improvements for some

individuals. With endogenous education, the lower ability individuals can

use education to get around minimum wage constraints which are restraining

on—the—job general training in the primary sector. This process will be

carried to the point where the individual with marginal ability is just

indifferent between getting the education and working in the primary sector

and remaining in the secondary sector.   In this setting, marginal training

subsidies will result only in marginal utility improvements for the

individuals it induces into primary sector employment.


                          VI. Empirical Analysis

      In this section we will begin the job of exploring the empirical

implications of the odi. ecause the model speaks to labor force

patterns traininq wage offers, the role of    ability   and tastes for

children and the interrelations among these variables, there are a large

number of empirical implications which are testable, and a number of

parameters which may be estimated by using increasingly complex econometric


                                     n
 techniques. Our     hope is to provide sufficient information tc determine

 whether the outcomes highlighted by this approach are important, whether

 the   general structure of the model seems reasonable and to provide
 guidance for specification to be used in estimating a full structural
 version of the model.
         The empirical evidence   comes   from the National Longitudinal Survey of
 Young Waen, which has surveyed for fifteen years women who were 14 to           24

 years   old in 1968, the initial year of the survey. bout two—thirds of the
 individuals   remained   in the survey in 1983, the last   year for which the

 data have been made available. Thus for individuals who remained with the

 survey for the full fifteen years, the survey covers the age spans from 14—

 29 to 24-39. Particularly for women who were in their late teens when the

survey began, this fifteen year span covers just. the age range which is of

particular interest in terms of evaluatinq this model.         In evaluating the

statistics presented in this section, however, a word of caution is in

order.     One might expect the general     levels of participation to be even

higher    today than in the period covered by the     survey. Ultimately the
model should be able to account for these changes, but significant aspects

of behavior remain exogenous to our analysis. Accordingly simple

extrapnlation of the relations fitted here to future periods may be

inappropriate.

       In the results which follow, the sample is restricted in several ways.

First, individuals are eliminated if they lack information on critical

variables. This most frequently arises in the cases of the ability (JQ)

variable and the taste variable. Regarding the ability variable, the NLS

lacks information on this variable for about 35 percent of the sample. As

for the taste variable, since this variable is constructed on the basis of



                                          25
questions asked in the 1972 survey, it is missing for individuals who did

not remain   with   the survey until at least this time.1 The sample further

omits individuals who had not reached the age of 30 by the time of the last

survey which the particular individual completed. This is done to

eliminate cases in which the observed pattern of work behavior is too short

to impart meaningui information.

     For each individual, the labor force behavior is examined in every

survey year following the survey year in which the individual last reported

full—time enrollment in school.       In each of these surveys, the individual

is classified as working full—time U , working part—time (pt) , or not in

the labor force (nlfl. The resulting sequences of labor force behavior

were then separated into four groups: (ii full—time work in all applicable

survey years, (ii) either full—time work or part—time work in all

applicable years, with at least some part—time work, (iii) sequences which

ir,clude at least some part—time work and some years not in the labor force,

and iv) either full—time work or a not in the labor force status in all

applicable years, with at least some years not in the labor force. These

four groups are denoted in the tables by ft, ft/pt, ft/pt/nlf, and

ft/nlf, respectively.

     Table 2 presents regressions of each of these four groups on a set of

10 and taste variables, with standardization for birth year and race.              In


each regression, the dependent variable is a dummy variable ta:ing on a

value of unity if the individual had a labor force participation pattern of

the indicated type. The 10 and        taste    variables are each separated into

three categories so that roughly equal numbers of those with a high school

education or less -fall into each category. For the 10 variable, the low

category is 1 and the high category is 3, whereas for the taste variable a

value of 1 indicates a     strong   taste for children and home time and a value


                                          26
  of 3 indicates a weak taste.   It should be kept in mind that ID is

  admittedly an imperfect measure of the underlying theoretical construct of

  ability—related earnings power.

       lable 3 is derived from the estimates of Table 2 and attempts to

 present the information in a more useful form. For each of the reqres5jon

 in Table 2, the coefficients of each of the ID—taste combinations is

 adjusted up or down so that the weighted sum of the coefficients is zero.

 Then the resulting coefficients are arranged in a grid corresponding to the

 various ID—taste combinations, and corresponding also in a rough manner to

 the axes of Figure 2 of Section Ill. The actual entries in Table 3

 indicate the amounts by which the average fraction of individuals in a

 particular sequence must be adjusted up or down for the particular cell.

 For example, the first entry indicated that for the low ID and high taste

 for children and home life combination, there would be 11.6 percent fewer

 individuals with continuous full—time participation than there would be for

the complete sample (again, correcting for birth year and race).

      In comparing the entries of Table 3 with the two panels of Figure 2,

it is evident that they correspond much better to panel (b) of the figure

than to panel (a).   To see this, consider the figure to be pictured for the

time immediately after the second period begins.     In this case, any

individuals below the lines EFIJL in panel (a) and EFIJ in panel (b) should

always be observed in the full—time status. Sequences
                                                          involving only -full—
time and part—time work should originate from areas of the figure in which

the individual elects part—time work at the beginning of the second period.

Sequences involving some part—time work and some time not in the labor

force should arise if the individual is in the area above GHKJ in panel (a)

or above GHKL in panel (b). Finally,
                                         sequences involving some time not in



                                    27
the labor force but no part—time work can arise from an individual

initially above JL in panel (a).        These sequences can also arise in panel

(b) if the fixed costs of employment are sufficiently high so that the

left—hand portions of EF and 6H and of IJ and KL became coincident. In

this regard, it may be more appropriate in an empirical model to regard the

fixed costs of employment as a stochastic variable which varies from

individual to individual. In a situation such as panel (b), lower ability

individuals with high fixed costs who begin the second period not working

would proceed directly to full—time work, while individuals with similar

ability but lower fixed costs would go through a period of part—time work.

For higher ability individuals, high fixed costs are less likely to induce

a transition directly from not working to full—time work. The empirical

implication is that in this panel, lower ability workers as a group should

be less likely to have work patterns with at least some part—time work.

        in looking at Table 3 it is evident that continuous full—time work is

depressed in the upper left part of the table and enhanced in the lower

right part of the table. This is exactly what one would expect from either

panel of the figure, however4 and although it is consistent with the model

 it does little to distinguish which panel in the figure is closer to the

truth.     The situation is much different when the last kind of sequence is

 examined4 however. This is the sequence which contains some years not in

 the labor force but no part—time work.           In the table, it is seen that this

 hind of behavior is considerably more common among individuals with lower

 IG scores., contrary to what would be expected if panel         (a) of the figure

 were correct. Given relatively high fixed costs of employment, however,

 this behavior is consistent with panel (b) of the figure.           In this case,

 what is happening is that the high fixed costs of employment make part—time

 work   unattractive   1-or   those with very low   part—time wages but less


                                            -7F
 unattractive for those with higher ability            and correspondingly higher part—

 time wages.

         The results for     the   two kinds   of sequences involving        some part—time

work are less      consi stent than the other results, but they too are broadly
consistent with the model. There is no clear relationship between the
part—time sequences and the IQ           variable,   but particularly in the last       two

columns of Table      3 the fraction cf        part—time   sequences also involving some
years    not   in the labor   force increases as taste        for   home and family time

increases and the fraction of           part—time sequences in       which   the individual
is   always in the labor force declines. Again, this corresponds well to

what might be expected on the basis of the theoretical model, since

sequences involving some time not working should begin in the upper part of

the diagram where tastes for home and family time are high.

        There is   another   piece of   evidence which also suggests that Panel (b)

of Figure 2 may be the closer to the true model. For any woman who

experienced both full—time and part—time work, and for whom valid wages

could be calculated for both, the full—time wages are averaged into a

single number, and the same is done for all part—time wage observations.

Siven a single full—time average wage and a single part—time average wage

for each woman, the correlation between the two was calculated for the

women in the sample. The simple correlation is 0.41 over 1586 individuals,

and the implied regression coefficient of part—time on full—time wages is

0.70.     These imply a fairly strong positive relationship between the full—

time and part—time wages, which is somewhat more consistent with Panel (b)

than Panel (a) in the figure.


                              VII. Summary and Conclusions

        This paper has presented a model which incorporates a number of


                                               L
features from the low waqe labor market for women. The model has been used

to analyze alternative patterns of labor market participation and home time

over the life cycle. The critical labor market choices are whether or not

to interrupt the career, whether or not to work part—time, and when to

return to full—time work, with all these choices conditioned on the

individuals own ability, on the penalties for career interruption and for

part—time work, and on the woman s preference for home time and children.

Reasons for differences in wage offers associated with each regime were

analyzed in the context of a two sector model of the labor market.     In one

sector there was traininq, which was a mix of specific and general, while

the other offered jobs with wages at or just above the minimum wage.

Ability differences were assumed to be associated with wage offer

differences for full—time work in the primary sector, but not for full—time

work in the secondary sector.

     Among the policy measures which can be analyzed in the context of this

model, the most interesting results are obtained for a training subsidy for

mothers with children. Such a subsidy does permit some women with marginal

ability levels to qualify for training programs whereas they would not be

able to obtain training without the subsidies. For higher ability women,

however, the result is perverse in the sense that it delays both the return

to the labor force and the resumption of full—time work after the

childbearing period. On the other hand, changes in the guarantee and/or

marginal tsx rates on benefits for low income mothers have the effects

which might be more or less expected from casual observation. An increase

in the guarantee will tend to reduce full—time work and increase both part—

time work and nonparticipation, at least on the assumption that full—time

workers earn sufficient income to be ineligible for the benefit. On the
  same assumption. a reduction in the marginal tax   rate   will tend to increase

  part—time work at the expense of both full—time work and nonparticipation.

         Perhaps the strongest implications of the analysis pertain to

  evaluations of training programs. These evaluations frequently attempt to

  isolate program impacts by comparing outcomes for program completers with

 those who are thought to be comparable due to their demographic

 characteristics and earnings histories. There are a couple of particularly

 treacherous problems for evaluation studies suggested by the model.
                                                                          First,
 it is important not to confuse changes in wage rates which are brought

 about by training programs with changes which are due to changes in labor

 supply. This is particularly likely to be a problem for ar individual who

 is working part—time before entering into the program. Secondly, the

 analysis shows that a training program affects two quite different groups.

 There is a fairly small group whose members would not obtain training at

 all without the program, and for these individuals the effect of training

 is a good measure of the effect of the program. However, there is a larger

group for whom the program affects only the timing of training and work

decisions, and for this group the relation between having participated in a

training program and the subsequent wage is likely to overstate

substantially the effect of the program.

     The empirical analysis is more suggestive than conclusive, but it does

appear to indicate that the general implications of the model are broadly

consistent with data drawn from the National Longitudinal Survey of Young

Women.    It indicates fairly strongly that a more complete empirical

ifiodel of the sequences of work and home decisions of young women should

embed a part—time wage that is correlated with full—time wages, and that

such a model should probably also consider fixed employment costs which are

possibly different from one woman to the next.    In view of these results,


                                      31
it would appr appropriate to pursue further this analysis with the

eventual aim of developing a structural empirical model suitable for policy

analysis
                                    Footnote a

 I.   In addition to the choices about labor supply and whether or not

 to have children, choices analyzed n the model, a young woman makes

 related choices about schooling, marriage, and concerning number, spacing

 and quality of children, perhaps making preliminary plans simultaneously

for each, some more tentatively than others, and then modifying these plans

 in light of realizations of stochastic variables. Considerable work has

been done on these issues.    (For two examples of many, see Weiss and

Sronau, 198l and Heckman, Hotz and Walker, 1985.)     In order to focus on

the basic labor market decisions and their interactions with the decision

as to whether or not to have children, the model abstracts from the

marriage and schooling decisions, treats fertility as certain ignores

questions about number and spacing of children, and adopts certain

assumptions that will have the effect of fixing the woman's age at first

birth. Thus while the model brings together many important determinants of

behavior, there is a long way to go.

      Some of the problems created by conditioning parts of the empirical

analysis on what are endoqenous outcomes are discussed by Heckman and

Willis (1977). Although the model conditions on formal schooling, note

that its structure is compatible with the model developed by Lehrer and

Nerlove (1981), where the endogeneity of the schooling decision is

emphasized,    it would be straight forward to extend our model to include

the decision, but would, of course, add to the complexity of the solution.

2.    w   may be above the minimum wage if women are more productive than

some other group (eq. teenagers) in the secondary sector.      In this case,

unemployment would be concentrated among the other qroup whose members

would be paid just the minimum wage. The growing importance of women in

minimum wage jobs is documented by Gramlich (1976).
3.      This expression supposes that the discounted value of productivity

remains constant over tiee which in turn implies that real productivity 1.5

growing at the same rate as the real interest rate. This assumption is
made for expositional convenience.

4.      In this expression the employer is willing to finance all of the

specific training costs but none of the costs of general training.             The

exact percentage of specific trainirg costs that the employer is willing to

finance would be different if the growth rate of productivity were not

equal    to the real interest rate but the          general nature of the analysis

would    not be changed.
5.      A second possible constraint might arise if the period Tm were short
enough relative to the training period that the employer would not be able
to recover his share of the training          costs in the post—training period

while     still paying a wage at least as great as the wage in tfle secondary
sector.      This constraint     would seem to     be more of a potential problem   in


the     first period than after the woman returns to full—time work in the
second and third periods. The major results discussed below do not appear
to be substantially        different if   this second constraint    is binding in   the

first     periods and so    the discussion will proceed on the presumption that it
is    the constraint discussed in the text is the binding one.           For a further

discussion of this type of implicit contract in a somewhat different

context, see Guetman and Steinscier (1985). Further complications, which

are not considered, would address the possibility that the rate cf

deterioration     cf akIlls is reduced by part—time work coTiparad to no market

work, and that the mix between specific and general skills varies among
 iobs    and thus is   subject   to   choice when   the initial occupation is chosen.
 (For related discussions, see Fclachek 1979.i


                                              34
    6.        There are two reasons for specifyinq the consumption argument in the

    utility function in terms of lifetime income. First preferences are

    specified in terms of lifetime income rather than in terms of income spent

    in each period separately because the model is not particularly concerned

 with the pattern of consumption over time.              (Problems created by borrowing

 constraints and the implications of these problems for this analysis are

 discused in footnote 13 below.) Second, an assumption that the minimum

 wage is fixed in terms of primary sector output allows us to specify this

 argument as a function of income rather than of consumption of each of the

 two goods produced by the economy. The reason is that the least capable

group of secondary sector workers must be paid the minimum wage, and fixing

 its value in terms of primary sector output has the effect of dictatina the

price ratio between the outputs of the two sectors. Then the composite

commodity theorem implies that preferences may be expressed in terms of

income rather than in terms of the consumption amounts of the two goods

separately.

7.        This elasticity is —u"y/u'.            If the elasticity exceeds unity

everywhere, then utility has an absolute upper bound. To see this! suppose
                = k       1.
                      >        This differential equation has the solution u =     a   +   by'
k
         with     b < 0 required because marginal utility must be positive. With

k > 1          and b < 0, u has an absolute maximum of a as y tends toward
03.       A    further characteristic of interest is that if the elasticity of

marginal utility is between zero and unity for u(y), the same must be

true for s(y) = u(y+m),                 where m is any positive amount. This is
because

                               —sMy/s     CyIy+m)Jt—u"(y+m)(y+m)/u(y+m)]

and since both factors on the right hand side are between zero and unity in

absolute value, the left hand side must be also. This means that some
amount m, say representing the husbands income, can be added to y

without invaiidatinq the assumption that 0                 —u'y/u'   < 1.

8.     In section II, on the job training costs were assumed to involve a

fraction of the real wage.               In this circumstance, as long as the rate of

real wage growth and the real interest rate are similar, OJT itself creates

no incentive to work earlier in the second period. Otherwise, if the woman

were to leave the labor force for the same amount of time later in the

period she would not earn any more income, but would lose more utility

than she would were she to leave the labor force for an equal length of

time at the beginning of the period. Similarly, if the woman works part—

time at any time during the second period, it should be after she has taken

her time (if any) out of the labor force, but before any full—time work

during the period.

9.       The derivation of the sign of the numerator of tia€                also   uses the

assumption that the elasticity of the marginal utility of income does not

exceed         unity.
10.      As is shown jr the appendix, the condition .3t/.3s                 0 in panel (b)

is strictly required only if the fixed costs of employment are small.

0therwise the sign of this derivative is indeterminate.

11.      Another general solution exists for the model, as illustrated in

Appendix Figure Al. This solution, however, corresponds to a situation in

which no low—wage women (i.e. those who can only work in the secondary

sector) with children are working full—time at the beginning of                    the   second

period.          For    further   discussion of   this solution. see the last part of the

ap p a n d i

12.        This would rot be true if the discounted value of the subsidy to the
second employer were less than the discounted value to the first employer.


                                                   •b
 In that cse, the minimum level of ability necessary for traininq in the

 pri   sar/ sector   would be reduced thcuqh not by as much as it woul d be   if
 the subsidy were completely unavailable to the second employer.
 l..     In specifing the consumption term in the utility function in terms
 of lifetime income, the model has assumed that the individual is not
 subject to a borrowing coristrai nt.    Such a constraint is most likely to be
 binding    when an individual   with ability between s   and       is offered a
 traIning    subsidy, since this individual is restricted to the lower part—

 time wage until after she returns to full—time work in the second period.

with the higher wages available only then. (In all other cases, individuals

who could expect higher earrings after the childbearing period would find

them available in the first period as well.) However, there are a couple

of considerations which might mitigate the effects of any borrowing

constraints. First, there is the characteristic of children that younger

children tend to be expensive in terms of time while older children tend to

be expensive in terms of resources. This means that by the time the

financial demands of children are reaching their peaks, the woman may well

have already returned to full—time work. nd secondly, the period of

children is not the only stage of the life cycle in which expenditures may

exceed income there is also the phase of retirement, which may be regarded

as occurring after the third period in the model. Hence some of the

increased earning power after the individual returns to full—time work may

simply enable individuals to service their expected retirement needs.

Despite these considerations, it may nevertheless be the case that

individuals in the second period are constrained by borrowing constraints.

If so, the utility function must be written in terms of income available in

each period rather than in terms simply of total income.        In this

circumstance, one might expect the major points of the paper, including the
anomalous effects of training subsidies and the cautions regarding

evaluation studies of training subsidies to persist even in a borrowing

constrained model if the utility function entails a reasonable degree of

substitutability of income in different periods. The analysis would become

more complicated, thouqhq and consideration would have to be given to the

possibility that there may be particular sets of circumstances in which

these findings might no longer hold.

14.   Our analysis assumes that training programs are permanent arid well

understood. Evaluation studies based either on econometric techniques or

on a classic experimental desiqn, must also deal with the difficulties

created by temporary programs. The introduction of new programs and

subsequent reoptimization, and the inability to count on current programs

being around in future years will lead to behavior different from what

would be observed with a permanent program available over the long term.

If a training program is perpetually availabie there is an optimal time

for the individual to enroll that may not be available when the program is

temporary.

15.   The taste variable is formed on the basis of twelve attitudinal

questions which were asked in the 1972 survey. (Specifically, these

variables are reference numbers 3867—3878 in the survey.) For each

question, the five possible responses are arranged so that the lowest

response corresponds to an attitude of wanting to be home during periods

when children are present and the hiohest response reflects an attitude

that work is all right snd even desirable during periods when young

children are present in the household. The responses so ordered are

assigned values of i to 5 for each question and are summed across the

twelve questions. The resulting sums are broken into three categorical



                                       38
var iab I es.




                39
                             Table 1

            Value of Productivity For Full—Time Work

                                                 Value of
  Sector         Circumstances                 Productivity

Primary     Training completed on current
               job

 Primary    In traininq on current job, with       EU—ri
               no previous traininq

 Primary    In traininq on current job, with           (1—Yr)
               previous training on a
               different primary sector job


            All cases                                  w
Secondary                                                  S




                                 40
                                  Table 2

                         Wor) Pattern Reqressions

                                                   Patter n
                                         ft/pt          ft/pt/nif      ft/ni+
  Va   r 1   ab 1 e

  constant            —0.60i             0.111            1.226       0.265
                      k. 1a9            (0. 105;          0. 193)    to. 193)
 birtrt       year     0.012            —0.001           —0.014       0.003
                       0. 003)           0. 002          (0. 004     (0. 004
       race            0. 125           —0. 009          —0. 147      0.031
                      cO.026)           (0.016';         (0.029)     (0.029)

  101 —         ri    —o.i:25       —0.003              —o.o3t:       0.058
                      (0. 046)          (0. 02B)         (0. 052)    (0. 052)
  102 — 12            —0. 066            0.014            0.052       0.000
                      (0 . 045)         (0. 028)         0. 051 )    (0. 051)
  103 — T3             0.052             0.003          —0.011       —0.044
                      (0.433)           (0.027)          (0.050)     (0.050
  102     —
               TI      0.029        —0.002               0.034       —0.   061
                      (0. 042)          (0. 026)         (0. 048)    (0. 048)
  102 — 13             0. 112           0.087           —0. 062      —0. 136
                      (0.040)           (0.025)         (0.046)      (0.046)
  103 — TI             0.073            0.026            0.034       —0. 133
                       0. 040)      (0. 025)            (0. 045)     (0.045)
  103 — 12             0.129            0.072           —0.078       —0.123
                      (0. 039.'     cO. 024)            (0. 045)     (0. 045)
  103 — T3             0.235            0.087           —0.127       —0.196
                      (0. 036)      (0. 022)            (0.   041)   (0.041)
                      0.058             0.024            0.034        0.029
 number        of
observations




                                   41
                               Table 3

                Deviations from Average Work Patterns
                           By 10 and Taste

                                         UI
                       low            mediue       high


                     —0. 116          —0.062      —0.018       ft
             high    —0.045           —0.045      —0.017      ft/pt
                      0.006            0.070       0.071    ft/pt/nlf
                      0.155            0.036      —0.036      ft/nlf



taste for            —0.156           —0.091       0.038       ft
 hnm        medium   —0.029           —0.043       0.030      ft/pt
 family               0.089            0.037      —0. 041   ft/pt/nI f
  life                0.097            0.097      —0.026      ft/nlf


                     —0.039            0.021       o. 144      ft
             low     —0.040            0.044       0.045      ft/pt
                      0.026           —0. 026     —0.090     ft/pt/ni    +

                      0.053           —0.039      —0.099      ft/nlf




                                 42
                                  References


 Becker, Gary S.. Human Sexual Capital, Effort, and The Sexual Division of
 Labor", Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, No. 1, Fart 2, January, 1985,
 pp. 533—558.

 Bassi Laurie J. "Estjmatinq the Effect of Training Programs with Nor—
 Random Selection," Review of Economics and Statistics 66 (Feb. 1984).

 Bassi ,   Laurie     al
                    J. •   et
                           'Measuring The Effects of CETA On Youth and The
 Economically D1sadvantaqed' Washington D.C.: Urban Institute, April, 1984.

 Bloom, Howard S. and Maureen A. McLaughlin, 'CETA Training Programs— Do
 They Work For Adults", Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office and
 National Commission For Employment Policy. July 1982.

 Burtless, Gary and Jerry Hausman:   "The Effect of Taxation on Labor
 Supply," Journal of Political Economy, 86 (1978)•  1103—1130.

 Carliner, Geoffrey, Chris Robinson and Nigel Tomes. "Lifetime Labor Supply,
 Wage Rates And Fertility"! Researjo Lilatiori Economics 5 (1984), 1—27.

 Corcoran, Mary.  "Work Experience. Labor Force Withdrawals! and Women's
 Earnings: Empirical Results Using the 1976 Panel Study of Income Dynamics."
 In Women in the Labor_Market, C.B. Lloyd, E. Andrews, and C.L. Gilroy. New
York: Columbia University Press! 1979.

Corcoran, Mary, Greg J. Duncan and Michael Ponza, "WORK EXPERIENCE AND
WAGE GROWTH OF WOMEN WORKERS", Five Thousand American Families—Patterns
of Economic Proqress, Volume X, Edited by Greg J. Duncan and James N.
Morgan, Survey Research Center Institute for Social Research The University
of Michigan, 1983.

Dickens, William 1. and Kevin Lang, "A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory,"
American Economic Review, 75 (September 1985), pp. 792—805.

Eliwood, David 1. and Mary Jo Bane, "The Impact of AFOC on Family Structure
and Living Arrangements," Harvard University, March, 1984.

Gramljch, Edward N., "The Impact of Minimum Wages, Employment and Family
Incomes", Brookings Papers In Economic Activity, No. 2, 1976.

Gustean, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "The Impact of Wages and
Unemployment on Youth Enrollment and Labor Supply," with Thomas Steinmeier,
Review of Economics and Statistics! November 1981, pp. 553—560.

Gustean, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier, "Minimum Hours Constraints and
Retirement Behavior," with Thomas Steinmeier, Contemporary Policy Issues, a
supplement to Economic Inquiry. No. 3, April 1983, pp. 77—91.

Heckman, James J. : "Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An
Explanation of the Relationship Between Income and Consumption Over the
Life Cycle," American Economic Review, 64 (1974a), 188-194.


                                    43
Heckinan, James J. Sample Selection Bias as Specification Error."
Econometrica 47, no. 1 (January 1979):  153—61.



Heckman, James J. Shadow Prices, Market Wages and Labor Supply."
Econometrica 42, no. 4 (July 1974b): 679—94.

Heckman, James J., V. Joseph Hotz and James R. Walker, "New Evidence On The
Timing And Spacing Of Births", American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings, May 1985, pp. 179—184.

Heckean, James J. and Richard Robb, Jr. 'Alternative Methods for
Evaluating the Impact of Training on Earnings." Chicago, IL: Department
of Economics. University of Chicago. December 1983.

Hecknan, James J. and Robert J. Willis. 'A Beta—logistic Model for the
Analysis of Sequential Labor Force Participation By Married Women, Journal
of_Political Econo, 85, no. 1 (February, 1977), pp. 27—58.
Lehrer, Evelyn and Marc Nerlove, "The Labor Supply And Fertility Behavior
Of Married Women: A Three Period Model", Research In Population Economics 3
(1981): 123—143.

Levy Frank, 'The Labor Supply of Female Household Heads, or AFDC Work
Incentives Dont Work Too Well,' Journal of Human Resources, XIV, no. 1
(Winter, 1981) pp. 76—97.

Mincer, Jacob, and Haim Ofek, 'Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation and
Restoration of Human Capital', Journal of Human Resources, XVII, No. 1
Winter, 1982), pp. 3—24.

Mincer, Jacob., and Soloman Polachek, "An Exchange: Theory of Human
Capital and the Earnings of Women: Womens Earnings Reexamined." Journal
of Human Resources, 13, no. 1 (Winter 1978): 118—34.

Mincer, Jacob and Soloman Polachek, "Family Investments in Human Capital:
Earnings of Women.' Journal of Political Economy 82, no. 2 (Part 2)
(March/April 1974): 57o—S108.

Poiachek. Saloman W. 'Differences in Expected Post—School Investments as a
Determinant of Market Wage Differentials.' International Economic Review
1, no. 2 (June 1975): 451—70.

Palachek, Soloman W. "Occupational Segregation among Women: Theory,
Evidence, and a Prognosis.   In Women in the Labor Market, C.B. Lloyd, E.S.
ndrews, and C.L. Giiray, pp. 137—57. New 'york:   Columbia University
Press. 1979.

Rosen, Harvey S.. 'Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hours
Determination," Econometrica. 44 (May 1976), 485—507.

Rosensweiq, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, "Life—Cycle Labor Supply And
Fertility: Causal Inferences From Household Models", Journal of Political
Economy 88, Na. 2 (April. 1980), 328—348.


                                    44
Sandeli, Steven H. and David Sh ira, Work Expectations, Human Capital
Accumul ati on, and the Waes of loung Women. Journal of Human Resources,
15, no. 3 Summer i98': 335—53.

Sandell, Steven H., and David Shapiro, An Exchanqe: Theory of Human
Capital and the Earrings of Women A Reexamination of the Evidence.'
Journal of Human Resources, 13, no. 1 (Winter 1978): 103—17.

Weiss, Yaram and Reuben Gronau, 'Expected Interruptions In Labour Force
Participation Groth', Review of Economic Studies, XLVII, 1981, pp. 607—
b19.




                                  45
                                                                                Appendix

     In the first part of this appendix we will derive the impact of

changes in          and 8 on the dates of entering and leaving part—time work

in the second period. The utility problem in this case involves maximizing

                                   .1 +t                                                              J -ft
       u(y)   + c                                   ifi(t)         v(h n'         8.i dt +                             di(t)    v(h       ;       8) dt]
                               -
                                   I    1
                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                          I 1 +t
                                                                                                                   p

                                                              T, +T
                                                    +
                                                          j                     d(t) v(hf                 8) dt]


subject to the budget constraint


 v = s h. IT —
        t
                       t   F
                               ] +          w
                                                p
                                                    () h
                                                               p
                                                                     (t. —
                                                                            t
                                                                                     tp   )
                                                                                              —           h. [(1 +
                                                                                                           t               /)    i-   T
                                                                                                                                          t   1    — iT    —   t
                                                                                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                                                                                       ) C



for primary sector workers. Secondary sector workers solve the same

problem with w                      and w5                    (both independent of ) replacing                                                             and

w () in the budget constraint.

     The following notation will help to reduce the notational burden in

the derivations

             u, u u: u(y) u'(y), u'(y)

                                   : (T1+t) t,(T1+t)
                                                    (T1+t) c'
               V                   v'               v(h            8)           -v(h
                   n                n                     n

               V
                   p.
                                   v'
                                    p
                                                    v(h ; 8), ,i1vh ;
                                                          p                            p.
                                                                                              8/3j
               v-I
                f.                 v4:              v(h e:              , 3v(h;               8)/38

               w
                   p
                                   w:
                                    p
                                                    w (€),
                                                     p
                                                                     w) p

Using this notat ion, the conditions for utility moximization                                                                                     can be found

by substituting the definition of y                                                       into        the utility function,

differentiating with respect to t
                                                                                 p
                                                                                       and        t,  +
                                                                                                               and setting the results

equal to zero.             These conditions are:




                                                                                     40
                                      — u' (w h —                         C)    +                  Cv           —   v
                                                     pp                                p                a               p
                                                                                                                            )




                                 — u          Cs h
                                                     F
                                                             — w       h )
                                                                      pp           +   b
                                                                                           F
                                                                                                    Cv —
                                                                                                            p
                                                                                                                        vJ
                                                                                                                         f


        To find how t                         and
                                      p
                                                         t
                                                             F
                                                                      are affected by chanqes
                                                                                          -   in                                                       s       and q
 totally         differentiate the above equations to obtain the                                                                               matrix              equation

 I   u' w h -C)                 Cv -v )                  Uu      (sh -w h ) (w h -C)                                                          dt
            pp              p     a       p                           F pp pp                                                                      p


     u'(sh —w h ) (w h —C)                          u"(sh —w h )+'(v —v )
             F    pp pp                                            F pp                        F        p           f           j     [       dt
                                                                                                                                     -
                                               u"(w h —C)s+u'w'h
                                                     pP                             pp                                                           (v—v)
                                                                                                                                              — pap
                                                                                                                        d€ +
                                      uu(sh —w h 's+u'(h —w'h )
                                           f             pp                         f pp                        J                    [    _(v_v4)
where


                 s = 3y/.3s = h                 El —         tF       —   (1 + Y)                  r T ) + h
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                     w' Ct
                                                                                                                                    pp   F             —       t        )
                                                                                                                                                                   p


By Cramer's rule, M /.3s = IA                                         I/IAI, where A                                                is the matrix
                                          P                      Ps


                                  h —C)s+u'w'h                                             uu(sh —w h )(w h —C)
                                 pp                          pp                                                 f pp pp
                   u"(sh —w h )s+u'th —w'h }                                           u"(sh —w h )2+4(v —vJ
                            F pp                             f pp                                           f pp                          t        p       t           .1




and A is the matrix on the left hand side of the matrix equation above.

Evaluating the determinant of A                                                yields


       IA        I =   Eu"(w h —C)s+uw'h ]'(v —v )
            PE                  pp                           pp f              p       f



                        +   u'u"(€h
                                              F—w pp
                                                  h )Eh h (w's—w )+C(h —w'h )]
                                                      pf p p          f pp
In one extreme case, this determinant is positive if w' = 0,                                                                                                   since        u11 c

0, th < 0              VP > v (if nonparticipation is a viable alternative to part—
time work), and w h                       > C        (if part—time work is a viable alternative to
                                PP


                                                                           47
nonparticipation).                    In the other extreme case, the determinant is negative

if w =            since —uy/u                                 1    by assumption, and (whC)s < hy. The
                                                                                                                          which will be
latter inequality follows from (hf—h)/hf > (1+Y)rTt/(T_t+),

satisfied as long as part—time hours are nontrivially shorter than full—

time hours and the training period is relatively short as compared to the

lifetime amount of full—time work.

      Similarly, the determinant of A can be evaluated as


  Al =     (v —v )                (v —v ) +                 u1[(w h —C) 4(V                —v       ) +       (h +—wpp
                                                                                                                     h )' (v —v
                                                                                                                        p n             )]
         pf p f                       n        p                  pp                   p        +                                   p




Together, these two determinants imply that at/                                                                must be positive in

the case of w =                0          and neqative
                                                -
                                                       in the case of w =
                      p                                                                                   p

      For t f,            3t f /E€            = IA
                                                       4€
                                                            1/IAI, where A                          is the matrix


                  u(w h -C)4+ (v -v )                                        uu(w h -C)s+u'w'h
                              pp                       p     n p                       pp                          pp

              I
              L
                  u'€h 4 —w pp
                            h i (w h —C)
                                pp
                                                                        u"(€h —w h )s+u(h —w'h >
                                                                               f pp                                4 pp

with the determinant given by


                                  =   u"u(w                h —C)[h h (w —w'€)—C(h —w h 1]
                                                                                 4 pp
                                                       pp          p4 p p
                                              +    (v
                                                   p        r
                                                              —v )[u"(sh—w
                                                                p      f
                                                                            h )s+u(h.—wh )]
                                                                           pp         pp                      +




 If   C is sufficiently small, this determinant is negative for both of the

extreme cases, w = 0                               and w =         €.        For       w = 0,                     the last term is less
                              p                               p                         p

than zero because                             c 0 and
                                          p




          u'(€h4—w            ph)s + u'h.f > uhfY + uh = uh4[(u'y/u) + 1]          I
                                                                                                                              > 0



 with the last inequality arising because -u'y/u 1 Similar reasoning

 applies if       w       =    €.             Thus, in both         extreme cases .3t4/3s is negative 'for


                                                                        4B
 suHicientjy small C,        and otherwise it                     is of             indeterminate sign.
      For the extreme came        wp )                    both                  A              and       IA   are
                                                                                    pE
 neqativ   (with C          and it will be of                     interest                   to ask which is larger in

 maqnitue. Under these circumstances the two determinants will reduce to


                                      =       (u"y+u)h
                             IA                  •


                                                              pf (vp                —v
                                                                                         f
                       IA     I   = .uHv+u)h_h }(v —v
                                              p p n p     t




 For small differences in income the first terms will be
                                                         approximately

 equal, and the first derivative will be larger in absolute magnitude if the

following condition is fulfilled:




                                                      /
                                                                       V•••Vp
                                  f   h h                     p         h
                                              f— p                          p



The first term on each side of this expression is the rate at which the

weight on v in the utility function is declining throughout the second

period, and one would expect this decline to be larger earlier in the

period, so that ll would be larger than                                                       However, the fractions
                                                                        I4I.
in the second term on each side represent the marginal utility per hour of

hours worked full—time and hours worked part—time, and under the assumption

of diminishing marginal utility one would expect the marginal utility of

full—time hours to be greater. Hence, whether the above relation holds or

does not hold depends upon the specific parameters in the utility function.

     Evaluation of the derivatives with respect to e                                            proceeds in much the
same manner.   .3t /.E8 is qiven by ! j/Il where (
                p
                         -                •

                                                     p             •

                                                                                                PG
                                                                                                         is



                     —p (v—v)                  u"(h —w h ) (w h —C)
                                                                                                     '

                          n p                             f pp                  pp


                                                 49
                     I - (v-vl)
                         L p1-       +
                                                                              u"(fl-w
                                                                                   +
                                                                                      h )2 f v p -v f
                                                                                      pp                                                          -'




Takinq the determinant and substitutin in -from the two marqinai conditions

yields


            IA I =
             pl
                             - (v-v)
                               p
                                     u"(h.-w pp
                                             n
                                              h )
                                                     p                            t                  +
                                                                                                         (v -v
                                                                                                          p  +
                                                                                                               )/u]+v
                                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                                      -v f
                                                                                                                                                        p


                                                     + (v_V)uu(€h_W h )d                                                    v -v
                                                             +            P       +             1-       pp        p             n            p



which means that at /.8 will be positive as ionq- as
                                 p


                                                                                                                        V—v•
                                                                                                                                         +
                                 n           p                   —+    u                                                    p
                             v —v
                                                     El 1-
                                                                 b u"h—w h —-—1
                                                                            )                                           v        —v
                                 n           p                       1-                1- pp                                p            -F




Similarly                    =
                                         II/iAI,                              where A is given by


                                 u(w h -C)+(v -v
                                              n
                                                 )
                                                 pp                           p            p
                                                                                                          - v-v p
                                                                                                              p     n




                             L
                                     u1'.sh—w             h ) (w h —C)
                                                      1- pp    pp
                                                                                                          —   +
                                                                                                                  v'—v +
                                                                                                                    p
                                                                                                                                     I




Substitutino from the two marQinal conditions qives a determinant of


            IA    .1 =       -[u'(w pp
                                     h -C)                                (v -v
                                                                          p       n    p
                                                                                           )/u)+v  -v )}
                                                                                                p n p                                         +
                                                                                                                                                       (v-v)
                                                                                                                                                        p  +



                                                 + th (v—v)u(w h —C)d (V —v)/u
                                                         p       n            p            pp              + p              1-




This yields the condition that                                                at/.3              will         be positive if



                                 V V                                                                                V —V
                                                         [1 + —-
                                 V —v                                             L 'w h —C)                        V —V
                                         p       f                        p                pp                           n            p



Note that either this condition or the previous one must be ful+illed so

that   at iest    one drd ossi1 bcth : the two deritives pt iH nd
         must be positive.



                                                                                      50
      T analyze the effects of hiqher fixed costs of employment, it is

 necessary first to calculate how these costs affect t                                                                      hcidinQ
                                                                                                     and tr
 other ti,jnqs constant. Usinq the same methodolooy as above, the relevant

 derivatives may be calculated as dt /LC =
                                                                p
                                                                            i   pC
                                                                                     I/) and •3t/C =
                     where the denominators are the same matrices as before. For

 the numerator of             •3t       18C, we    have the matrix
                                    p


                 I   -u'-u'(w           h -C) (T-T )                      u1(sh-w h
                                        pp         p                             f pp (wpp
                                                                                         h -C)



                 L       uhw h+ pp
                                )(T-t )                                 u'(€h+ -w h )2+(v -v
                                                   p                                           T           +




 whose determinant is given by


          IA
               pC
                     =   -u'u"(sh
                                         p-wpp
                                             h         -   (v
                                                           F        p
                                                                        -vF )tu+u'(w h -C)(T-t )] > 0
                                                                                          pp                   p


with the inequality following because u+u'(wh—C) (T—t                                                  > u'+uy                  0.

For the numerator of                               the matrix is
                                        3t.f/8C,


                     UU(W h -C)4+(v -v )                                 _uuu(w       h
                          pp                 p lip                                   pp -C)        (T-t )
                                                                                                       p

                      u" (sh —w h
                              F         pp) (wpph —C)                     —u' (zh —w h ) (T—t )
                                                                                     + pp              p           j




whose determinant is given by


     IA
          fC
               I =   uu"(h p—w pp
                               h }(w h —C)
                                    pp                     —        h(v
                                                                    p n—vp )u"(Eh+—wpp
                                                                                     h                )T—t )           <:   a
                                                                                                                   p


Hence, atiac             is   positive and t/dC is negative.


     As a final topic in the appendix, we consider the situation where no

low—wage women with children elect to work full—time in the early part of

the second period. This is the case illustrated in Figure Al, and it

corresponds to an instance in which the slope of the segments in Figure 1

between full—time and part—time work are relatively steeper, so that at


                                                           51
sufficiently low waqe levels women would not find it advantaqeous to work

full-time if they have children. Ps time passes in the second period, the

areas corresponding to nonparticipation and to part--time work will move

upward in the diaqram, for exactly the same reasons as discussed in the

text and earlier in this appendix. However, the boundary separating women

with children and women without children must remain fixed throuqhout the

period, so that although later on in the period the boundaries between

full—time wurk part—time works and nonparticipation will look much like

Figure 2. the boundary between women with and without children will not be

the horizontal segment pictured in Figure 2 but will continue to be the

segment pictured in Figure 1. Note that in this case there is a positive

association between the     ard the minimum level of 9 for which the

woman will choose to have children.




                                      52
     .1   j.,,, e       t   Mi•,si ts.       Cit   ' I(,.t*

,.



                                         ,
                            C




                                         &     Nd4II          0




                                                    2
                            2p
                    £




                                         z
                                                  2.




                                bec;s;.,t5 m. ;mt 8

0
             6                                                        I,

                                                                      I
                                                                           &Jp;!r,4,
                                                                           . &OO.i
                     I•


                                             4-                                -
                                                                            £Co. j


                          Cit                                                        d,4R
                          '#iII -


    C.       I                           o               C.



                     *.                                           I
                                                                              4•
             I        41L11tiMI
                                                                  I
             I             4O#&                                                         t.
                 A
                                                                  ji
             I
             e.
                                         £
                                                                  I                          £




    (a) o'4ajtE. Pat -Tj,.. Wte                        () Part -tin'. w.. E&*1 #b &, -rim,
                                           Fj$,( 5

                           ,e                        .o.cts f 6nipIji'tt#tt Oal.
                          •#                   *at W.ik Dtclsid,ts & Time t




T                               •                                             *. WOVC.


                                                                                                    —
                                                                                  —
                                                                             ——



     p*,.* -*;.
                                                             IIIITU
                  1                        •tsiia
                      I         4M.IS- hmi ,saO,k                                  £hildrg,i
                                                                                  4eH- $',i,
                  I                                                                      i.,. r C
                  I

                  I
                  I

                  I
                                    clii
                                S-hsst
                                             aA,
                                                                         I        # cii d'ei,
                  I                                                     I         4,.4   l—thi1
                  I                                                     I
                                                                                         lU.fC.
                  I


                  S.


    (a) .*.#a,i6 PmPt-*p',e Il8t                            b) Pt-r.e Wm9C EtmF                     #.

                                                                  FMII Tin.C M/dg*
                                     4



         .cf€ct of T,Pti#tq              dits                    ••
                                     Ci SiO"        r..1




     I       I     hs 14 re't,
     I       I         were                                       . W0*.
     I       I
                                                     I
                                                     I      I

                                 L




                                                     I     I
                                                     I     I                      0


                  *.                                 I
                                                                      Pt.
                  #IiI- Iar                                           1t4 £ I —
                                                                            e


     I       I




(4t) o QFIt PareTi                              P*rtT'i*tt V9€
                                                  II - T.r Wm5
                                   ir,e '
                      .1 Icrt as e a.         .-&n tec                       $   of Per
                      *i •rk DLci*io,s           at       i•me t0

a                                                     a
                  I
I

                                                                                 'I. wo,L
                           '% UO#t




              jLLL:
                                                           eJ,Jdv.as,
                                                           pa,-t-tiiie

                                     IIIIIV
                               U or                                      1             ltLjjme
                                                                         I              &u.r


              I
                              Cijjdit,t                                  I        ,.
                                                                         I
              I              u.                                          I         LUe,




    (u) C..ottgtt Prt Tjv.g                           b) Part-Tjra, Wagt g.m! to
                                                                                 L4J2gt
                            F,ire (.

       E#tct •f I,Icred5m          InipSaC.*   lay  gtt oit Pa.tv..r" •f
                   ,i4    W.v'k DeCISanS         t't rin€. t




                         II. WO                                       ,o werk



                                                     c.iI,Ire4,
  isi't-                                             part- bue
    we,

—— ——                 cha idrt4,
                      4'&H-ti,we
                                                 — ---n               eJIajj( t,t,
                                                                      MIS —




            I                                                     I   A1    —

            I         &o,-                                                 wOr&
                                                                  I

                                                                  I                  £




(4) Cots tant Pai-t- T,mt Ware                  () P4'- r;,n. Wt2 E1/ to
                                                     Fii- r;, Wa,4
     4I1raiit*yi P*4'*ts,,s •f             W."k DcssIo'i.s *t
                       .1 childbeahtj Pc,i.d.


               I                                                  I
               I                            i                     I
               I                           I
                                           I                      I

               I
                                                             —I



   t,*4,                                         c4i!s,.*,
 p#t-
                           - Wm
                                                                  _____.i.c111_t
           I                                                  I       .
           I       full - ha,,,                               I
                                                                          *., k
           I
                                                             I
           I
                                                             I
           I
                                                             I



(a) C45f*nt Pa-t-Ti u/age                      C) Pt-fl. IUg. Egua. 1
