                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DEFINING CLUSTERS OF RELATED INDUSTRIES

                                         Mercedes Delgado
                                         Michael E. Porter
                                            Scott Stern

                                        Working Paper 20375
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20375


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




This project has been funded by a grant from the Economic Development Administration of the U.S.
Department of Commerce. We received financial support from Harvard Business School. We thank
Bill Simpson, Xiang Ao, Rich Bryden, and Sam Zyontz for their invaluable assistance with the analysis.
We also acknowledge the insightful comments of two anonymous reviewers, Harald Bathelt, Ed Feser,
Frank Neffke, Juan Alcacer, Bill Kerr, Fiona Murray, Christian Ketels, James Delaney, Brandon Stewart,
Muhammed Yildirim, Ram Mudambi, Sergiy Protsiv, Jorge Guzman, Sarah Jane Maxted and the participants
in the Industry Studies Association Conference, NBER Productivity Seminar, Temple University Seminar,
and the Symposium on the Use of Innovative Datasets for Regional Economic Research at George
Washington University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20375.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Mercedes Delgado, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Defining Clusters of Related Industries
Mercedes Delgado, Michael E. Porter, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 20375
August 2014
JEL No. R0,R1

                                              ABSTRACT

Clusters are geographic concentrations of industries related by knowledge, skills, inputs, demand,
and/or other linkages. A growing body of empirical literature has shown the positive impact of clusters
on regional and industry performance, including job creation, patenting, and new business formation.
There is an increasing need for cluster-based data to support research, facilitate comparisons of clusters
across regions, and support policymakers and practitioners in defining regional strategies. This paper
develops a novel clustering algorithm that systematically generates and assesses sets of cluster definitions
(i.e., groups of closely related industries). We implement the algorithm using 2009 data for U.S. industries
(6-digit NAICS), and propose a new set of benchmark cluster definitions that incorporates measures
of inter-industry linkages based on co-location patterns, input-output links, and similarities in labor
occupations. We also illustrate the algorithm’s ability to compare alternative sets of cluster definitions
by evaluating our new set against existing sets in the literature. We find that our proposed set outperforms
other methods in capturing a wide range of inter-industry linkages, including grouping industries within
the same 3-digit NAICS.


Mercedes Delgado                                     Scott Stern
Temple University and ISC                            MIT Sloan School of Management
Fox School of Business                               100 Main Street, E62-476
Alter Hall 542                                       Cambridge, MA 02142
1801 Liacouras Walk                                  and NBER
Philadelphia, PA 19122                               sstern@mit.edu
mdelgado@temple.edu

Michael E. Porter
Harvard University
Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness
Ludcke House
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
mporter@hbs.edu
1.         Introduction

           There is an increasing need for useful data tools to measure the cluster composition of
regions, and support regional policy development as well as business strategy. The goal of this
paper is to address this need by providing a rigorous methodology for generating and assessing
sets of cluster definitions – groups of industries closely related by skill, technology, supply,
demand, and/or other linkages. Our approach is novel by comparing the quality of alternative
sets of cluster definitions and also by capturing multiple types of inter-industry linkages. We
implement this clustering algorithm to create a new set of U.S. Benchmark Cluster Definitions
(BCD), capturing a broad range of inter-industry linkages.
           Clusters are geographic concentrations of related industries and associated institutions.
The agglomeration of related economic activity is a central feature of economic geography
(Marshall, 1920; Porter, 1990; Krugman, 1991; Ellison and Glaeser, 1997). Marshall (1920)
highlighted three distinct drivers of agglomeration: input-output linkages, labor market pooling,
and knowledge spillovers, which are associated with cost or productivity advantages to firms.
Over time, an extensive literature has broadened the set of agglomeration drivers, including local
demand conditions, specialized institutions, the organizational structure of regional business, and
social networks (Porter, 1990, 1998; Saxenian, 1994; Storper, 1995; Markusen, 1996; Sorenson
and Audia, 2000; among others). Thus, clusters contain a mix of industries related by various
linkages (knowledge, skills, inputs, demand, and others) and supportive institutions.
           The bulk of the cluster literature has been based on detailed case studies (Marshall, 1920;
Porter, 1990, 1998; Swann, 1992; Saxenian, 1994). Over time, attention has begun to shift to
larger-scale, quantitative studies across regions and industries (Porter, 2003; Feser, 2005). Using
particular cluster definitions, studies have shown that the presence of related economic activity
matters for regional and industry performance, including job creation, patenting, and new
business formation (see among others, Feldman and Audretsch, 1999; Porter, 2003; Feser,
Renski, and Goldstein, 2008; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009; Delgado, Porter, and Stern, 2010, 2014;
Neffke, Henning, and Boschma, 2011).1 This evidence has informed key questions of both
research and policy interest: the size of cluster effects, which mechanisms are most important in
driving agglomeration, and how clusters diversify and grow in a region. Based on different


1
    See Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Cortright (2006) for a review of economies of agglomeration studies.


                                                          2
definitions of clusters, covering different portions of the economy ranging from high
technological intensity industries to manufacturing to all industries defined in the industrial
classification system, existing research has generated a range of results on these issues. However,
the lack of a comprehensive methodology, and a way to compare alternative sets of cluster
definitions, makes it difficult to reconcile key findings. This paper addresses this issue by
developing a novel clustering algorithm to generate, assess and compare alternative sets of
cluster definitions.
        Cluster definitions are groups of industries related by skill, technology, supply, demand,
and/or other linkages. This paper focuses on regionally comparable cluster definitions (i.e., the
industries that constitute a cluster (e.g., Biopharmaceuticals) are the same for all regions). Inter-
industry linkages are identified through the co-location patterns of industries across regions, or
with a range of national data available across industries. The identified linkages are used to
group industries into a set of defined clusters, allowing clusters to be compared across regions.
        To generate a set of cluster definitions, we use clustering analysis – numerical methods
for the classification of similar objects into groups (Everitt et al., 2011; Grimmer and King,
2011). Our algorithm generates many different cluster configurations, Cs, through a clustering
function that utilizes a particular measure of the relatedness between any two industries and well-
specified parameter choices (e.g., the number of groups). Each configuration is composed of
mutually exclusive groups of related industries (i.e., clusters). The algorithm then provides
scores that assess the quality of each C (i.e., its ability to capture meaningful inter-industry
linkages within clusters). This allows us to identify the configuration, C*, that best captures
certain types of inter-industry links. Because an algorithm cannot perfectly substitute for expert
judgment, the methodology concludes with an expert assessment and adjustment of individual
clusters in C* to determine a final set of cluster definitions, C**.
        Our paper contributes to the literature on clusters and economies of agglomeration in
several ways. First, the clustering algorithm allows us to compare the quality of alternative sets
of clusters using a common approach that generates objective scores (i.e., most clustering
methods do not provide scores to help compare across groupings (Everitt et al., 2011; Grimmer
and King, 2011)). We can assess cluster configurations that are generated using different inter-
industry linkage measures. For example, we can evaluate Cs generated using pairwise industry
co-location patterns to those based on input-output or other measures. We can also compare


                                                   3
existing sets of cluster definitions. The ability to score sets of clusters can help identify the
appropriate sets for addressing particular research and policy questions.
        Our scoring approach utilizes a basic clustering principle: creating groupings so that
industries within a cluster are more related to each other than to industries in other clusters based
on various measures of inter-industry linkages. The score for a given C depends on how well it
captures various types of industry linkages. However, what constitutes a useful set of cluster
definitions may change depending on the particular research and policy question. Some studies
may be interested in a particular type of industry link (e.g., labor occupational links), making sets
of cluster definitions that perform better in that link more useful.
        Second, our algorithm allows for experimentation with multiple inter-industry linkage
measures used in the economies of agglomeration literature, including input-output linkages,
occupational linkages, the co-location patterns of industries, and combinations among them. We
can then examine the cluster configurations generated based on these different measures. The
methodology can incorporate additional inter-industry linkage measures as they become
available (e.g., a measure that specifically captures knowledge linkages), and score their
resulting cluster sets.
        Third, although generating cluster definitions will require expert judgment for some
individual clusters, our algorithm is transparent. In the last stage of the algorithm, there is room
for expert judgment to correct for inevitable anomalies that arise due to data imperfections and
industry definitions. For example, in a given C*, there could be industry outliers that do not seem
to belong to their assigned cluster. These can be reallocated to their “next best” cluster using a
score that assesses the relatedness of the particular industry with another cluster, using a
transparent process. Users can assess how adjustments (re-allocations of industries, combining or
dividing clusters) impact cluster scores.
        Another important contribution of this paper is that we implement our method to generate
a new set of benchmark cluster definitions for the U.S. (BCD or C**), which captures a wide
array of inter-industry linkages. The U.S.-based empirical analysis focuses on grouping 778 6-
digit NAICS industries in manufacturing and services in 2009, and uses County Business
Patterns (CBP), the Benchmark Input-Output Account of the United States, and Occupational
Employment Statistics (OES) datasets to define multiple industry relatedness measures.




                                                  4
        The proposed BCD is generated using inter-industry measures of co-location patterns of
employment and the number of establishments, input-output links, and labor occupation links,
and contains 51 clusters. We examine the relative performance of the BCD and three existing
sets of (mutually exclusive) cluster definitions: industries within the same 3-digit NAICS, Porter
(2003), and Feser (2005). Grouping industries within the same 3-digit NAICS scores poorly in
capturing multiple inter-industry linkages, which is perhaps not surprising since the industrial
classification system groups industries based on the similarities of their products/services, not on
their inter-industry complementarities. Moreover, manufacturing and service industries belong to
different parts of the NAICS, so that products and services are definitionally unrelated.
Numerous empirical studies on economies of agglomeration have relied solely on industry codes
to define inter-industry relatedness, potentially limiting their ability to capture a broad array of
relevant industry linkages.
        Our benchmark set scores higher in capturing a broader range of inter-industry linkages
than the three other prominent sets of cluster definitions. The BCD also scores better or the same
as the other sets in input-output linkages and shared labor occupations.
        While the analysis is based on U.S. data, our clustering methodology can be implemented
in other large and integrated economies with sufficient data availability. At present, however,
U.S. data offers several advantages. Comparably large and diversified economic areas like the
EU have heterogeneous data accessibility across countries, and current and past barriers to trade
across locations can limit economies of agglomeration. Smaller economies (like the Nordics)
have access to rich data, but their relative small size leads to specialization in a narrow range of
industries.
        Our benchmark cluster definitions offer a useful tool for research and policy on regional
economic development. They allow the comparison of clusters across locations and over time by
mapping the defined clusters into regional units and measuring the specialization patterns of
regions in the clusters. Using the BCD, the U.S. Cluster Mapping Project has created a detailed
regional cluster dataset that facilitates comparisons across regions and across clusters on
numerous dimensions.2 For example, the Boston, MA and San Diego, CA Economic Areas have
high employment specialization in Biopharmaceuticals, but the size and breadth of the cluster is

2
 The U.S. Cluster Mapping website (http://clustermapping.us/) is supported by the U.S. Economic Development
Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce.


                                                    5
lower in San Diego, which lacks specialization in biological products (except in-vitro diagnostic
substances). The Project also includes data on the business environment and cluster institutions
to inform research and policy. This data tool can be used in combination with cluster methods
that focus on examining region-specific links among firms, individuals, and supportive
institutions in clusters to shed light on the mechanisms at play in particular regional clusters.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature on industry
cluster definitions. Section 3 describes our clustering algorithm. In Section 4, we discuss our
main findings regarding the generation and assessment of cluster configurations, and Section 5
proposes a set of benchmark cluster definitions. In Section 6 we compare the BCD to existing
sets of cluster definitions in the literature, and discuss some research and policy applications.
Section 7 concludes.


2.     Defining Industry Clusters
       There are various types of economies of agglomeration identified in the literature,
including input-output linkages, labor market pooling, knowledge spillovers, sophisticated local
demand, specialized institutions, and the organizational structure of business and social networks
(Marshall, 1920; Porter, 1990, 1998; Swann, 1992; Saxenian, 1994; Storper, 1995; Markusen,
1996; among others). These economies of agglomeration manifest themselves in clusters –
geographic concentrations of related industries and associated institutions. Within regional
clusters, firms and associated institutions (i.e., trade organizations, universities, and local
government) can operate more efficiently and innovate faster due to sharing common
technologies, infrastructure, pools of knowledge and skills, inputs, and responding to demanding
local customers.
       To implement cluster research and policy, however, we need to measure the boundaries
of clusters: What set of related economic activity and institutions constitutes a cluster? Two main
approaches to defining clusters have developed over the last 20 years: clusters based on inter-
industry linkages inferred from multi-region analysis (which we refer to as comparable cluster
definitions) and cluster definitions based on observed linkages among industries or firms in a
single region (which we refer to as region-specific cluster definitions). Many empirically derived
cluster definitions have been generated by researchers and practitioners over the years based on
both approaches (see Cortright (2006) and Feser et al., (2009) for a review). The goal of this


                                                  6
paper is to develop a novel methodology to generate and assess sets of comparable cluster
definitions. We next explain both approaches to define clusters and the contribution of our
clustering method to the literature.


2.1 Comparable Cluster Definitions
        A set of comparable cluster definitions allocates individual industries to specific clusters
(e.g., Biopharmaceuticals), allowing clusters to be compared across locations. The defined
clusters are mapped into regional units to measure the cluster specialization of regions. We can
then compare particular clusters across regions, as well as the overall cluster composition of
regions. Regional cluster strength reflects specialization in an array of related industries, not
specialization in a narrowly defined single industry (Porter, 1998, 2003; Feldman and Audretsch,
1999; Delgado et al., 2014). Thus, regional cluster strength is conceptually similar to the notion
of “related variety” introduced by Frenken et al. (2007). For example, a regional cluster with a
high breadth of industries will capture related variety.
        There are two types of inter-industry relatedness measures that have been developed in
the literature (see Section 3.1 for a detailed explanation). Some studies use national-level data to
capture particular inter-industry linkages, including knowledge links based on co-patenting (see
e.g., Scherer, 1982; Koo, 2005a; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009); input and output links (see e.g., Feser
and Bergman, 2000; Feser, 2005); skill links (see e.g., Koo, 2005b; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009;
Neffke and Henning, 2013); and product similarity as defined by the industry classification
system (e.g., same 3-digit NAICS). Still other studies define measures based on the co-location
patterns of industries across many regions to capture various types of linkages (Ellison and
Glaeser, 1997; Porter, 2003; Ellison et al., 2010). Only a few studies use the inter-industry
relatedness measures to then define clusters of related industries. We next discuss the main
existing sets of cluster definitions.
        Knowledge Clusters. Studies of knowledge clusters focus on a selected set of U.S.
manufacturing industries with high technological intensity. For example, Feldman and Audretsch
(1999) group industries that have a common science and technological base, using the Yale
Survey of R&D Managers. This survey assesses the relevance of key academic disciplines for a
product category. Industries with similar rankings of the importance of different academic
disciplines are grouped into six mutually exclusive clusters. Alternatively, Koo (2005b) groups


                                                  7
manufacturing industries into seven mutually exclusive knowledge-based clusters using principal
component factor analysis on an inter-industry patent-citation flow matrix.
        Input-Output Clusters. Feser and Bergman (2000) define a set of U.S. manufacturing
clusters using input-output links based on the Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the United
States. They group input-output classification codes (IO codes) into 23 clusters using principal
component factor analysis on an inter-industry input-output link matrix. The factor analysis
method tends to create highly uneven clusters, with a large number of IO codes grouped into a
few clusters.    To address this issue, Feser (2005) develops a new methodology based on
hierarchical clustering on an input-output link matrix for manufacturing and service activities.
This transparent method creates a set of 45 mutually exclusive clusters. Overlapping clusters are
then created in a second stage by identifying secondary IO codes highly related to the primary
codes within a cluster. For each cluster, the method provides scores of the fit of each IO code
within its cluster. The IO codes are then matched to 2002 NAICS codes to create a final set of
clusters of related industries.
        Co-Location-Based Clusters. Porter (2003) examines the co-location patterns of narrowly
defined industries in both service and manufacturing to define clusters, following the principle
that co-location reveals the presence of linkages across industries. The methodology first
distinguishes traded and local industries. Local industries are those that serve primarily the local
markets (e.g., retail), whose employment is evenly distributed across regions in proportion to
regional population. Traded industries are those that are more geographically concentrated and
produce goods and services that are sold across regions and countries. The set of traded
industries excludes natural-resource-based industries, whose location is tied to local resource
availability (e.g., mining).
        To measure the relatedness between a pair of traded industries (4-digit SIC), Porter
(2003) computes the pairwise correlation of industry employment across states using 1996 data.
This measure of co-location patterns is referred to as the “locational correlation” of employment
(LC-Employment) and could capture various types of inter-industry linkages. Porter (2003) uses
an iterative approach to define clusters rather than a clustering function approach. A set of 41
narrow (mutually exclusive) clusters are created using an iterative process to identify pairs and
then groups of industries highly linked based on statistically significant locational correlations.
In a second stage, a set of broad (overlapping) clusters is created by including other industries


                                                 8
that have a high locational correlation with the core industries within the narrow cluster. While
the cluster definitions are mainly based on the empirical patterns of employment co-location
among industries, the Benchmark Input-Output Account of the United States and industry
definitions are used to correct the placement of industries with high co-location but low
economic relatedness. These cluster definitions have proven very useful in the empirical analysis
of the role of clusters on regional performance (see e.g., Porter, 2003; Delgado, Porter, and Stern,
2010, 2014).


2.2 Region-Specific Cluster Definitions
       Comparable cluster definitions can capture most economic activities and are necessary
for studies that aim to examine clusters across regions. However, one limitation of any multi-
region cluster approach is that it may overlook specific inter-industry linkages that may exist in
particular regional clusters. These idiosyncratic regional linkages are the focus of the region-
specific cluster definitions. This approach focuses on a single region to measure industry and/or
firm interdependencies and define the region’s clusters. Such studies vary in their industry
coverage, types of economic units (industry, technology classes, or firms), types of regional units
(administrative or non-administrative), and methods.
       A small set of papers defines region-specific clusters for a large set of economic
activities. Some of these studies identify specific “driver” industries in which a region has a
competitive advantage. Then they use region-specific inter-industry linkages, such as regional
input-output models, to define the clusters around the driver industries (Hill and Brennan, 2000).
Other studies focus on identifying the (non-administrative) geographic boundaries of a given
cluster. To do so, they examine the spatial density of businesses for particular industries
(Duranton and Overman, 2005) or the spatial density of patents for particular technology classes
(e.g., Kerr and Kominers, 2010; Alcacer and Zhao, 2013). The goal is to identify locations with a
high density of economic activity in a particular field that will facilitate inter-firm connections
and externalities.
       The bulk of region-specific cluster definitions are qualitative and based on case studies
that tend to focus on particular clusters (see e.g., Bresnahan and Gambardella (2004); Cortright,
2010; Porter and Ramirez-Vallejo, 2013), for example, the Athletic and Outdoor cluster in
Portland (Cortright, 2010). These studies rely on existing cluster organizations, industry


                                                 9
directories, and other primary data collection to identify clusters. They offer rich details on the
firms and institutions within particular defined clusters, but may be less appropriate for
comparing clusters across regions.
        The conceptual limitation to region-specific approaches to define clusters is that such
definitions are based on observed linkages among existing economic activities in a region
(Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell, 2004; Maskell and Malmberg, 2007; Feser et al., 2009; Bathelt
and Li, 2013). Activities that are not present in a region (e.g., industries, technology classes, and
labor occupations that are not present) are classified as unrelated to the other activities in the
region. However, such non-present activities could be related to the activities in the region, but
historical factors, market imperfections or other factors may have prevented their development.
Region-specific cluster definitions could thus be too narrow (or myopic) in terms of the linkages
captured because they abstract from the linkages that may be present in other locations. Thus,
region-specific cluster definitions could be complemented by comparable cluster definitions
derived from patterns across multiple regions.
        This paper creates a new cluster methodology that systematically generates comparable
cluster definitions based on multiple types of inter-industry linkages. This approach provides
scores that assess the ability of each set of definitions to capture high inter-industry linkages
within individual clusters. For example, we can compare the Feser (2005) and Porter (2003) sets
of cluster definitions as well as other sets.
        We implement the algorithm and propose a new set of U.S. Benchmark Cluster
Definitions (BCD) that captures a wide variety of inter-industry linkages. This set can be updated
over time as new data (e.g., new industry definitions) becomes available.


3.      The Clustering Algorithm
        In order to derive clusters of industries, we use cluster analysis, or numerical methods to
classify similar objects (cities, people, genes, industries, etc.) into groups (Everitt et al., 2011). In
contrast to network analysis, where each object is related to any other object,3 cluster analysis



3
  For example, some papers focus on defining the “product space” – the network of relatedness between products.
Hidalgo et al. (2007) define the product space for exported goods. Other studies focus on specific dimensions of the
product space, such as the technology, knowledge, or market space (Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson, 1993;
Neffke et al., 2011; Bloom et al., 2012).


                                                        10
creates groups (termed clusters) in such a way that objects in the same cluster are more similar
among themselves than to those in other clusters.
           Defining clusters of related industries involves a number of key choices that can be
parameterized in a clustering algorithm. The algorithm includes criteria for scoring alternative
cluster configurations. Once the most promising configuration is identified, the algorithm
addresses outlier industries to develop a final set of cluster definitions.
           The clustering algorithm is designed to define mutually exclusive clusters, where each
industry is uniquely assigned to one cluster. The methodology also allows the measurement of
relatedness between any pair of (mutually exclusive) clusters and the creation of overlapping
clusters (with individual industries shared by multiple clusters).
           Drawing on Porter (2003), our method first distinguishes between traded industries
(geographically concentrated) and local industries (geographically dispersed). There are 1,088 6-
digit NAICS-2007 industries in the 2009 CBP data (excluding farming and some government
activity). We identify 778 traded industries using the specialization and concentration patterns of
each industry across U.S. regions. In 2009, the traded industries account for 36% of total U.S.
employment, 50.5% of payroll, and more than 90% of patenting activity.4
           The analysis focuses on grouping the 778 traded industries in service and manufacturing
into non-overlapping groups. We refer to each cluster configuration as C and its individual
clusters as c. There are five inter-related steps to create and assess each configuration C: (1)
define a similarity matrix Mij that captures the relatedness between any two industries; (2) make
broad parameter choices β; (3) use a clustering function to create a configuration C based on the
similarity matrix and parameter choices (C=F(Mij, β)); (4) calculate performance scores for each
C and identify the most promising configuration C*; and (5) assess and correct the individual
clusters in C* to determine the finalized set of cluster definitions C**. Each of these clustering
algorithm steps is explained in detail below.5


3.1 Step 1: Similarity Matrix
           The first step to group related industries into clusters is to define the degree to which each
pair of industries is related. A similarity matrix Mij provides the relatedness between any pair of

4
    The complete description of the traded and local categorization can be found on the U.S. Cluster Mapping website.
5
    All the steps of the algorithm were implemented using STATA software.


                                                          11
industries i and j. The matrix is based on the choice of indicator and the similarity measure.
Indicators used in the literature include employment, number of establishments, measures of
buyer-supplier linkages, and measures of shared labor requirements. The choice of a similarity
measure allows the user to decide how the distance between two industries i and j should be
measured (e.g., correlation coefficient, Euclidean, Jaccard index, or user-defined measures).
       There are many alternative similarity matrices. Our analysis focuses on the inter-industry
relatedness measures most frequently used in the field of regional studies to capture economies
of agglomeration. The similarity matrices can be divided into three types. First, there are Mij that
exploit co-location patterns across many regions to capture various types of inter-industry
linkages. This group includes the locational correlation of employment developed by Porter
(2003) and the Ellison and Glaeser (1997) coagglomeration index. Second, there are Mij that
focus on national-level inter-industry linkages, including measures based on national input and
output tables (see Feser and Bergman, 2000; Feser, 2005; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010) and
on labor occupation links (Glaeser and Kerr, 2009). Third, we create multidimensional matrices
that use a combination of these matrices. In what follows, we explain each of these similarity
matrices as well as additional industry linkages we do not directly measure.
       Pairwise Industry Co-location Patterns. Before we explain the co-location similarity
matrices used in our analysis, we need to clarify the regional unit used for these measures and the
source of the underlying data. There are two spatial approaches to measure the co-location
patterns of industries across regions: using discrete spatial units like states (Ellison and Glaeser,
1997; Porter, 2003; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010) and using continuous spatial units that are
based on the density of businesses (Duranton and Overman, 2005). Discrete spatial units that
capture relevant regional markets offer a reasonable starting point for understanding co-location
patterns. The differences between discrete and continuous co-location measures in their ability to
capture inter-industry externalities can be tested. For example, Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010)
show that their co-agglomeration index based on states and an approximation of the continuous
co-agglomeration metric developed by Duranton and Overman (2005) both capture similar inter-
industry Marshallian effects (input-output, skill, and knowledge links). Using continuous spatial
measures is beyond the scope of this paper due to data limitations.
       We use meaningful administrative regional units: Economic Areas (EAs) as defined by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). EAs represent 179 relevant regional markets that cover


                                                 12
the entirety of the continental United States (Johnson and Kort, 2004). The underlying
employment and count of establishments of an EA-industry is sourced from the County Business
Patterns (CBP) 2009 data.6
        Locational Correlation (LC). Porter (2003) examines the employment co-location
patterns of pairs of industries to capture inter-industry linkages of various types (e.g.,
technology, skills, supply, or demand links). He defines the locational correlation of employment
(LC-Employment) of a pair of industries as the correlation coefficient between employment in
industry i and employment in industry j in a region r:
         LC -Employmentij  Correlation( Employmentir , Employment jr )                       (1).

Similarly, we also define an alternative locational correlation based on the count of
establishments in a region-industry:
         LC -Establishmentsij  Correlation( Establishmentsir , Establishments jr )           (2).

Economies of agglomeration channels include firms as well as employees. The presence of
numerous establishments can facilitate inter-firm interactions that result in spillovers (Glaeser
and Kerr, 2009). Thus, the co-location patterns of count of establishments could help capture
inter-industry linkages that are facilitated by the number of businesses.
        The correlation coefficient is a well-known distance measure for continuous data used in
clustering analysis (Everitt et al., 2011). The LC measures can be implemented for very granular
industry definitions, and its scale is easy to interpret, with values between -1 and 1. Positive and
large values suggest that there are relevant economic interdependencies between a pair of
industries. For example, if the location of employment (count of establishments) in electronic
computers and software is highly correlated, it would suggest that both industries are linked.
While the LC measures tend to capture relevant linkages, it is possible that in some cases
industries with high co-location may have little economic relatedness but instead capture shared
natural resources. As we discuss further below, this does not limit the usefulness of co-location
measures.
        LC also could be sensitive to the size of the regions (Porter, 2003). For example, for pairs
of industries with employment concentrated in large regions (i.e., with many pairs of zero

6
  The CBP data is made available at the county, state, and U.S. level. Economic Area data is built up from the
county file. CBP data uses cell suppression in certain geography-industries with a small presence of firms. When
employment data is suppressed, a range is reported. We utilize the midpoint in the range in our data.


                                                      13
activity across regions), the LC could be biased. We limit this problem by using EAs versus
using smaller regional units (like counties) that do not fully capture the regional market. We also
implement several sensitivities to EA size that suggest this problem is limited.7 In our data, the
average LC-Employment and LC-Establishments of a pair of industries are 0.30 and 0.52,
respectively (Table 2).
          The Coagglomeration Index (COI). This index developed by Ellison and Glaeser (1997)
captures whether two industries are more co-located than expected if their employment is
distributed randomly. We use the revised version of the COI in Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr
(2010):

          COIij   (s ri  x r )*(s rj  x r ) (1   x r2 )   (3);
                     r                                r

where sri is the share of industry i’s employment in region r; and xr measures the aggregate size
of region r, which they model as the mean employment share in the region across industries. A
value of zero or negative for COI would suggest no externalities-driven co-agglomeration. The
higher the positive value of the COI, the greater is the potential for externalities between two
industries, but it is not easy to assess whether particular positive values are large or small.
          Ellison et al. (2010) compute the COI for pairs of manufacturing industries (3-digit SIC
codes) and use states as the main regional unit. They find that each of the three Marshallian
effects (input-output, skill, and knowledge links) matter for the co-agglomeration of a pair of
industries. However, shared natural advantages (e.g., coastal access) also matter for the co-
agglomeration, but this effect is less important than the cumulative effect of the Marshallian
factors. Their findings suggest that co-location captures not only meaningful economic
interdependencies and externalities between industries, but also some natural advantages.
          We extend the Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010) analysis, and compute the COI for 6-
digit NAICS manufacturing and service industries, using EAs as the regional unit. The mean of
this variable is around zero with a standard deviation of 0.010; and the values range from a
minimum of -0.05 to a maximum of 0.37 (Table 2). These values are very similar to those
obtained in Ellison et al. (2010) for 3-digit SIC manufacturing industries and with a state as the
regional unit. In our data, the COI is skewed, with 90% of the distribution below 0.01.

7
 We compute alternative LC matrices by dropping the 10 smallest and 10 largest EAs, and these LC matrices are
highly correlated to our baseline measures based on all EAs.


                                                           14
        National-Level Inter-Industry Links. We explain the next two similarity matrices that are
based on national-level data: input-output and labor occupation links. Because these measures do
not consider location patterns, they may capture industry interdependencies that are not
geographically bounded.
        Input-Output Links (IO). Measures based on the Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of
the United States are widely used to capture supplier and buyer flows between industries (see
Feser, 2005; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr, 2010; Alcacer and Chung, 2012). Following Ellison et
al. (2010), we construct a symmetric IO link between any pair of industries i,j based on the
maximum of all unidirectional input and output links:
         IOij  Max{input i j ,input i j ,output i j ,output i j }           (4).

The inputi  j link is the share of industry i’s total value of inputs that comes from industry j, and

the outputi  j link is the share of industry i’s total value of outputs that goes to industry j.8 The

IOij link takes a minimum value of zero if the two industries do not buy from or sell to each
other, and a maximum value of 1 if any of the two industries buy or sell exclusively from or to
the other.
        To compute this variable, we use the 2002 Benchmark Input-Output Account of the
United States developed by the BEA. The average of this variable is 0.02 (Table 2). Most
pairwise industrial combinations have a small IO link (also documented at Ellison et al., 2010),
making the distribution over all pairwise combinations skewed to the right. In our sample, 90%
of the distribution of this variable is below 0.06. Overall, input-output tables are more detailed
for manufacturing than service industries, and so may better capture links among manufacturing
industries.9
        In the sensitivity analysis, we also compute a more conservative IO link score that takes
the average (versus maximum) of the unidirectional input and output links, correcting
downwards the score for pairs of industries with large asymmetries in their links. The average

8
  To properly capture the strength of the input-output links between two industries, we compute these percentages
excluding final consumption and value-added commodity codes.
9
  In the underlying input-output data, many manufacturing industries are only available at the 4/5-digit NAICS level,
and many service industries at the 2/3-digit NAICS level. The following activities are aggregated at the 2-digit
NAICS level: Construction (23 NAICS), Wholesale trade (42 NAICS), Retail trade (44 and 45 NAICS), and
Management of Companies and Enterprises (55 NAICS). This higher level of aggregation may induce some
measurement error in the links among the corresponding 6-digit NAICS industries (e.g., we have to assume that any
6-digit industries within Wholesale trade have the same input-output links with other 6-digit industries).


                                                         15
and maximum pairwise IO links are highly correlated, and our findings are robust to using these
alternative measures.10
         Labor Occupation Links (Occ). Labor occupations have been used to measure the extent
to which industries share similar skills (Koo, 2005a; Glaeser and Kerr, 2009). We use the
Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS; 2009
data). The OES data provides 792 non-governmental occupations and information on the
prevalence of these occupations for each industry (i.e., for each occupation (e.g., computer
programmers); it provides the percentage of that occupation in the total occupational
employment of the industry). Using this data and following Glaeser and Kerr (2009), we
compute the pairwise correlation between the occupation composition of any two industries:
         Occij  Correlation(Occupationi , Occupation j )               (5);

where Occupationi is a vector with the percentage of each of the 792 occupations in the total
occupational employment of industry i. A limitation of this measure is that occupation data is
aggregated at the 4-digit NAICS level (i.e., industries with the same 4-digit NAICS will have the
maximum occupational link by construction).11 The average labor occupation correlation in our
sample is 0.18.12
         Multidimensional        Similarity     Matrices.      We     also     create    combinations       of    the
unidimensional similarity matrices described above. Creating multidimensional similarity
matrices begins with understanding the relationship between the unidimensional matrices.
Looking at the correlations in Table 3, LC-Employment is highly correlated with LC-
Establishments (correlation of 0.77) and with the coagglomeration index (correlation of 0.36).
These high correlations are robust to the size of the industry and to manufacturing and service
industries. IO links have a modest positive correlation with the other measures. We also explore
a matrix that captures product similarity as defined by the industry code (NAICS-3). This matrix
is equal to 1 for pairs of industries with the same 3-digit NAICS code (and 0 otherwise), and



10
   Other papers use measures of indirect input-output links that capture the extent to which a pair of industries have
meaningful suppliers and buyers in common (see Feser, 2005).
11
   We are using 7-digit Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) and 4-digit NAICS data because of better
coverage. The data can be accessed at http://www.bls.gov/oes/oes_dl.htm.
12
   Another way to measure skill links between industries is to examine the actual flow of employment using matched
employer-employee data for the workforce of a country. See Neffke and Henning (2013) inter-industry skill-
relatedness analysis for the Swedish economy.


                                                         16
relates very poorly with all similarity matrices except with occupational linkages (correlation of
0.45).
         By using a multidimensional similarity matrix, we can better capture more types of inter-
industry links (e.g., demand, supply, skills, knowledge, and others), and we can overcome some
of the data limitations of the unidimensional matrices (see Table A1 in the Appendix for the
definitions of all Mij used). For example, we compute an Mij that we call LC-IO-Occij, which is
the average of four (standardized) individual matrices: LC-Employmentij, LC-Establishmentsij,
IOij, and Occij.13 The multidimensional LC-IO-Occ has a high and statistically significant
correlation with each of the individual matrices (Table 3). This suggests that a pair of highly
linked industries based on one particular measure (e.g., IO) will also tend to be meaningfully
related based on the multidimensional similarity matrix. Thus, LC-IO-Occ seems to better
capture various inter-industry links.
         Through our algorithm, we can compare how well cluster configurations derived from
different similarity matrices perform given the validation scores developed in Step 4 below. We
can then assess which matrices seem to result in cluster configurations that capture the broadest
range of inter-industry links (see Section 4).
         Similarity Matrices and Alternative Agglomeration Mechanisms. While we explore a
particular set of relevant inter-industry measures, there are specific agglomeration mechanisms
that we do not measure explicitly, such as knowledge linkages and social linkages.
         Prior studies that focus on aggregated industries in manufacturing examine inter-industry
knowledge linkages using patent citation patterns (e.g., Koo, 2005b; Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr,
2010). We cannot create inter-industry patenting linkages due to data limitations.14 However,
knowledge linkages may be partly captured by our industry linkage measures. For example, co-
location patterns of industries could capture some knowledge links as shown by Ellison, Glaeser,
and Kerr (2010). Two industries may co-locate across regions because they share knowledge,
and proximity facilitates the flow of knowledge. Similarly, if two industries share labor
occupations, knowledge linkages could flow more easily.
         We also do not measure social linkages of firms and individuals, which are important to
define regional clusters. The inter-industry economic links captured by our measures can
13
 We standardize the unidimensional matrices since their scale and/or distribution are different (see Table 2).
14
  We use narrowly defined industries (6-digit NAICS), making the bridge to patent classes noisy. Additionally,
many service industries have low patent intensity.


                                                     17
facilitate opportunities for inter-firm interactions. For example, firms operating in industries that
share labor requirements or other inputs are more likely to interact and develop socioeconomic
links.
         If measures of inter-industry knowledge linkages or social linkages become available,
they could be incorporated into our clustering algorithm. We could compare them against other
similarity matrices, and assess how cluster configurations that are generated using the new
matrices perform in the validation scores defined in Step 4 below.
         More broadly, the nature and intensity of knowledge and socioeconomic linkages can
vary significantly across regional clusters. Studies of the network among firms, individuals, and
associated institutions will be especially informative as to the mechanisms at work in specific
clusters (Sorenson and Audia, 2000; Rosenthal and Strange, 2003; Feldman, Francis, and
Bercovitz, 2005; Bathelt, Malmberg, and Maskell, 2004; Storper and Venables, 2004; Lorenzen
and Mudambi, 2013).


3.2 Step 2: Broad Parameter Choices
         The parameter choices (β) required as inputs to the clustering functions include setting
the initial number of clusters (i.e., number of groups), determining how the underlying data
should be normalized, and determining the starting values for the clustering function.
         An important parameter choice in clustering analysis is the initial number of clusters
(numc). There are 41 clusters in Porter (2003) and 45 input-output based clusters in Feser (2005).
Current methods to identify the “optimal” number of clusters in clustering analysis are very
inconclusive (Everitt et al., 2011). Therefore, we explore values for the number of clusters
between 30 and 60. Overall, too few or too many groups could result in less useful cluster
definitions. Too few clusters could result in large clusters that include industries that are not very
related; and too many clusters could result in clusters that are not meaningfully different from
each other. Using Step 4 in the cluster algorithm (described below), it is possible to compare the
quality of different configurations based on differences in the initial number of clusters.
         The other two parameter choices refer to the starting values and the type of normalization
of the underlying data for the clustering functions. The starting values were chosen at random.
The underlying data was either untransformed (raw) or row-standardized (rst). These two
parameter choices are relevant only for partition-clustering functions: kmeans and kmedians. The


                                                 18
normalization of the data can be important for these two clustering functions since it could result
in a better centroid for each individual cluster.15
3.3 Step 3: Clustering Function
         Clustering functions are designed to find the greatest relatedness among industries within
each cluster. There are several clustering functions F(•) for grouping industries into clusters (see
Everitt et al., 2011; Grimmer and King, 2011). Each function creates a new grouping C based on
the similarity matrix and parameter choices: C = F(Mij, β). Our analysis uses the main cluster
functions for continuous data: the hierarchical function (with Ward’s linkage) and centroid-
based clustering functions (kmean and kmedian).16
         Only hierarchical functions allow the user to import a particular similarity matrix. In
contrast, kmean and kmedian functions require the underlying raw data to directly compute the
similarity matrix (and centroids). Thus, for similarity matrices that require additional
manipulation of the underlying data (e.g., IO or COI), we can only use the hierarchical function.
         Example of Steps 1 to 3 of the Clustering Algorithm. To illustrate Steps 1 to 3 of our
algorithm, we replicate a set of cluster definitions that we already know, namely the 3-digit
NAICS groupings. We define the similarity matrix NAICS-3ij as a symmetric binary matrix
where pairs of industries within the same 3-digit NAICS code are assigned a value of 1 (and a
value of 0 otherwise). Then, we set the broad parameters (β) so that there are 66 clusters just as
there are 66 different 3-digit NAICS codes for our 778 industries. Finally, we run the
hierarchical clustering function using the NAICS-3 matrix and 66 clusters. As expected, we find
that the resulting grouping C is indeed equal to the NAICS-3 groupings, validating the clustering
algorithm.


3.4 Step 4: Performance Scores for Each C
         Given the number of possible similarity matrices, parameters, and clustering functions
that could be chosen, the number of alternative cluster configurations is quite large. By
combining the choices described above in Steps 1 to 3 in different ways, we have generated 713


15
   The centroid of a cluster is the mean industry employment (for kmean) and the median industry employment (for
kmedian). These centroids could be biased towards larger regional industries. To limit this problem, we allow for
row-standardization of the region-industry employment/establishment data.
16
   We also tried hierarchical clustering with average linkages, but the resulting individual clusters were very uneven.
See Grimmer and King (2011) for a new clustering approach that combines multiple clustering functions.


                                                         19
different Cs. For example, choosing the LC-Employment similarity matrix, 40 clusters, raw
underlying data, and the kmean clustering function will result in one configuration C1.
Alternatively, choosing the IO links similarity matrix, 35 clusters, and the hierarchical clustering
function will result in a different configuration C2 (see Table 1 for examples of Cs).
       Without some way to evaluate the relative quality of all these Cs, it is very hard to find
the most useful sets of definitions that incorporate a broad range of inter-industry linkages. The
cluster analysis literature often lacks satisfactory methods for evaluating different categorization
schemes (Grimmer and King, 2011). In contrast, our approach provides a score for each
configuration C. In order to generate these scores, we must first address the question, What
makes a good set of cluster definitions?
       In our analysis, the primary criterion for a good set of cluster definitions is that industries
within a particular cluster (e.g., the Automotive cluster) should be more closely related among
themselves than to industries in other clusters. In other words, individual clusters should be
meaningfully different from each other, and individual industries should fit well within their own
cluster. Our score approach assesses this by using alternative measures of inter-industry linkages
that we use for creating validation sub-scores (e.g., sub-scores based on input-output links). Our
view is that a useful set of clusters will capture various types of industry linkages, including
demand, supply, skills, and others (Marshall, 1920; Porter, 1998). Thus, we develop an overall
validation score (VS) for each C that combines sub-scores based on alternative industry
measures.
       A secondary criterion is that the configurations should be robust. We would prefer cluster
definitions that are similar to other well-performing cluster definitions generated by the
algorithm, since this would suggest that they are more robust. We develop Overlap Scores (OS)
to capture the overlap of each C to other configurations.
       Those Cs with the highest ranked validation scores are then subject to the robustness
criteria to select the better configurations. The configuration that does relatively well in all
criteria is the C* selected to undergo further assessment in Step 5. In the remainder of this
section, we explain the validation and overlap scores.
       Validation Scores. We develop validation scores that capture the extent to which
individual clusters and industries have high Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR) relative to
Between Cluster Relatedness (BCR) with other clusters. The validation scores assess the quality


                                                 20
of a cluster configuration C along two dimensions. The first score, VS-Cluster, captures whether
individual clusters in C are meaningfully different from each other. The second score, VS-
Industry, assesses the fit of individual industries within their own cluster. The two scores are
related, but capture different information. For example, in cluster configurations with many
clusters, industries could fit very well in a cluster, but the individual clusters may not be very
different from each other. Alternatively, in other cluster configurations with a few large clusters,
individual clusters may be meaningfully different, but numerous industries may fit better in other
clusters.
        At the cluster level, we define WCRc as the average relatedness between pairs of
industries within a cluster, while BCRc is the average relatedness between industries in cluster c
and those in another cluster. For example, consider two clusters in C: cluster c1 with industries
a1, a2 and cluster c2 with industries b1, b2; and a similarity matrix Mij (e.g., LC-Employment) that
may be different from the one used to generate C. Then, the WCR of focal cluster c1 is
WCR c 1  Ma1a 2 , and the BCR of c1 and c2 is BCR c1 ,c2  Avg(Ma1b1 , Ma1b2 , Ma 2b1 , Ma 2b2 ) .

        For each focal cluster c in C, we compute its BCR with every other cluster and examine
the resulting distribution to compute two cut-off values – the average and the 95th percentile
values (AvgBCRc and Pctile95BCRc). For example, if there are 47 clusters in C, for each focal
cluster c we then have 46 different BCRc values, and we compute the average and the 95th
percentile of the BCRc values. We can then assess whether a cluster’s WCRc is higher than these
two threshold values.
        Once we define WCRc, AvgBCRc, and Pctile95BCRc for each cluster in C, we compute a
validation score that captures the percent of clusters with high WCRc (VS-Cluster). This score is
made up of two broad sub-scores that we average. The first calculates the percent of clusters in C
with WCRc higher than AvgBCRc (VS-Cluster Avg) based on a particular similarity matrix Mij.
The second sub-score is similar but more restrictive; it calculates the percent of clusters in C with
WCRc higher than Pctile95BCRc (VS-Cluster Pctile95):
        VS-Cluster Avg CM =(100/Nc )* I[WCR c (Mij ) AvgBCR c (Mij )]                    (6a)
                                           c

        VS-Cluster Pctile95 CM =(100/Nc )* I[WCR c (Mij ) Pctile95BCR c (Mij )] (6b);
                                               c
where Nc is the number of clusters in C and I is an indicator function equal to 1 if for a given
cluster c WCRc>AvgBCRc in (6a) or WCRc>Pctile95BCRc in (6b). We then average these two


                                                    21
sub-scores to compute VS-ClusterM. For example, for C* the VS-ClusterLC-Emp score is 67.0%,
meaning that approximately 31 (of 47) clusters have relatively high WCRc based on LC-
Employment (Table 5).
         We compute (6a) and (6b) based on four different Mij (LC-Employment, LC-
Establishments, IO, and Occ). Note that the similarity matrices we use here are not dependent on
the similarity matrix used to create C. This allows us to calculate validation scores that can be
consistently compared regardless of the underlying measures used to generate Cs. This results in
eight sub-scores that we then average to generate the main validation score. 17 A score of 100
indicates that all the individual clusters in C contain industries that are highly related based on
multiple linkages. For example, for C* the VS-Cluster is 81.6% (Table 5), while the average of
this variable across all Cs is 73.9% (Table 4).
         So far, we have computed a validation score that examines individual clusters. We then
compute a validation score based on the fit of individual industries within their own cluster (VS-
Industry). For a given industry i, we want it to be more related to the industries within its own
cluster than to industries outside its cluster.18 Similar to our calculation of VS-Cluster, we
measure the percent of industries with WCRic higher than their average BCRi (VS-Industry Avg)
and higher than the 95th percentile of BCRi (VS-Industry Pctile95) based on various similarity
matrices.
         VS-Industry Avg CM =(100/Ni )* I[WCR ic (Mij ) AvgBCR i (Mij )]                         (7a)
                                               i


         VS-Industry Pctile95CM =(100/Ni )* I[WCR ic (Mij ) Pctile95BCR i (Mij )] (7b);
                                                   i

where Ni is the number of industries in C. We compute (7a) and (7b) based on four different Mij
(LC-Employment, LC-Establishments, IO, and Occ), resulting in eight sub-scores that we then
average to generate the validation score VS-Industry.
         The overall validation score VS of a cluster configuration is computed as the average of
the VS-Cluster and VS-Industry scores. Those Cs with highly ranked scores for both VS-Cluster


17
   We do not include validation sub-scores based on COI to compute our main validation scores because COI and
LC-Employment will capture similar industry interdependencies.
18
   The industry WCRic score is the average pairwise relatedness between the focal industry and the other industries
within the cluster; while industry BCR is the average relatedness between the focal industry and industries in a
different cluster. Using the example above, if we consider focal industry a1 in cluster c1, then its WCRa1c=Ma1,a2 and
the BCR of a1 with industries in cluster c2 is BCRa1, c2=Avg(Ma1,b1, Ma1,b2).


                                                         22
and VS-Industry are the most promising configurations (the “candidates” C*s). The final
candidate C* is the configuration with the maximum VS score. For example, Table 5 illustrates
the validation scores and sub-scores for the candidate configuration C*.
        Overlap Scores. The candidate C*s are subject to the robustness criteria. We develop
scores that capture the robustness of a particular C by comparing the industry overlap between
the clusters in C and the clusters in other candidate configurations. To compare a configuration
C1 to another C2, for each individual cluster c in C1, we find a matching cluster b in C2 (i.e., the
cluster b that has the highest industry overlap with c). Specifically, we compute the overlap
between a pair of clusters c, b using the geometric mean of the industry overlap in each direction:
        overlapc,b  100  (Shared Industriesc,b / Industriesc  Industriesb ) .

Where Shared Industries is the number of industries in common in b and c; and Industries are
the number of industries in each cluster. The maximum overlap of a pair of matched clusters is
100. Then we define the overlap score of C1 to C2 as the average industry overlap across C1’s
                                  1
clusters: Overlap ScoreC1 C2 
                                  Nc
                                        overlap
                                       cC1
                                                c ,b   Similarly, we compute the average overlap of C1

with all other candidate configurations (Overlap Score        C-Candidates).   For example, on average the
proposed candidate C has an industry overlap of 77.6% with other relevant candidates,
                         *


indicating that these alternative Cs tend to provide, on average, similar groupings of industries
(Table 7).
        The configuration that does relatively well in the validation score (and overlap score) is
the C* selected to undergo further assessment in Step 5. Generally, the higher the validation
scores, the better the C*. However, there could be anomalies within individual clusters that
would require some assessment and reallocation of individual industries to obtain the finalized
set of cluster definitions C**.


3.5 Step 5: Assessing Individual Clusters of Candidate C*
        Because clustering analysis cannot perfectly substitute for expert judgment, the
methodology concludes with a systematic correction of anomalies and characterization of the
individual clusters in C*, resulting in a finalized set of cluster definitions. Although Steps 1 to 4
systematically assign industries to clusters, the resulting Cs can be improved. Limitations in the
underlying data may create spurious industry relatedness that will place some industries into


                                                       23
clusters where they are not the best fit. Some clusters may contain conceptually distinct groups
that may have not been separated because of the choice of initial number of groups (numc
parameter); and other clusters may be better off combined. Step 5 allows us to examine the
clusters in C* to assess whether there are industry outliers that are better placed into different
clusters and whether to combine or break individual clusters to improve the coherence of the
clusters. We can use our score approach to inform these expert-driven choices. Users can assess
how certain changes impact the WCR scores of individual clusters and the validation scores of
the cluster configuration relative to the initial values.
         We define two types of possible outlier industries: systematic and marginal outliers.
Systematic outlier industries are those with a low overall WCRic score (based on the average of
standardized sub-scores for WCRLC-Emp, WCRLC-Est, WCRIO, and WCROcc).19 Systematic outliers
are identified and corrected with a simple sub-process. They are identified based on two criteria:
the industry WCR is low relative to other clusters (i.e., WCRic is below the 75th percentile value
of BCRi); or WCR is low relative to other industries in the same cluster (i.e., WCRic is two
standard deviations below the average WCRic). Then the systematic outliers are reassigned to the
cluster where their WCR is highest. This sub-process is iterated several times until there are no
systematic outliers.
         Marginal outlier industries are those industries that, even with a high WCRic, could be
conceptually better in another cluster. These outliers are often the result of limitations in the
underlying data.20 For example, Men’s and Boy’s Clothing Manufacturing industries (NAICS
315221-31525) are in the Printing Services cluster for C*, but they likely best belong to an
Apparel cluster. Identifying these marginal outliers requires examining each cluster and
analyzing the main product/service lines of the industries based on the detailed definitions
offered by the NAICS system. The outliers are reallocated to their “next best” cluster using the



19
   The WCR score is based on these four sub-scores to have a more robust score that captures multiple inter-industry
linkages within the cluster.
20
   In a few cases, the input-output link between two industries may be overestimated due to the level of aggregation
of underlying data and/or due to our symmetric measure of IO links. For example, R&D industries (NAICS 541700)
appear very highly linked to Water Transportation (NAICS 483000) industries because Water Transportation
supplies a large percentage of its output to R&D industries. This induces the R&D industries to be grouped with
Water Transportation if input-output links are considered in the similarity matrix. For industries where the
underlying input-output data is highly aggregated and for industries with very high input-output links in the cluster,
we check that these industries also fit well in their cluster based on the other measures (LC and Occ).


                                                         24
WCRi scores. Reallocated marginal outliers can be easily tracked and documented so that the
process is transparent.
       Once we correct industry outliers, we then examine whether some individual clusters
should be combined or partitioned. If two individual clusters have very high BCR and they do
not seem conceptually different, they could be combined. In contrast, some individual clusters
could be partitioned if we find clear conceptual and relatedness differences among certain sub-
groups of industries in a cluster. Because of these corrections, the initial number of clusters
(numc) and the number of clusters in the finalized set of cluster definitions may differ.
       After all five steps in the cluster algorithm are complete, we are able to recommend a
final set of benchmark cluster definitions C** (the BCD). We explain the main findings and the
proposed new cluster definitions in the next Sections.


4.     Generating and Assessing Cluster Configurations
       We apply the clustering algorithm to generate 713 different cluster configurations that
group 778 6-digit NAICS industries using 2009 U.S. data. These configurations are based on 13
different similarity matrices (Mij) and the parameter and clustering function choices discussed in
the prior section (C=F(Mij, β)). As illustrated in Table 1, some Cs are generated using
unidimensional matrices (e.g., LC-Emp) and others using multidimensional matrices (e.g., LC-
IO-Occ). We then generate the validation scores for each configuration to assess their relative
quality. In this section, we use the scores to compare Cs generated using different similarity
matrices. We then explain the properties of the proposed candidate C* that will be subject to
assessment and adjustments of individual clusters in the last step of the algorithm to obtain the
BCD.
       Validation Scores by Choice of Similarity Matrix. Through our algorithm, we can
compare how well the configurations derived from different similarity matrices perform in the
validation scores. We can then assess which similarity matrices seem to result in cluster
configurations that capture the broadest range of inter-industry linkages and potential
externalities (e.g., demand, supply, skills, knowledge, and others).
       We use our score function to compare Cs generated by either a unidimensional similarity
matrix (LC-Emp, LC-Est, COI, IO, Occ) or the multidimensional LC-IO-Occ matrix. Each of
these matrices can be used to create a number of different Cs by changing the type of clustering


                                                 25
function and/or the parameter choices. For example, there are 31 Cs generated using a
hierarchical function, Mij=LC-IO-Occ, and 31 different values for the number of clusters (numc).
We then assess the average quality of Cs generated with the same similarity matrix. The analysis
is shown in Table 6, which reports the mean validation score (VS) and the mean validation sub-
scores (VSLC-Emp, VSLC-Est, VSIO, and VSOcc) by similarity matrix.
         If we want to capture various inter-industry linkages within clusters, then Cs with higher
overall validation scores will be preferred. We find that Cs generated with the LC-IO-Occ matrix
have, on average, statistically significant higher VS scores than other Cs generated based on
unidimensional matrices. For example, the mean VS of Cs(LC-IO-Occ) is 76, and the next best
mean VS is 71 for Cs(LC-Est) (Table 6). This difference in the means is statistically significant
at 1%.21 The matrix LC-IO-Occij seems to generate meaningful sets of cluster definitions that
capture a broad set of industry interdependencies. One of the Cs generated with this matrix is the
proposed candidate C*, which is the basis for our final set of cluster definitions.
         We can also examine how other model choices influence the validation scores. While we
cannot estimate the optimal number of groups (numc) for a good set of cluster definitions, we
can evaluate whether some numc values result in higher validation scores. For example, we find
that validation scores for Cs with 40-to-49 clusters are higher than the validation scores for
configurations that have either fewer (30-to-39) or more (50-60) clusters. This type of analysis
can help users identify good parameter values for their clustering models.
         Choosing the Candidate Configuration C*. The choice of C* depends primarily on the
validation scores. Those configurations with highly ranked scores for both VS-Cluster and VS-
Industry (i.e., top-40 rankings in both scores across the 713 Cs) are the candidates, C*s. There are
24 candidates (see Table 7). Then the configuration with the maximum overall validation score
VS is the proposed candidate C*. The C* is generated using a hierarchical clustering function with
47 clusters and the multidimensional similarity matrix LC-IO-Occ. This configuration has the
highest validation score across all the Cs, with a score of 77.7% (see Table 5 for all the scores
and sub-scores for C*).


21
  Some studies may be interested in the sets of clusters that best capture a particular measure. Cluster configurations
that are generated based exclusively on one particular measure tend to have better sub-scores in that particular
measure. That is the case for Cs generated using LC-Emp, LC-Est, or Occ, but not for Cs generated based on IO.
Using Cs(Occ) as an example, in Table 6 these Cs have a mean validation sub-score VSOcc higher than that of
Cs(LC-IO-Occ) (99 versus 95); but do significantly worse than Cs(LC-IO-Occ) in the other sub-scores.


                                                         26
        For sensitivity, we assess the robustness of the candidate C* by comparing its overlap to
the other 23 promising configurations. Table 7 shows that on average C* has a high overlap of
77.6% with these other Cs, indicating that they tend to provide very similar groupings of
industries. The configuration C* will be subject to assessment and improvement of individual
clusters in Step 5 to derive C**.


5.      Proposed Set of Benchmark Cluster Definitions C**
        Our methodology concludes with an assessment and correction of the individual clusters
in C* to derive the finalized set of cluster definitions. We explain this process here, present a
summary overview of the BCD, and illustrate a few selected clusters. A detailed overview of the
cluster definitions, with a description of each cluster, associated industry NAICS codes,
summary calculations of the fit of each industry within its cluster, and a full explanation of the
process to get to these clusters, is available in the supplemental online Technical Appendix.22
        The proposed set of cluster definitions C** has 51 clusters (see Table 8). In this set, 7
industries are systematic outliers and 125 industries are marginal outliers that were re-allocated
into other clusters.23 While we started with 47 clusters in C*, our final set of definitions has 51
clusters because we partitioned and combined some clusters to improve the coherence and
usefulness of the cluster definitions. These modifications had a trivial effect on the VS score,
which is 78% in C** and C* (see Tables 5 and 10).
        There are four cases where the algorithm divided industries into two clusters, but we
created a single combined cluster because they had high Between Cluster Relatedness and
seemed conceptually similar. Specifically, we combined the following pairs of clusters into an
individual cluster: two textile clusters, two financial services clusters, two food clusters, and two
upstream metal manufacturing clusters.
        We also partitioned the original clusters in seven cases: six individual clusters were each
partitioned into two clusters, and one cluster was partitioned into three. These partitions are


22
    The cluster definitions and the Technical Appendix are available at the U.S. Cluster Mapping website
(http://clustermapping.us).
23
   The correction of marginal outlier industries may not improve the overall VS score since some industries are
moved to clusters with lower WCRi than the original cluster. Most industries are moved to clusters with high
relative WCRi scores. Specifically, around 40% of industries are re-allocated into a new cluster where they have a
WCRic rank of 1 (best fit out of 51 clusters). A list of the marginal industries and their original and destination
clusters can be accessed at the online Technical Appendix.


                                                        27
supported by sensitivity analysis, and the new clusters have better properties (WCRc) than their
original larger cluster. We separated Downstream Chemical Products from Biopharmaceuticals
as supported by the underlying data and expert opinion. By doing this, we create narrower
clusters that focus on different markets. Similarly, we separated the Downstream Metal Products
cluster from the original Production Technology cluster, Leather and Related Products from the
original Apparel cluster, and Coal Mining from Electric Power Generation and Transmission; the
Mining cluster was partitioned into Metal Mining and Nonmetal Mining clusters. One partition
happened systematically when we slightly increased the parameter value for the number of initial
clusters (all else being equal): the Performing Arts cluster was separated from the original
Marketing, Design, and Publishing. Finally, the original Lighting and Electrical Equipment
cluster was partitioned into three clusters: the focal Lighting and Electrical Equipment, Medical
Devices, and Recreational and Small Electronic clusters. While these clusters share skills, they
are distinct groups. We explain these three clusters below.
       After this process of assessment and correction of individual clusters, we finalize the
characterization of clusters in C** with the creation of names and conceptual subcategories
(termed “subclusters”) to help describe the content of each cluster. These subclusters are based
mainly on industry definitions.
       Table 8 offers a summary overview of the clusters in C** (the BCD), with information by
cluster on the number of industries, the average WCR score, and sub-scores. All the individual
clusters have a high WCR score, but there is variation across clusters with Tobacco, Music and
Sound Recording, and Jewelry and Precious Metals having the highest scores. Most clusters have
an average WCR score greater than the maximum BCR score (i.e., WCR Rank of one).
       Cluster Examples. We illustrate the BCD with number of clusters that differ in the types
of industries included (e.g., different 3-digit NAICS) and in the types of corrections undertaken
in Step 5 to provide additional insights into the cluster definitions.
       Aerospace Vehicles and Defense Cluster (Table 9.1). This cluster includes establishments
that manufacture aircraft, space vehicles, guided missiles, and related parts. It was systematically
generated by Steps 1 to 3 of our algorithm, and contains seven industries in two different 3-digit
NAICS (336 and 334). These industries can be categorized into three sub-clusters: Aircraft,
Missiles and Space Vehicles, and Search and Navigation Equipment. All the industries fit best in
this cluster as compared to being placed in any of the remaining 50 clusters (i.e., the rank for


                                                  28
each industry based on WCRic score equals 1). The industry with the highest WCR score is
Aircraft Manufacturing (NAICS 315999), suggesting that this is a focal activity with relevant
links to the other industries within the cluster. As an example of the cluster’s distribution over
U.S. regions, Figure 1 shows the Economic Areas that are highly specialized in this cluster,
including, among many others, Seattle-Tacoma-Olympia, WA; Wichita-Winfield, KS; and
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX.
         Oil and Gas Production and Transportation Cluster (Table 9.2). This cluster includes
firms involved in locating, extracting, refining, and transporting oil and gas. It contains 12
industries in six different 3-digit NAICS. The focal industry here is Petroleum Refineries
(NAICS 324110). The mix of manufacturing and service industries in this cluster (and in other
ten clusters) contrasts with the measurement of related economic activity used in other papers.
For example, Frenken et al. (2007) develop a meaningful conceptual distinction of regional
diversity in related economic activity versus diversity in unrelated economic activity. They
classify industries in service and manufacturing as unrelated, which may not be the case for some
clusters.24
         Insurance Services Cluster (Table 9.3). The firms in this cluster provide a range of
insurance products as well as insurance support services. It contains eight service industries and
is one of three clusters that is exactly equivalent to a 3-digit NAICS group (524). Insurance-
related services (e.g., Claims Adjusting, NAICS 524291; All Other Insurance Related Activities,
NAICS 524298) is a focal part of the cluster, supporting a broad range of insurance types.
         Medical Devices; Lighting and Electrical Equipment; and Recreational and Small
Electric Goods Clusters (Tables 9.4–9.6). The algorithm originally grouped all three clusters into
one large cluster. Using expert judgment, we separated the overall cluster into three based
primarily on the NAICS definitions. We checked that the WCRc of each of the new clusters
improved or changed minimally relative to the score of the initial larger cluster, and that their
WCRc rank is 1 (Table 8).25 We also examined the geographic concentration of the three cluster



24
   Frenken et al. (2007) define related variety in a region by examining the diversity of industries within a given
two-digit industry class (i.e., entropy at the five-digit level industries within each two-digit industry class); and find
that related diversity enhances regional employment growth.
25
   Specifically, in the initial C* with 47 groups (and after correcting the industry outliers), the WCRc of the original
cluster was 1.5, while each of the WCRc of the partitioned clusters was 1.7 for Lighting and Electrical Equipment,
2.3 for Medical Devices, and 1.5 for Recreational and Small Electric Goods.


                                                           29
categories across EA regions as an additional criterion, and concluded that they have different
geographic concentration patterns.
        As suggested by their descriptions, the three clusters are conceptually different. The
Medical Devices cluster (Table 9.4) consists of firms that manufacture different medical devices
and supplies. It has five industries representing two 3-digit NAICS codes (333 and 339). Firms in
the Lighting and Electrical Equipment cluster (Table 9.5) are not involved in manufacturing
medical devices, but do manufacture other electrical equipment and electronic components. It is
a larger cluster, consisting of 15 industries representing one 3-digit NAICS code (335). Finally,
firms in the Recreational and Small Electric Goods cluster (Table 9.6) are related to those in the
Lighting and Electrical Equipment cluster, but the focus is different. These establishments
manufacture end-use products for recreational, decorative, and office purposes. There are 15
industries that represent five different 3-digit NAICS codes.
6.      Comparison of our C** and Existing Sets of Cluster Definitions
        Using the clustering algorithm, we can assess the relative performance of our proposed
set of benchmark cluster definitions C** and other existing sets of cluster definitions: NAICS-3,
Porter (2003), and Feser (2005). We use the mutually exclusive sets of cluster definitions offered
by Porter (2003) and Feser (2005) since the differences are more readily apparent when each
industry is assigned to one cluster, and their overlapping clusters rely on having well-defined
mutually exclusive clusters. Before providing the details of the comparisons, it is important to
clarify that the number of industries and the number of groups are different across the four sets.
Our C** includes 778 industries and 51 clusters, NAICS-3 grouping includes 778 industries and
66 clusters, Porter’s (2003) set includes 685 industries and 41 traded clusters, and Feser’s (2005)
set includes 910 industries and 44 clusters (excluding farming and a few other industries due to
data limitations).26
        The validation scores for the selected sets of cluster definitions are presented in Table 10.
Our analysis shows that a definition based on grouping industries with the same 3-digit NAICS
code performs relatively poorly when trying to capture a broad set of industry interdependencies.
The overall validation score of NAICS-3 is the lowest (58) not only among the existing sets, but

26
  One of the clusters in Feser’s (2005) set is Farming, which is excluded from the CBP data; therefore, we focus the
analysis on the other 44 clusters and 910 industries (out of 969 industries) that we can bridge into 2007 NAICS
codes and CBP data. The larger number of industries in Feser (2005) is in part due to the inclusion of local health
services.


                                                        30
also among all the cluster configurations (Cs) generated by the algorithm. The NAICS-3
groupings do poorly in most sub-scores except for occupational linkages. The low validation
scores are perhaps not surprising, since the industry code system groups industries based on
similarities in products or services, not based on broader inter-industry complementarities. This
suggests that many studies that classify industries from different parts of the industry code as
unrelated may fail to capture relevant inter-industry linkages.
       In Table 10, we find that C** scores better in capturing a broad set of industry
interdependencies than any of the other sets of clusters. C** receives the highest validation score
(and highest VS-Cluster and VS-Industry scores) with a VS value of 78 as compared to 73 for
Porter (2003), 69 for Feser (2005), and 58 for NAICS-3. Furthermore, the validation score of C**
ranks second across the 713 Cs generated by the algorithm. C** also seems to perform well in
particular inter-industry measures. Specifically, C** scores better or the same as the three other
sets in the validation sub-scores for pairwise industry co-location of the number of
establishments (VSLC-Est), input-output links (VSIO), and shared labor occupations (VSOcc). Porter
(2003) set scores highest in the validation sub-score for pairwise industry co-location of
employment (VSLC-Emp), but with little difference from the C** score (67 versus 66). The Feser
(2005) set does relatively worse than C** in the LC and IO sub-scores. The lower validation sub-
score for IO links could be due to the fact that Feser’s (2005) set of clusters uses a particular
indirect IO link measure that is different from the one used in this paper (i.e., his measure
captures the percent of meaningful suppliers and buyers in common for a pair of industries rather
than the direct selling and buying to and from each other). Overall, these findings suggest that
the clusters in our proposed set of benchmark cluster definitions contain industries that are
meaningfully related, and may facilitate externalities of various types.
       We can also analyze the industry overlap between the clusters in C** and the clusters in
the other three sets of cluster definitions to evaluate whether different clustering methods tend to
generate similar clusters. In each case, we examine the overlap for the sub-set of industries in
common with C**. For example, C**and NAICS-3 definitions have 778 industries in common,
which belong to 51 clusters in C** and 66 clusters in NAICS-3. We then assess if the industries
are grouped in similar clusters using our overlap score (see Section 3.4). We compute the overlap
score in each direction (i.e., C** to NAICS-3 and NAICS-3 to C**) and then take the average in
both directions. The findings are presented in Table 11. The average industry overlap is 61%


                                                31
between C** and NAICS-3, which means that on average a pair of clusters shares 61% of their
industries. Only three clusters are identical in both sets (100% overlap): Environmental Services
(NAICS-562); Insurance Services (NAICS-524; Table 9.3); and Paper and Packaging (NAICS-
322).27 Similarly, the average cluster overlap is 57% between C** and Porter’s (2003) set, and
54% between C**and Feser’s (2005) set. While there is overlap between sets, the scores indicate
that the clusters in the BCD are meaningfully different from those in the other existing sets.


6.1 Research and Policy Applications for the BCD
           What constitutes a good set of cluster definitions depends on the particular research or
policy question. We implement our clustering algorithm to offer a set of benchmark cluster
definitions that captures numerous inter-industry linkages and could facilitate externalities of
various types (e.g., skills, supply, demand, and others).
           For research questions that focus on a particular type of inter-industry link (e.g.,
occupational links and potential labor market pooling benefits), groupings that better capture that
specific link may be preferred. For example, if the policy goal is to promote training and skills
that could be shared by industries with similar labor needs, cluster configurations that best
capture occupational links will be useful.
           However, if the goal is to promote multiple complementarities across industries, we
believe our BCD may be more useful. Industries within our cluster categories are highly related
based on a mix of various links. Some industries in a cluster may have strong skill links, while
other industries may be closely related by IO, technology, and/or other types of links. Policies
that focus on improving a specific link for a sub-set of industries within the cluster (e.g., training
and skills shared by some industries) can facilitate complementarities of many types among all
industries in the cluster.
           We believe our proposed BCD is particularly important for studying the economic
development of regions. We map the finalized set of cluster definitions into different regional
units (Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), Economic Areas (EAs), and States) over time,
creating a regional cluster dataset that allows for a systematic comparison of the cluster
composition of regions using different metrics (e.g., employment, specialization, wages, and
number of establishments). For example, Figure 1 shows the top regional Aerospace Vehicles

27
     The number of different 3-digit NAICS in a cluster in C** is on average 2.7.


                                                           32
and Defense clusters across Economic Areas in 2010. This database is publicly available at the
U.S. Cluster Mapping website.
       For a particular cluster category, we can assess its presence in a region and examine what
industries are under-represented (or non-existing) in the region as compared to the national
cluster or as compared to similar clusters in other regions. These comparisons can then be the
focus of key research and policy actions. To design policies that help a regional cluster, we need
to examine why certain industries are under-represented or under-performing. Several
explanations are plausible: the lack of skills, inputs, technology, sophisticated demand, and/or
institutions for collaboration. Other methods that focus on examining region-specific links
among firms and individuals in clusters could complement our benchmark cluster definitions and
offer important insights into the mechanism at play in a particular regional cluster.
       The ability to compare a cluster across regions can also facilitate the evaluation of
regional cluster policies (Feldman et al. 2012). For example, we could identify a few regional
clusters that look very similar in a base year in terms of various cluster attributes (size,
specialization, number of firms, industry composition, etc.), but where one cluster is the target of
a relevant investment (say a private-public grant) and the others are not. We can then assess if
over time we observe differences in the composition and performance of the treated regional
cluster relative to the others. In addition, researchers can use our clustering method and the
BCD-based database to examine relevant questions on the role of clusters in the performance of
regions and firms.


7.     Conclusion
       In order to compete more effectively, regions need to understand their cluster strengths as
compared to those of other regions. To make this comparison, a set of regionally comparable
cluster definitions that marks the industry boundaries of each cluster is necessary. This paper
responds to this need by providing a clustering methodology to generate and assess sets of
cluster definitions. In our algorithm, each cluster configuration is generated by a clustering
function that uses as inputs a particular inter-industry similarity matrix and well-specified
parameter choices. The clustering algorithm provides scores that assess the quality of each
configuration. This allows us to identify the candidate configuration that best captures multiple
types of inter-industry links. The methodology concludes with a correction of anomalies of the


                                                 33
individual clusters in the most promising configuration to determine our finalized set of cluster
definitions.
       Using U.S. data, we implement the clustering algorithm to generate a transparent set of
benchmark cluster definitions that captures many inter-industry interdependencies. The proposed
definitions use measures of inter-industry linkages based on the co-location patterns of
employment and establishments, input-output linkages, and shared labor occupations. The BCD
contains 51 clusters that can be mapped consistently into U.S. regions to create a regional cluster
database.
       With an updateable algorithm for defining and assessing alternative cluster definitions, a
number of extensions are possible. First, we can add additional inter-industry similarity matrices
as they become available (e.g., specific measures of knowledge linkages or labor flows among
industries) to generate improved cluster definitions.
       Second, while the analysis here focuses on mutually exclusive clusters, the methodology
also provides scores of the relatedness between any pair of clusters and between any industry and
any cluster. These scores are based on various inter-industry linkage measures. Thus, we can
assess which mutually exclusive clusters are meaningfully related (e.g., industries in the
Financial Services cluster and in the Insurance Services cluster are highly related). We can also
develop overlapping cluster definitions by adding secondary industries that are highly related to
the industries that constitute each (mutually exclusive) cluster (Porter, 2003; Feser, 2005).
Defining measures of the relatedness among clusters is important since economies of
agglomeration arise across related clusters as well as within individual clusters (Delgado, Porter,
and Stern, 2014).
       Third, our clustering method can be applied to other countries using their specific data.
Defining clusters is best undertaken using data from large and diverse economies with numerous
highly integrated regions. Since the U.S. is a large and diverse economy, the U.S. benchmark
cluster definitions are a good starting point, especially for economies that lack the data needed to
implement the clustering methodology. However, there are some limitations on using the BCD in
other economies that are weighted toward economic activities that are less prevalent in the
United States (e.g., ship building) or that are not well captured by U.S. data (e.g., farming). They
may also be less useful in countries with a lower level of technological development, but here,
our definitions offer important insights into how clusters could form with reduced internal


                                                34
barriers to trade and technological improvements. Finally, the BCD will be especially useful for
countries with an industry code schema similar in detail to the one in the United States (e.g.,
Mexico and Canada). It can also be applied with higher aggregation to a large set of countries
through matching the U.S. NAICS code to the U.N. International Standard Industrial
Classification (ISIC). Definitions based on ISIC would facilitate an examination of the trade and
foreign direct investment links of clusters across countries (e.g., Bathelt and Li, 2013; Delgado,
Kyle, and McGahan, 2013).
       A fourth extension is the further examination of local industries (e.g., retail industries,
hospitals) and their linkages with traded regional clusters. Our clustering analysis excludes local
industries because they do not geographically concentrate, but rather focus on serving a region’s
population. Also, within a region certain local industries (e.g., local business services, retail
activities) can geographically concentrate, which has implications for policy.
       Fifth, the algorithm can be used to track the evolution of the industry boundaries of
clusters over time. For example, while IT and analytical instruments industries are highly related
today, they may have been less complementary a decade or two ago. The emergence and
evolution of clusters have not been widely studied due to lack of data (Swann, 1998; Porter,
1998; Bathelt and Boggs, 2003; Klepper, 2010). However, an understanding of cluster
emergence and relatedness could have wide-ranging implications for forward-looking regional
strategy.
       Another area for future research is the development of methods to adapt cluster
definitions to specific regions (i.e., the industry boundaries of a cluster can sometimes vary by
region). For example, regional input-output tables could be used to measure region-specific
buyer-supplier linkages in clusters.
       Finally, our benchmark cluster definitions can be mapped into continuous spatial units as
well as administrative units (e.g., MSAs, EAs, and States). We could then analyze the micro-
geography of clusters within (and across) jurisdictions (e.g., Duranton and Overman, 2005; Kerr
and Kominers, 2010; Alcacer and Zhao, 2013). For example, in a particular Economic Area (e.g.,
Los Angeles, CA), we could assess whether a cluster category is geographically separated in
distant parts within the region or whether the whole cluster is closely co-located. Understanding
the micro-geography of clusters can help inform policies to facilitate the connectivity of firms
and supportive institutions within clusters.


                                                35
        The BCD, combined with other available data sources, can be used to greatly inform
economic development. For example, using the BCD and other data sources, the U.S. Cluster
Mapping Project has created a regional cluster dataset together with multiple regional
performance and business environment indicators (e.g., employment, specialization, wages, and
number of establishments). The Project provides a powerful tool for researchers and
policymakers, and offers a new interactive tool for practitioners and firms looking to identify
opportunities in regions and design cluster-based regional economic development policies. The
tool also maps the cluster composition of regions to encourage connections previously not
identified.




                                              36
7.     References

Alcacer, J. and W. Chung, 2014, “Location Strategies for Agglomeration Economies,” Strategic
        Management Journal (forthcoming).
Alcacer, J. and M. Zhao, “Zooming In: A Practical Manual for Identifying Geographic Clusters,”
        Harvard Business School Working Paper, No. 14-042, November 2013.
Bathelt, H. and J.S. Boggs, 2003, “Toward a Reconceptualization of Regional Development
        Paths: Is Leipzig’s Media Cluster a Continuation of or a Rupture with the Past?,”
        Economic Geography 79, pp. 265–93.
Bathelt, H. and P.F. Li, 2013, “Global Cluster Networks – Foreign Direct Investment Flows
        From Canada to China,” Journal of Economic Geography, 13. doi: 10.1093/jeg/lbt005.
Bathelt, H., A. Malmberg, and P. Maskell, 2004, “Clusters and Knowledge: Local Buzz, Global
        Pipelines, and the Process of Knowledge Creation,” Progress in Human Geography, 28
        (1), pp. 31–56.
Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen, 2012, “Identifying Technology Spillovers and
        Product Market Rivalry,” Econometrica, 81 (4), pp. 1347–93.
Bresnahan, T., A. Gambardella (eds.), 2004, Building High-Tech Clusters. Silicon Valley and
        Beyond. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Cortright, J., 2006, “Making Sense of Clusters: Regional Competitiveness and Economic
        Development,” The Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program,
        http://www.brookings.edu/reports/2006/03cities_cortright.aspx.
Cortright, J., 2010, “The Athletic and Outdoor Industry Cluster: A White Paper,” Impresa
        Economics.
Delgado, M., M. Kyle, and A.M. McGahan, 2013, “Intellectual Property Protection and the
        Geography of Trade,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 61 (3), pp. 733–62.
Delgado, M., M.E. Porter, and S. Stern, 2010, “Clusters and Entrepreneurship,” Journal of
        Economic Geography, 10 (4), pp. 495–518.
Delgado, M., M.E. Porter, and S. Stern, 2014, “Clusters, Convergence, and Economic
        Performance,” Research Policy, forthcoming.
Duranton, G. and H.G. Overman, 2005, “Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
        Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 72 (4), pp. 1077–1106.
Ellison, G. and E. Glaeser, 1997, “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries:
        A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, pp. 889–927.
Ellison, G., E. Glaeser, and W. Kerr, 2010, “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
        from Coagglomeration Patterns,” The American Economic Review, 100 (3), pp. 1195–
        1213.
Everitt, B.S., S. Landau, M. Leese, and D. Stahl, 2011, Cluster Analysis, 5th Edition, John Wiley
      & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, UK.
Feldman, M.P. and D. Audretsch, 1999, “Innovation in Cities: Science-based Diversity,
        Specialization, and Localized Competition,” European Economic Review, 43, pp. 409–
        29.
Feldman, M.P., J. Francis, and J. Bercovitz, 2005, “Creating a Cluster While Building a Firm:
        Entrepreneurs and the Formation of Industrial Clusters,” Regional Studies, 39 (1), pp.
        129–41.
Feldman, M.P., A.G. Reed, L. Lanahan, G. McLaurin, K. Nelson, and A. Reamer, 2012,
        “Innovative Data Sources for Economic Analysis,” e-book.


                                               37
Feser, E.J., 2005, “Benchmark Value Chain Industry Clusters for Applied Regional Research,”
        Regional Economics Applications Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-
        Champaign.
Feser, E.J. and E.M. Bergman, 2000, “National Industry Cluster Templates: A Framework for
        Applied Regional Cluster Analysis,” Regional Studies, 34 (1), pp. 1–19.
Feser, E.J., H. Renski, and H. Goldstein, 2008, “Clusters and Economic Development
        Outcomes,” Economic Development Quarterly, 22 (4), pp. 324–44.
Feser, E.J., H. Renski, and J. Koo, 2009, “Regional Cluster Analysis with Interindustry
        Benchmarks,” in S.J. Goetz, S.C. Deller, and T.R. Harris (eds.), Targeting Regional
        Economic Development, pp. 213–38.
Frenken, K., F.G. Van Oort, and T. Verburg, 2007, “Related Variety, Unrelated Variety, and
        Regional Economic Growth,” Regional Studies, 41 (5), pp. 685–97.
Glaeser, E.L. and W.R. Kerr, 2009, “Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How
        Much of the Spatial Distribution Can We Explain?,” Journal of Economics and
        Management Strategy, 18 (3), pp. 623–63.
Grimmer, J. and G. King, 2011, “General Purpose Computer-assisted Clustering and
      Conceptualization,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (7), pp. 2643–
      50.
Hidalgo, C.A., B. Klinger, A.L. Barabasi, and R. Hausmann, 2007, “The Product Space
        Conditions the Development of Nations,” Science 317 (5837): 482–87.
Hill, E.W. and Brennan, J.F., 2000, “A Methodology for Identifying the Drivers of Industrial
        Clusters: The Foundation of Regional Competitive Advantage,” Economic Development
        Quarterly, 14: 65–96.
Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg, and R. Henderson, 1993, “Geographic Localization of Knowledge
        Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, pp.
        577–98.
Johnson, K.P. and J.R. Kort, 2004, “2004 Redefinition of the BEA Economic Areas,” at
        http://www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2004/11November/1104Econ-Areas.pdf.
Klepper, S., 2010, “The Origin and Growth of Industry Clusters: The Making of Silicon Valley
        and Detroit,” Journal of Urban Economics, 67 (1), pp. 15–32.
Kerr, W. and S. Kominers, 2010, “Agglomerative Forces and Cluster Shapes,” NBER Working
        Paper 16639.
Koo, J., 2005a, “How to Analyze the Regional Economy with Occupation Data,” Economic
        Development Quarterly, 19: 356–72.
Koo, J., 2005b, “Knowledge-based Industry Clusters: Evidenced by Geographical Patterns of
        Patents in Manufacturing,” Urban Studies, 42: 1487–505.
Krugman, P., 1991, “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Political
        Economy 99 (3), pp. 483–99.
Lorenzen, M. and R. Mudambi, 2013, “Clusters, Connectivity, and Catch-up: Bollywood and
        Bangalore in the Global Economy,” Journal of Economic Geography, 13, pp. 501–34.
Marshall, A., 1920, Principles of Economics, London: MacMillan.
Markusen, A., 1996, “Sticky Places in Slippery Space: A Typology of Industrial Districts,”
        Economic Geography, 72 (3), pp. 293–313.
Maskell, P. and A. Malmberg, 2007, “Myopia, Knowledge Development, and Cluster
        Evolution,” Journal of Economic Geography, 7, pp. 603–18.



                                             38
Neffke, F. and M. Henning, 2013, “Skill-relatedness and Firm Diversification,” Strategic
        Management Journal, 34 (3), pp. 297–316.
Neffke, F., M. Henning, and R. Boschma, 2011, “How Do Regions Diversify over Time?
        Industry Relatedness and the Development of New Growth Paths in Regions,” Economic
        Geography, 87 (3).
Porter, M.E., 1990, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, Free Press, New York.
Porter, M.E., 1998, “Clusters and Competition: New Agendas for Companies, Governments, and
        Institutions,” in M.E. Porter (ed.), On Competition, Harvard Business School Press,
        Boston, pp. 197–299.
Porter, M.E., 2003, “The Economic Performance of Regions,” Regional Studies, 37, pp. 549–78.
Porter, M.E. and J. Ramirez-Vallejo, 2013, “The New Caroline Initiative,” Harvard Business
        School, N9-713–462.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange, 2003, “Geography, Industrial Organization, and
        Agglomeration,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, pp. 377–93.
Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange, 2004, “Evidence on the Nature and Sources of Agglomeration
        Economies,” in J.V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse (eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban
        Economics, vol. 4., Amsterdam: Elsevier North-Holland.
Saxenian, A., 1994, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route
        128, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University.
Scherer, F.M., 1982, “Inter-industry Technology Flows and Productivity Growth,” The Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 64 (4), pp. 627–34.
Sorenson, O. and P.G. Audia, 2000, “The Social Structure of Entrepreneurial Activity:
        Geographic Concentration of Footwear Production in the United States, 1940–1989,”
        American Journal of Sociology, 106 (2), pp. 424–62.
Storper M., 1995, “The Resurgence of Regional Economies, Ten Years Later: The Region as a
        Nexus of Untraded Interdependencies, European Urban and Regional Studies, 2, pp.
        191–221.
Storper, M. and T. Venables, 2004, “Buzz: Face‐to‐Face Contact and the Urban Economy,”
        Journal of Economic Geography, 4 (4), pp. 351–70.
Swann, P., 1992, The Dynamics of Industrial Clusters, Oxford.
Swann, P., 1998, “Clusters in the U.S. Computing Industry,” in Swann, P., M. Prevezer, and D.
        Stout (eds.), 1998, The Dynamics of Industrial Clustering: International Comparisons in
        Computing and Biotechnology, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 76–105.




                                              39
Table 1: Examples of Cluster Configurations Generated

Similarity Matrix Mij                         Parameter Choices β                 Clustering Function   No. of Cs
                                     No. Clusters (numc)          Data                 C=F(Mij, β)
LC-Employmentij                              30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
                                                                Raw/Std                  Kmean             62
                                                                Raw/Std                 Kmedian            62
LC-Establishmentsij                          30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
                                                                Raw/Std                  Kmean             62
                                                                Raw/Std                 Kmedian            62
Labor Occupation (Occij)                     30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
                                                                  Raw                    Kmean             31
                                                                  Raw                   Kmedian            31
Input-Output (IOij)                          30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
Coagglomeration Index                        30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
              *
LC-IO-Occij                                  30-60                Raw              Hierarchical-Ward’s     31
*
  This Mij is an average of the (standardized) LC-Employment, LC-Establishments, IO, and Occ matrices. See Table
A1 for a list of all the similarity matrices used. The Hierarchical function uses Ward’s linkages.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Similarity Matrices (778 industries (6-digit NAICS-2007 codes),
2009 data; N=604,506)
Similarity Matrices Mij                       Mean          Std Dev      Min          Max         Median Pctile90
LC-Employment (LC-Empij)                       0.296         0.232      -0.176       0.993         0.263      0.631
LC-Establishments (LC-Estij)                   0.519         0.259      -0.174       0.998         0.555      0.840
Input-Output (IOij)                            0.017         0.045         0            1          0.001      0.064
Labor Occupation (Occij)                       0.183         0.202      -0.013          1          0.113      0.450
Coagglomeration Index (COIij)                 -0.000         0.010      -0.051       0.372        -0.000      0.007
            *
LC-IO-Occij                                   -0.002         0.646      -1.438       6.716        -0.037      0.801
Notes: An observation is any pair of industries (ij, i≠j). *LC-IO-Occij is an average of the (standardized) LC-
Employment, LC-Establishments, IO, and Occ.

Table 3: Correlation between Similarity Matrices (778                industries (6-digit NAICS-2007 codes), 2009
data; N=604,506)
                              LC-Emp      LC-Est                       IO             Occ           COI       NAICS-3
LC-Employment                   1.00
LC-Establishments               0.77        1.00
Input-Output                    0.16        0.13                      1.00
Labor Occupation                0.03        0.10                      0.13            1.00
Coagglomeration Index           0.36        0.17                      0.07            0.15          1.00
NAICS-3*                        0.05        0.05                      0.09            0.45          0.09         1.00
LC-IO-Occij                     0.76        0.78                      0.55            0.49          0.29         0.25
Notes: An observation is any pair of industries (ij, i≠j). All coefficients are significant at 1% level. All variables are
based on 2009 data except for IO, which is based on 2002 data. *NAICS-3 matrix is equal to 1 for a pair of
industries with the same 3-digit NAICS code (and 0 otherwise).




                                                           40
Table 4: Descriptive Statistics: Validation Scores for Cluster Configurations (No. of Cs=713)
Validation Scores                         Description               Mean Std Dev      Min      Max     Pctile90
VS-Cluster                 % of clusters with high WCRc (Average     73.9     4.8     63.5     83.9       80.4
                           of VS-Cluster sub-scores)
VS-Industry                % of industries with high WCRic           66.3     3.1     56.9     74.2       70.2
                           (Average of VS-Industry sub-scores)
VS                         Average VS-Cluster and VS-Industry        70.1     3.5     63.4     77.7       74.5
                  Sub-scores based on individual similarity matrix (LC-Emp, LC-Est, IO, or Occ)
VS-ClusterLC-Emp           % of clusters with high WCRLC-Emp         76.7    14.9     50.0 100.0          96.9
             LC-Est
VS-Cluster                 % of clusters with high WCRLC-Est         71.4    11.0     50.0     96.7       89.5
VS-ClusterIO               % of clusters with high WCRIO             68.3    15.9     41.7     98.3       94.1
VS-ClusterOcc              % of clusters with high WCROcc            79.3    18.2     47.3 100.00        100.0
VS-IndustryLC-Emp          % of industries with high WCRLC-Emp       70.6    16.0     45.9     97.8       92.9
              LC-Est
VS-Industry                % of industries with high WCRLC-Est       68.9    13.4     45.6     95.2       88.7
VS-IndustryIO              % of industries with high WCRIO           54.9    12.1     40.3     80.4       75.7
VS-IndustryOcc             % of industries with high WCROcc          70.8    19.1     46.5     99.8       98.3
Notes: For each C, VS-Cluster is the average of the sub-scores (VS-ClusterLC-Emp, VS ClusterLC-Est, VS-ClusterIO,
VS-ClusterOcc); and similarly VS-Industry is the average of the VS-Industry sub-scores. See Table 5 for an
illustration of the scores and sub-scores using a particular C.

Table 5: Validation Scores (sub-scores) for Selected Cluster Configuration C* (778 industries)
                                  C* =Hierarchical (LC-IO-Occ, 47 clusters)
Validation Sub-scores            VS-Cluster                VS-Industry                             VS
                           % Clusters with high WCRc    % Industries with high WCRic   (Avg VS-Cluster, VS-Industry)
VSLC-Emp (Avg)                       67.0                           61.7                          64.4
 WCR>AvgBCR                          93.6                           90.7                          92.2
 WCR>Pctile95BCR                     40.4                           32.6                          36.5
VS LC-Est
          (Avg)                      68.1                           62.3                          65.2
 WCR>AvgBCR                          89.4                           91.0                          90.2
 WCR>Pctile95BCR                     46.8                           33.5                          40.2
VS (Avg)
   IO
                                     92.6                           78.0                          85.3
 WCR>AvgBCR                          97.9                           89.7                          93.8
 WCR>Pctile95BCR                     87.2                           66.3                          76.8
VS Occ
       (Avg)                         98.9                           92.8                          95.9
 WCR>AvgBCR                         100.0                           98.7                          99.4
 WCR>Pctile95BCR                     97.9                           86.9                          92.4
Validation Scores                    81.6                           73.7                          77.7
 Rank (1=best)                        14                             4                              1
Notes: We compute to what extent individual clusters and industries in C have Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR)
greater than a Between Cluster Relatedness (BCR) cut-off value based on particular similarity matrices M ij. We then
average these sub-scores into the Validation Scores: VS=Avg(VSLC-Emp, VSLC-Est, VSIO, VSOcc). The Validation
Score Rankings are computed across 713 sets of cluster definitions.




                                                        41
Table 6: Mean of Validation Score (and sub-scores) by Selected Similarity Matrices (Mij)
                                         Validation Score                     Validation Sub-scores
                                                VS
Mij                     No. Cs(Mij)       (Avg sub-scores)      VSLC-Emp          VSLC-Est         VSIO        VSOcc
LC-IO-Occ                     31                 76                 62              64              84           95
LC-Emp                       155                 67                 94              70              50           54
LC-Est                       155                 71                 79              89              53           63
IO                            31                 70                 56              59              85           82
Occ                           93                 67                 55              55              58           99
COI                           31                 65                 89              70              50           53
Notes: Validation scores and sub-scores take value [0,100]. The differences in the means of the validation scores and
sub-scores of Cs(LC-IO-Occ) versus Cs(Mij) are all statistically significant at 1% level, except for the sub-score
VSIO of Cs(LC-IO-Occ) and Cs(IO) (84 and 85).

Table 7: Candidate Cluster Configurations C*s (Top-40 Rankings in both VS-Cluster and VS-Industry)
               Model Choices                                   Validation Scores                       Overlap Score
                                                VS-Cluster        VS-Industry              VS            OSC-Candidates
C*s        Mij         Numc Function Rank              Score     Rank     Score      Rank     Score         Score
C* LC-IO-Occ             47       Hiw          14      81.6        4       73.7        1       77.7          77.6
C2 LC-IO-Occ             56       Hiw          12      81.7        8       73.3        2       77.5          75.5
C3 LC-IO-Occ             48       Hiw           9      81.8       10       73.3        3       77.5          77.7
C4 LC-IO-Occ             55       Hiw          15      81.6        9       73.3        4       77.5          75.9
C5 LC-IO-Occ             53       Hiw           7      82.1       17       72.8        5       77.4          76.8
C6 LC-IO-Occ             49       Hiw           8      81.9       12       72.9        6       77.4          77.6
C7 LC-IO-Occ             54       Hiw          11      81.7       11       73.0        7       77.4          76.4
C8 LC-IO-Occ             42       Hiw          39      81.0        6       73.7        8       77.3          77.0
C9 LC-IO-Occ             59       Hiw          17      81.6       13       72.8       11       77.2          73.6
C10 LC-IO-Occ            57       Hiw          16      81.6       16       72.8       12       77.2          74.9
C11 LC-IO-Occ            58       Hiw          21      81.5       14       72.8       14       77.1          74.3
C12 LC-Est               43       Hiw          13      81.7       23       72.5       15       77.1          39.5
C13 LC                   41       Hiw           3      82.6       40       71.3       18       77.0          43.7
C14 LC-IO-Occ            50       Hiw          19      81.5       27       72.3       19       76.9          77.3
C15 LC-IO-Occ            60       Hiw          27      81.3       21       72.6       20       76.9          73.0
C16 LC-IO-Occ            52       Hiw          20      81.5       29       72.3       21       76.9          77.1
C17 LC-IO-Occ            51       Hiw          26      81.4       28       72.3       22       76.8          77.1
C18 COI-IO-Occ           44       Hiw          38      81.0       18       72.7       23       76.8          68.3
C19 LC                   42       Hiw           6      82.1       31       71.4       24       76.8          43.4
C20 COI-IO-Occ           42       Hiw          39      81.0       19       72.6       25       76.8          67.7
C21 LC-Est               41       Hiw          36      81.1       26       72.3       26       76.7          39.9
C22 LC                   44       Hiw          18      81.5       34       71.4       30       76.5          42.9
C23 LC                   43       Hiw          25      81.4       32       71.4       31       76.4          43.0
C24 IO-Occ               44       Hiw          27      81.3       34       71.4       32       76.3          69.7
Notes: Rank is across the 713 Cs. Overlap ScoreC-Candidates is the average cluster overlap between the focal C and the
23 other sets of definitions. Hiw refers to the Hierarchical-Ward’s clustering function.




                                                         42
Table 8: Overview of Proposed Set of Benchmark Cluster Definitions C**
                                                                                   LC-Emp
Cluster Name                                       No.    % Traded     WCR     WCR          WCRLC-Est WCRIO WCROcc
                                                Industries Employ    Rank Score [-1,1]       [-1,1]    [0,1] [-1,1]
Aerospace Vehicles and Defense                      7        1.3%     1   1.93   0.20         0.63     0.15   0.87
Agricultural Inputs and Services                    9        0.2%     1   1.14   0.35         0.53     0.10   0.46
Apparel                                             21       0.4%     1   2.28   0.45         0.74     0.11   1.00
Automotive                                          26       1.9%     1   2.27   0.31         0.62     0.22   0.65
Biopharmaceuticals                                  4        0.6%     1   3.35   0.59         0.76     0.23   1.00
Business Services                                   33      24.2%     1   1.17   0.66         0.83     0.04   0.25
Coal Mining                                         4        0.2%     2   2.30   0.44         0.53     0.22   0.62
Communications Equipment and Services               8        1.3%     1   2.37   0.47         0.79     0.23   0.41
Construction Products and Services                  20       1.8%     1   1.81   0.39         0.61     0.21   0.29
Distribution and Electronic Commerce                62      13.0%     1   2.19   0.67         0.82     0.12   0.63
Downstream Chemical Products                        13       0.6%     1   1.30   0.39         0.69     0.04   0.71
Downstream Metal Products                           16       1.0%     1   1.05   0.28         0.58     0.02   0.82
Education and Knowledge Creation                    15       6.8%     1   1.34   0.70         0.85     0.03   0.38
Electric Power Generation and Transmission          5        0.3%     2   0.90   0.30         0.31     0.00   1.00
Environmental Services                              7        0.2%     1   2.81   0.57         0.78     0.22   0.67
Financial Services                                  26       4.9%     1   2.04   0.54         0.71     0.16   0.51
Fishing and Fishing Products                        5        0.1%     1   3.40   0.48         0.63     0.28   1.00
Food Processing and Manufacturing                   47       2.2%     1   0.82   0.26         0.46     0.03   0.72
Footwear                                            6        0.0%     1   5.22   0.09         0.31     0.72   0.75
Forestry                                            4        0.2%     1   3.47   0.59         0.66     0.36   0.51
Furniture                                           12       0.9%     1   1.43   0.34         0.76     0.03   0.83
Hospitality and Tourism                             31       7.0%     5   0.45   0.50         0.60     0.01   0.21
Information Technology and Analytical Instruments 27         2.6%     1   1.32   0.43         0.78     0.03   0.69
Insurance Services                                  8        3.8%     1   4.35   0.59         0.82     0.39   0.91
Jewelry and Precious Metals                         4        0.1%     1   5.49   0.53         0.79     0.55   1.00
Leather and Related Products                        6        0.1%     2   1.32   0.35         0.75     0.01   0.86
Lighting and Electrical Equipment                   15       0.8%     1   1.49   0.36         0.75     0.02   0.94
Livestock Processing                                5        1.2%     1   1.66   0.34         0.56     0.14   0.65
Marketing, Design, and Publishing                   22       2.9%     1   1.68   0.76         0.90     0.04   0.48
Medical Devices                                     5        0.7%     1   2.12   0.52         0.89     0.07   0.87
Metal Mining                                        8        0.1%     1   0.60   0.09         0.23     0.05   0.81
Metalworking Technology                             17       1.2%     1   1.43   0.62         0.82     0.02   0.59
Music and Sound Recording                           5        0.1%     1   6.19   0.85         0.94     0.57   1.00
Nonmetal Mining                                     13       0.2%     1   0.63   0.13         0.19     0.03   0.89
Oil and Gas Production and Transportation           12       1.3%     1   1.47   0.61         0.64     0.10   0.36
Paper and Packaging                                 20       0.9%     1   1.62   0.28         0.52     0.08   0.97
Performing Arts                                     8        0.7%     1   1.84   0.65         0.86     0.10   0.42
Plastics                                            15       1.6%     1   2.04   0.49         0.76     0.10   0.82
Printing Services                                   13       1.3%     1   2.54   0.54         0.87     0.15   0.78
Production Technology and Heavy Machinery           41       2.3%     1   1.08   0.29         0.59     0.01   0.89
Recreational and Small Electric Goods               15       0.5%     1   1.30   0.32         0.74     0.01   0.90
Textile Manufacturing                               23       0.5%     1   1.20   0.35         0.52     0.10   0.49
Tobacco                                             3        0.0%     1   7.53   0.09         0.35     1.00   1.00
Trailers, Motor Homes, and Appliances               9        0.3%     1   0.52   0.08         0.26     0.01   0.90
Transportation and Logistics                        17       3.8%     1   1.14   0.42         0.76     0.10   0.22
Upstream Chemical Products                          12       0.4%     1   1.24   0.12         0.32     0.09   0.95
Upstream Metal Manufacturing                        26       0.9%     1   0.97   0.25         0.50     0.04   0.76
Video Production and Distribution                   6        0.5%     1   3.13   0.69         0.83     0.23   0.69
Vulcanized and Fired Materials                      17       0.6%     1   0.94   0.26         0.53     0.02   0.78
Water Transportation                                12       0.7%     1   1.73   0.37         0.69     0.16   0.45
Wood Products                                       13       0.9%     1   1.71   0.36         0.54     0.10   0.87
                                        Average                           2.07   0.42         0.65     0.15   0.71

Notes: WCR is the average of the (standardized) WCR LC-Emp, WCRLC-Est, WCRIO, and WCROcc.


                                                          43
Table 9.1: Aerospace Vehicles and Defense Cluster
Description: Establishments in this cluster manufacture aircraft, space vehicles, guided missiles, and related parts. It
also contains firms that manufacture the necessary search and navigation equipment used by these products.
NAICS     NAICS Name                                              Subcluster Name                               Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                                Rank (1=best)        Score
336411    Aircraft Mfg                                            Aircraft                                           1               3.53
336412    Aircraft Engine & Engine Parts Mfg                      Aircraft                                           1               1.65
336413    Other Aircraft Parts & Auxiliary Equipment Mfg          Aircraft                                           1               2.22
336414    Guided Missile & Space Vehicle Mfg                      Missiles & Space Vehicles                          1               1.47
336415    Guided Missile & Space Vehicle Propulsion Unit &
                                                                  Missiles & Space Vehicles                          1
          Propulsion Unit Parts Mfg                                                                                                  1.89
336419    Other Guided Missile & Space Vehicle Parts &
                                                                  Missiles & Space Vehicles                          1
          Auxiliary Equipment Mfg                                                                                                    0.99
334511    Search, Detection, Navigation, Guidance,
                                                                  Search & Navigation Equipment                      1
          Aeronautical, & Nautical System & Instrument Mfg                                                                           1.77


Table 9.2: Oil and Gas Production and Transportation Cluster
Description: This cluster includes firms involved in locating, extracting, refining, & transporting oil & gas. This
includes companies that manufacture the equipment necessary to extract oil & gas, as well as companies that
provide support services for oil & gas operations & pipeline transport.
NAICS     NAICS Name                                              Subcluster Name                               Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                                Rank (1=best)        Score
324110    Petroleum Refineries                                    Petroleum Processing                               1               2.58
324199    All Other Petroleum & Coal Products Mfg                 Petroleum Processing                               1               0.83
213112    Support Activities for Oil & Gas Operations             Support Activities for Oil & Gas Operations        1               2.17
541360    Geophysical Surveying & Mapping Services                Support Activities for Oil & Gas Operations        1               0.79
213111    Drilling Oil & Gas Wells                                Drilling Wells                                     1               0.94
211111    Crude Petroleum & Natural Gas Extraction                Oil & Gas Extraction                               1               2.47
211112    Natural Gas Liquid Extraction                           Oil & Gas Extraction                               1               2.17
333132    Oil & Gas Field Machinery & Equipment Mfg               Oil & Gas Machinery                                1               1.15
486110    Pipeline Transportation of Crude Oil                    Pipeline Transportation                            1               1.29
486210    Pipeline Transportation of Natural Gas                  Pipeline Transportation                            1               1.10
486910    Pipeline Transportation of Refined Petroleum Products   Pipeline Transportation                            2               1.11
486990    All Other Pipeline Transportation                       Pipeline Transportation                            1               1.09



Table 9.3: Insurance Services Cluster
Description: This cluster consists of firms providing a range of insurance types, as well as support services such as
reinsurance and claims adjustment.
NAICS     NAICS Name                                              Subcluster Name                               Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                                Rank (1=best)        Score
524291    Claims Adjusting                                        Insurance Related Services                         1               6.17
524298    All Other Insurance Related Activities                  Insurance Related Services                         1               6.20
524113    Direct Life Insurance Carriers                          Insurance Carriers                                 1               3.93
524114    Direct Health & Medical Insurance Carriers              Insurance Carriers                                 1               3.92
524126    Direct Property & Casualty Insurance Carriers           Insurance Carriers                                 1               3.92
524127    Direct Title Insurance Carriers                         Insurance Carriers                                 1               3.55
524128    Other Direct Insurance Carriers                         Insurance Carriers                                 1               3.32
524130    Reinsurance Carriers                                    Reinsurance Carriers                               1               3.76

Table 9.4: Medical Devices Cluster
Description: Establishments in this cluster primarily manufacture surgical, dental, & optical instruments & supplies.
NAICS NAICS Name                                                  Subcluster Name                               Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                                Rank (1=best)        Score
333314*   Optical Instrument & Lens Mfg                           Optical Instruments & Ophthalmic Goods             1               1.98
339115    Ophthalmic Goods Mfg                                    Optical Instruments & Ophthalmic Goods             1               2.48
339112    Surgical & Medical Instrument Mfg                       Surgical & Dental Instruments & Supplies           1               2.19
339113    Surgical Appliance & Supplies Mfg                       Surgical & Dental Instruments & Supplies           1               2.34
339114    Dental Equipment & Supplies Mfg                         Surgical & Dental Instruments & Supplies           1               1.61
Note: *Marginal industry outliers reallocated from other cluster (see online Technical Appendix).



                                                                         44
Table 9.5: Lighting and Electrical Equipment Cluster
Description: This cluster contains firms involved in the manufacture of electrical equipment & electronic
components. The companies in this cluster manufacture wire for communications, wiring devices, fiber-optic cables,
switchboards, lighting fixtures, motors, transformers, & related products.
NAICS     NAICS Name                                         Subcluster Name                      Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                  Rank (1=best)        Score
335110    Electric Lamp Bulb & Part Mfg                      Lighting Fixtures & Parts                 1               1.34
335121    Residential Electric Lighting Fixture Mfg          Lighting Fixtures & Parts                 1               1.77
335122    Commercial, Industrial, & Institutional Electric   Lighting Fixtures & Parts                 1               1.77
          Lighting Fixture Mfg
335129    Other Lighting Equipment Mfg                       Lighting Fixtures & Parts                 1               1.68
335311    Power, Distribution, & Specialty Transformer Mfg   Electrical Equipment                      1               1.62
335312    Motor & Generator Mfg                              Electrical Equipment                      1               1.30
335313    Switchgear & Switchboard Apparatus Mfg             Electrical Equipment                      1               1.48
335314    Relay & Industrial Control Mfg                     Electrical Equipment                      1               1.64
335921    Fiber Optic Cable Mfg                              Electrical Components                     1               1.39
335929    Other Communication & Energy Wire Mfg              Electrical Components                     1               1.61
335931    Current-Carrying Wiring Device Mfg                 Electrical Components                     1               1.67
335932    Noncurrent-Carrying Wiring Device Mfg              Electrical Components                     1               1.23
335991    Carbon & Graphite Product Mfg                      Electrical Components                     1               1.15
335999*   All Other Miscellaneous Electrical Equipment &     Electrical Components
                                                                                                       1               1.65
          Component Mfg
335911    Storage Battery Mfg                                Storage Batteries                         1               1.00
Note: *Marginal industry outliers reallocated from other clusters (see online Technical Appendix).

Table 9.6: Recreational and Small Electric Goods Cluster
Description: This cluster contains establishments that manufacture end-use products for recreational & decorative
purposes. These products include games, toys, bicycles, motorcycles, musical instruments, sporting goods, art
supplies, office supplies, shades, & home accessories. This cluster also incorporates firms that produce small, simple
electric goods like hairdryers, fans, & office machinery.
NAICS     NAICS Name                                         Subcluster Name                      Within Cluster Relatedness (WCR ic)
                                                                                                  Rank (1=best)        Score
337920    Blind & Shade Mfg                                  Recreational & Decorative Goods           3               1.37
339992    Musical Instrument Mfg                             Recreational & Decorative Goods           3               1.60
339993    Fastener, Button, Needle, & Pin Mfg                Recreational & Decorative Goods           3               1.37
339999    All Other Miscellaneous Mfg                        Recreational & Decorative Goods           1               1.58
339931    Doll & Stuffed Toy Mfg                             Games, Toys, & Children’s Vehicles        2               1.17
339932    Game, Toy, & Children’s Vehicle Mfg                Games, Toys, & Children’s Vehicles        1               1.44
336991*   Motorcycle, Bicycle, & Parts Mfg                   Motorcycles & Bicycles                    1               0.94
339920    Sporting & Athletic Goods Mfg                      Sporting & Athletic Goods                 3               1.25
333313    Office Machinery Mfg                               Office Supplies                           4               1.00
333315*   Photographic & Photocopying Equipment Mfg          Office Supplies                           3               1.35
339941    Pen & Mechanical Pencil Mfg                        Office Supplies                           2               1.43
339942    Lead Pencil & Art Good Mfg                         Office Supplies                           1               1.50
339943    Marking Device Mfg                                 Office Supplies                           1               1.61
339944    Carbon Paper & Inked Ribbon Mfg                    Office Supplies                           1               1.11
335211*   Electric Housewares & Household Fan Mfg            Electric Housewares                       1               0.78
Note: *Marginal industry outliers reallocated from other clusters (see online Technical Appendix).




                                                                    45
Table 10: Validation Scores (sub-scores) for Selected Sets of Cluster Definitions
                          BCD ( C**)                3-digit NAICS                Porter (2003)               Feser (2005)
                   51 clusters, 778 industries 66 clusters, 778 industries 41 clusters, 685 industries 44 clusters, 910 industries
                      VS       VS      VS*      VS        VS        VS       VS        VS       VS       VS        VS       VS
                    Cluster Industry           Cluster Industry            Cluster Industry            Cluster Industry
 VS Scores           82       73      78    56       59       58        77      69     73       70     67   69
 VS Rank              9        7       2   717      710      717       261     146    200      541     258 429
 VS Sub-scores
  VSLC-Emp           70       63      66    49       46       47        68      66     67       48     59   53
  VSLC-Est           73       64      68    51       49       50        67      63     65       61     58   59
  VSIO               87       74      81    39       44       42        77      68     73       72     61   67
  VSOcc              98       93      95    88       97       92        94      80     87       99     92   95
Notes: *VS is the average of VS-Cluster and VS-Industry. The VS rankings are computed across the 713 Cs and the
4 sets included in the table (1=best, 717=worst). Each set of clusters contains mutually exclusive groups.

Table 11: Overlap between C** and Other Sets of Cluster Definitions
Overlap Score            C** and 3-digit NAICS    C** and Porter (2003)                               C** and Feser (2005)
C**→ C                            66%                      55%                                                54%
C ←C
  **
                                  56%                      58%                                                54%
C ↔ C (Average)
  **
                                  61%                      57%                                                54%
Industries in C** and C           778                      671                                                734
                  **
No. clusters in C , C            51, 66                   47, 41                                             49, 44
Note: We compute the overlap score for the sub-set of industries in common with C**.

Figure 1: Top Regional Aerospace Vehicles and Defense Clusters in 2010 (Economic Areas; C**)
         EAs with Top Employment Specialization and Share of U.S. Cluster
         EAs with Top Employment Specialization
         EAs with Top Employment Share




Notes: Economic Areas (EAs) with Top Employment Specialization in a cluster meet these criteria: Location Quotient (LQ) of
Cluster Employment must be greater than 75th percentile when measured across all EAs with non-zero employment in the
cluster. Secondary criteria to differentiate marginal cases: LQ of Cluster Employment greater than 1.0, Share of National Cluster
Employment greater than 25th percentile, Share of National Cluster Establishments greater than 25th percentile. EAs with Top
Employment Share in a cluster meet this criterion: Share of National Cluster Employment must be greater than 90th percentile
when measured across all EAs with non-zero employment in the cluster. EAs with Top Employment Specialization and Share
meet all of the above criteria.



                                                               46
Appendix A

Table A1: Similarity Matrices Used to Generate Sets of Cluster Definitions Cs
 Similarity Matrix   No. of Cs     Type of Mij                                Definition
LC-Emp                 155       Unidimensional        Locational Correlation of employment [-1, 1]
LC-Est                 155       Unidimensional        Locational Correlation of establishments [-1, 1]
IO                      31       Unidimensional        Input-Output link [0, 1]
Occ                     93       Unidimensional        Labor Occupation link [-1, 1]
COI                     31       Unidimensional        Coagglomeration Index
LC-IO-Occ               31       Multidimensional      Average of (standardized) LC-Emp, LC-Est, IO, Occ
COI-IO-Occ              31       Multidimensional      Average of (standardized) COI, IO, Occ
LC                      31       Multidimensional      Average of LC-Emp, LC-Est
IO-Occ                  31       Multidimensional      Average of (standardized) IO, Occ
LC-Emp-IO               31       Multidimensional      Average of (standardized) LC-Emp, IO
LC-Est-IO               31       Multidimensional      Average of (standardized) LC-Est, IO
LC-Emp-Occ              31       Multidimensional      Average of LC-Emp, Occ
LC-Est-Occ              31       Multidimensional      Average of LC-Est, Occ



An online Technical Appendix, with a detailed cluster-by-cluster overview of the proposed set of
benchmark cluster definitions (C**), may be accessed here.




                                                  47
