NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DON'T TAKE ‘NO’ FOR AN ANSWER:
AN EXPERIMENT WITH ACTUAL ORGAN DONOR REGISTRATIONS
Judd B. Kessler
Alvin E. Roth
Working Paper 20378
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20378

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

The authors thank Frank Delmonico and Sean Fitzpatrick of the New England Organ Bank, Brad Makaiau
of Donate Life California, Greg Segal of Organize; Kristen Grabarz, Alexander Izydorczyk, Julia Peng,
and Linda Yao for excellent Research Assistant work; and the staff at the Computer Lab for Experimental
Research at Harvard Business School and the Wharton Behavioral Lab at The Wharton School. The
authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation, Harvard Business
School, Stanford University, and the Wharton School. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Judd B. Kessler and Alvin E. Roth. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Don't Take ‘No’ For An Answer: An Experiment With Actual Organ Donor Registrations
Judd B. Kessler and Alvin E. Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 20378
August 2014
JEL No. D02,D04,D47
ABSTRACT
Over 10,000 people in the U.S. die each year while waiting for an organ. Attempts to increase organ
transplantation have focused on changing the registration question from an opt-in frame to an active
choice frame. We analyze this change in California and show it decreased registration rates. Similarly,
a "field in the lab" experiment run on actual organ donor registration decisions finds no increase in
registrations resulting from an active choice frame. In addition, individuals are more likely to support
donating the organs of a deceased who did not opt-in than one who said "no" in an active choice frame.

Judd B. Kessler
Department of Business and Public Policy
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu
Alvin E. Roth
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
alroth@stanford.edu

I.

Introduction
Over 120,000 people in the United Sates are currently on the waiting list for a

life-saving organ transplant, and every year over 10,000 people die while waiting for an
organ.1 The individuals on these lists are waiting for a transplantable organ from a
deceased donor: a donor whose organs are transplanted following the donor’s death.
Deceased donors provide the large majority of transplanted organs in the United
States. In addition to there being more deceased donors than living donors, one deceased
donor can provide multiple vital organs, including two kidneys, liver, heart, pancreas,
lungs, and intestine, whereas living donors overwhelmingly donate one kidney.2 To
become a deceased donor, an individual must either have registered as a donor (e.g. on
the registry run by a state department of motor vehicles) or have his organs donated by
next of kin after his death. Despite the need for deceased donor organs, only 48% of
individuals over the age of 18 in the United States are registered as organ donors (Donate
Life America 2013). Consequently, even with additional donations made by next of kin,
the organ donation rate among eligible donors is well below 100%.3
In the United States and most other countries, attempts to increase deceased
donation have focused on altering how the organ donor registration question is asked. A
number of U.S. states (including California and New York) as well as the U.K. have
recently switched their organ donor registration question from an “opt in” frame to an
“active choice” frame. In an “opt-in” frame an individual has to make an explicit positive
statement or skip the question. In an “active choice” frame, an individual is asked to
respond to a question that has a positive or a negative response.4 In fact, the use of the
1

United Network for Organ Sharing. http://www.unos.org/data/data_resources.asp (6/27/2014).
A deceased donor can also provide tissues including corneas, skin, heart valves, cartilage, bone,
tendons, and ligaments.
3
The New England Organ Bank provides some data: among Medically Suitable Brain Dead
potential donors, the recovery rate from registered donors was 98%, 90% and 98% in 2010, 2011,
and 2012 respectively, while the recovery rate from unregistered potential donors was 54%, 57%
and 55% in those years. The recovery rates were somewhat lower overall among Medically
Suitable Donation after Cardiac Death potential donors: from registered potential donors the
recovery rates were 78%, 70% and 79%, while the recovery rate from unregistered potential
donors was 42%, 38%, and 39%. (Personal communication, Sean Fitzpatrick, NEOB.)
4
In both cases, the request to become a donor is presented at the DMV at a time when transaction
costs of registering are near zero (checking a box or signing on a line) and so in the terminology
2

2

active choice frame for organ donation is widespread in the United States. In 2014, of the
50 U.S. jurisdictions with DMV forms posted online or made available to us for this
research, 41 (82%) ask the organ donor registration question with an active choice frame
(on paper or on a kiosk screen in 25 states and verbally in 16 states; see Table 1).
Table 1: Organ Donor Registration Questions by State
Active Choice
Positive Wording

Negative Wording

“Yes”

“No”

“YES, add my name to the donor
registry”
“Yes, add my name”
“Yes”
“Yes”
Verbal question: No fixed response

“I do not wish to register at this
time”
“No, not at this time”
“Skip this question”
“Not now”

States
AK, CT, GA, HI, IA, LA,
MA, MS, NE, NV, NJ,
NM, ND, OR, PA, RI,
TX, UT, VT, WV, WY
CA
MD
NY
MT
AR, CO, DE, FL, ID, IL,
IN, KS, KY, ME, MI,
MO, NC, OH, OK, WA

Opt-In
Positive Wording
States
“Yes”
TN, WI, DC
“I want to be an organ and tissue donor. By checking this box, Donor
AZ
Network of AZ will add me to the Donate Life AZ Registry”
“I want my license or ID card to show that I choose to be an organ and
MN
tissue donor under the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act”
“Check here to consent to organ & tissue donation”
NH
“YES, I want to be an organ and tissue donor.”
SC
“In the event of my death, I would like to be an organ/tissue donor.”
SD
“Yes, I would like to remain or become an organ, eye and tissue donor.” VA
Table 1 shows the question framing and responses for 49 states and DC, which either had DMV
forms online, shared forms for our research, or answered questions about their organ donation
policies when called by our research assistants (all U.S. jurisdictions excluding Alabama).
of choice architecture both are examples of “prompted choice”. There is a debate as to whether
the “active choice” frames employed for organ donation should be labeled “mandated choice”.
The difference between active choice (a perceived requirement to choose) and mandated choice
(a real requirement to choose, sometimes called “forced choice”) is about what happens when an
individual refuses to answer the question posed. In a mandated choice, an individual who does
not answer the organ donor question cannot achieve the intended outcome of his DMV visit (e.g.
receiving a driver’s license). Some states may treat an individual who does not answer the active
choice question as a “no” (i.e. not mandated choice) while other states may require the question to
be answered (e.g. the NY State license application form reads: “You must answer the following
question:” before the organ donor question, emphasis in original.) For the 16 states that ask the
organ donor question verbally, this distinction amounts to what happens if the individual does not
respond to the DMV clerk asking about donation, which may depend on that particular clerk.

3

Despite its prevalence and the recent changes towards an active choice frame, the
efficacy of the frame has not been empirically tested on registration data. Instead, support
for the active choice frame has primarily come from hypothetical choice data reported by
Johnson and Goldstein (2003, 2004) and theoretical arguments in its favor made in the
academic (Thaler and Sunstein 2003) and popular press (Thaler and Sunstein 2008,
Thaler 2009). Those authors concluded that switching to an active choice frame would
increase the rate at which respondents chose to register as organ donors.
In this paper we provide the first empirical evidence on the efficacy of an active
choice frame on actual organ donation registration decisions. We investigate the role of
choice architecture on organ donor registration decisions in two ways. First, we provide
empirical evidence on organ donor registration rates using a 2011 policy change in
California that switched the organ donor registration question at the DMV from an opt-in
frame to an active choice frame. We find that the switch did not increase registration rates
and likely decreased them given the positive secular trend observed in other states.
Second, we report results from a controlled “field in the lab” experiment to test
whether changing the choice frame affects real organ donor registration decisions. In our
experiment, we provided individuals who have previously been asked to register as organ
donors by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation the opportunity to change
their organ donor registration status. Registration in our experiment is registration on the
Massachusetts Donor Registry, so subjects who register to be donors in our study leave
the laboratory as registered donors. The experiment is a “field in the lab” design in that
we invite subjects into the laboratory, where we have experimental control, but each
subject makes a real-world decision about their actual organ donation status. As will be
described in Section III, significant technical requirements were met in order to connect
our laboratory computers to the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles online
database and record each participant’s interaction. This connection allowed us to observe
each subject’s previous donor status and to make any changes to a subject’s registration
status in real time. We again find that the active choice frame does not increase, and may
decrease, organ donor registration rates.
One of the reasons why failure to observe an increase in organ donor registration
under the active choice frame is particularly concerning for deceased organ donations is
4

that that the frame of the organ donor registration question might affect the decisions of
next-of-kin. In a second experiment, we asked a separate group of experimental subjects
to report what next of kin should do when deciding whether to donate the organs of a
deceased. Subjects made hypothetical choices indicating next of kin would be more likely
to donate the organs of a non-registered deceased who had simply failed to opt-in rather
than explicitly chosen not to donate in an active choice frame. Consequently, we suspect
that as individuals in a state repeatedly see the organ donation question posed as an active
choice (e.g. every time they renew their driver’s license), they will become less inclined
to donate the organs of an unregistered deceased. Notice that here we focus not just on
registration but on transplantation, which is the ultimate goal of having people register to
be organ donors. Our results suggest that not only does active choice not increase the
registration rate, it may decrease the transplantation rate through suggesting to next of kin
that unregistered donors had actively chosen not to donate.
While our results suggest that changing the organ donor registration question
from an opt-in frame to an active choice frame is unlikely to increase organ donor
registration rates and may have a negative effect on the donation decisions of next-of-kin,
our experimental results suggest other ways to increase the rates of organ donor
registration. We find that subjects are 22 times more likely to add themselves to the
registry than remove themselves from the registry, even though all subjects had been
asked previously about organ donor registration. This suggests the effectiveness of
making a repeated appeal for organ donor registration. In addition, we find that providing
more information about organ donation increases registration rates.
Note that many steps can be taken in parallel to relieve the shortage of
transplantable organs (Kessler and Roth 2012, 2014b), but that some steps may be
potentially counterproductive (Kessler and Roth 2014a). One approach to increasing the
number of registered donors is to provide priority on organ donor waiting lists for those
who had previously registered as donors. This policy has been implemented in Singapore
and in Israel and been studied theoretically and experimentally by Kessler and Roth
(2012, 2014a). Results from Israel suggest that the introduction of the new priority policy
has been accompanied by a significant increase in the number of registered donors
(Lavee et al. 2013).
5

Increasing the number of individuals who register as deceased donors is just one
way of addressing the need for transplantable organs. Kidney exchange, in which
incompatible patient-donor pairs are matched, has facilitated transplantation of kidneys
from living donors (Roth, Sonmez and Unver 2004, 2005a,b, 2007; Roth et al. 2006;
Saidman et al. 2006). This research has resulted in new institutions, which identify
incompatible patient-donor pairs who are compatible with one another, allowing for an
exchange of kidneys. In addition, these organizations can create chains of donation that
start with an undirected donor.5 While kidney exchange has facilitated a growing number
of transplants, kidney waiting lists continue to grow without a sign of slowing down.6 In
addition, while donor chains and exchanges can increase the number of transplanted
kidneys, live donation of other solid organs (including the heart, pancreas, and intestine)
is not possible and there is very little transplantation of live donor lungs or livers.7 So
deceased donation will remain of critical importance.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the change from opt-in to
active choice in California and presents an empirical analysis of its effect on organ donor
registration rates. Section III describes the experimental design of our field-in-the-lab
experiment on organ donor registration rates and presents its results. Section IV describes
5

Roth et al. (2006) proposed that chains initiated by a non-directed donor could be performed
non-simultaneously, since the patient in an incompatible patient-donor pair would always have
received a kidney before the donor was asked to donate. The first non-simultaneous chain that
began with an undirected donor started in 2007 and resulted in ten transplants over a period of
eight months (Rees et al. 2009). Donor chains beginning with an undirected donor are becoming
more common (see Ashlagi et al. 2011 and
http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/search/label/chains). There are now a number of kidney
exchange networks, including an attempt to start a Federally sanctioned national program under
the auspices of UNOS, the Federal contractor that oversees deceased organ allocation.
6
There have been over 2000 transplants due to kidney exchange since 2004, the year NEPKE
was founded, according to data reported to the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
(see http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/latestData/rptData.asp, as described in
http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2010/05/kidney-exchange-time-series.html).
7
There is an ongoing literature on donation of blood and bone marrow. Recent work on blood
donation has investigated whether providing incentives for donations of blood causes a “crowding
out” that might lead to less donation overall and has found that incentives increase donations
without leading to a decrease in blood quality (see Mellstrom and Johannesson 2008; Lacetera
and Macis 2010a,b; Lacetera, Macis and Slonim 2012). Recent work on bone marrow donations
suggests that fewer individuals are on the bone marrow registry than is optimal (see Feve and
Florens 2005; Feve et al. 2007; Bergstrom et al. 2009, 2011) and that legislation giving donors a
leave-of-absence from work encourages bone marrow donation (Lacetera, Macis and Stith 2012).

6

the second experiment about the decisions of next-of-kin and presents its results. Section
V discusses the implications of our results and concludes.

II.

Opt-in to Active Choice in California
The policy change in California provides an opportunity to analyze the effect of

the organ donor registration question frame on registration rates. Starting on July 1, 2011,
the California DMV changed the way in which the organ donation question is asked on
its forms, switching from an opt-in framed choice (in which individuals checked a box to
register and left it blank not to register) to an active choice frame (in which individuals
were required to check either a yes or no option for the question to be complete). After
July 1 2011, those who left the question blank were asked by DMV staff to complete it.
See Figure 1 for the old and new CA questions.

Panel 1A: Old CA Organ Donation Question (until June 30, 2011)

Panel 1B: New CA Organ Donation Question (as of July 1, 2011)
Figure 1. The new organ donor registration question (Panel 1B) offers an active choice frame
with a yes and no option in place of the old opt-in frame (Panel 1A) that only offered the yes
option. The legislation that proposed this change simultaneously legislated that DMV staff ask
whether someone wants to be an organ donor if the question is left blank.

The timing of the policy change in CA is plausibly exogenous to organ donation
rates. California’s registration rates have historically been lower than the rates in other
states, but the policy change only occurred early in this decade — according to former
7

CA Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger — due to lobbying by Steve Jobs to change the
organ donation choice frame in California lobbying that presumably began as a result of
his own medical need for an organ.8 On a more granular level, the change was the result
of legislation introduced in early 2010 but not implemented for almost a year and a half.9
What is the effect of changing the choice frame from opt-in to active choice? To
answer this question, we collected data from on registration rates in California and other
states in the quarters surrounding the 2011 change. Figure 2 displays quarterly
registration rate data from California and from the 26 other jurisdictions (25 states and
Washington DC) that made their quarterly data available to Donate Life America for all
six quarters between Q4 2010 and Q1 2012, three quarters before and three quarters after
the policy change.10 The data shows the registration rate as a percentage of the rate in Q2
2011, which was 27.43% for CA and 39.83% for the other states). Starting in Q3 2011,

Registration Rate as a Percentage of
the Q2 2011 Rate

the organ donor registration question in CA was changed from opt-in to active choice.
106%
104%
102%
100%
98%
96%
94%
92%
Q4 2010

Q1 2011
California

Q2 2011

Q3 2011

Q4 2011

Q1 2012

All Other States

Figure 2. Chart displays quarterly registration rate data from California, and 25 other states and
DC, from Q4 2010 to Q1 2012. For comparability, data is presented as a percentage of Q2 2011
rates (27.43% for CA; 39.83% for others). 95% confidence intervals are around each mean.
The text of Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger’s speech on this issue can be found at:
http://gov.ca.gov/news.php?id=16126 (6/27/2014).
9
For legislation and timing, see the bill at http://leginfo.ca.gov/pub/09-10/bill/sen/sb_13511400/sb_1395_bill_20100902_chaptered.html (6/27/2014).
10
Data provided by Donate Life California and Organize, an organ donation non-profit that
received data from Donate Life America. Table A1 in the appendix presents the data.
8

8

While the other states show a gradual increase in registration rates over the six
quarters, California shows a dip in registration rates between the second and third
quarters of 2011 when the policy change was enacted.
We can conduct statistical tests on the data presented in Figure 2. Table 2 reports
results from regressions that uses the other states as the control group for California to
conduct difference-in-differences estimates. Regressions (1) and (2) treat the registration
rates in each state-year as an observation while regressions (3) and (4) use individual
registration decisions of people who visit the DMV as the unit of observation —
essentially weighting each state by the number of people who make the organ donation
decision each quarter. Regressions (2) and (4) include state fixed effects so that we are
looking only at changes within states.

Table 2: Change from Opt-in to Active Choice on CA Registration Decisions
Organ Donor Registration Rates
Quarterly Rates by State
Registration Decisions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Post*California
-0.022
-0.022
-0.027
-0.024
(0.006)***
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
Post
0.014
0.014
0.019
0.015
(0.006)**
(0.007)**
(0.007)**
(0.007)***
California
-0.174
-0.123
(0.031)***
(0.042)***
Constant
0.445
0.439
0.394
0.380
(0.031)***
(0.003)***
(0.042)***
(0.003)***
State FE
No
Yes
No
Yes
Observations
162
162
65,856,108
65,856,108
Clusters
27
27
29
29
R-squared
0.05
0.98
0.10
0.98
The coefficient Post represents the average difference in registration rates between the 3 quarters
after the policy change (Q3 2011 through Q1 2012) and the three quarters before the policy
change (Q4 2010 through Q2 2011). The coefficient California shows the registration rate in
California compared to other states in the three quarters before the policy change (Q4 2010
through Q2 2011). The interaction of Post*California represents the difference-in-differences
estimate of interest. Regressions (1) and (2) use state-quarters as observations while regressions
(3) and (4) use binary choices of each individual who visits the DMVs as the unit of observation.
Robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant at
5%, *** significant at 1%.

9

The coefficient Post of 0.014 to 0.019 represents the average difference in
registration rates between the three quarters before the policy change and the three
quarters after. This suggests that states’ registration rates increased by between 1.4 and
1.9 percentage points from the pre-period to the post-period. The coefficient California
shows that the registration rate in California were lower than the average registration rate
in other states in the pre-period. Finally, the interaction of Post*California represents the
differences-in-differences estimate of interest. The negative and statistically significant
coefficient suggests that by switching from an opt-in frame to an active choice frame,
California’s registration rate was between 2.2 and 2.7 percentage points lower than it
would have been otherwise.
To ensure that changes in other states do not drive the result in CA, we had
conversations with DMV staff in each state and searched state news sources to identify
any other policy changes. Results are similar if we drop the one state that changed their
organ donor registration policy at some point during the six quarters we examine.
(Michigan began requiring DMV staff to verbally ask about organ donation in addition to
the written question on the form in Q1 2012). A variety of other specifications are shown
as robustness checks in Table A2 in the Appendix, and all find consistent results.
While the analysis of the change in the frame of the organ donation question in
California suggests that the active choice frame decreases registration rates relative to
what the rates would have been with an opt-in frame, we cannot rule out that others
things may have changed in California between Q2 2011 and Q3 2011 that could drive
the observed difference-in-differences in registration rates. In addition, while the pattern
of data in Figure 2 is consistent with the parallel trends assumptions, data limitations
mean we are underpowered to detect a difference in trends between CA and the states we
are using as a control group, even if such a difference were there. To more completely
answer the question about the effect of the choice frame on registration decisions, and to
answer additional questions about what influences organ donor registrations, we turn to a
controlled laboratory environment in the next section.

10

III. Experiment with actual organ donor registrations
In our main experiment, 368 participants were recruited to the Computer Lab for
Experimental Research at Harvard University to participate in one of 66 sessions on one
of 25 dates between August 2010 and April 2012.11 Recruitment information informed
potential participants that they needed a Massachusetts driver’s license, learner’s permit,
or state identification card and the last four digits of their social security number to
participate in the study, but participants were not informed in advance that the study
concerned organ donation.12 Participants received $15 for showing up and participating in
the study. Everyone who arrived at the behavioral laboratory and had the required
Massachusetts credentials was allowed to participate.
After arriving at the laboratory, each subject was seated at an isolated computer
terminal and signed a consent form, In addition, the experimenter read aloud a paragraph
from the consent form explaining that participants would log into the Massachusetts
Organ and Tissue Donor Registry and have the opportunity to change their donor
registration status.13 Subjects initiated the study by logging into the Massachusetts Organ
and Tissue Donor Registry maintained by the Department of Transportation (DOT)
accessible through the website of the Registry of Motor Vehicles. Subjects logged into
the registry through a web interface designed specifically for the experiment as shown in
Figure 3. The software was designed so that subjects logged into and interacted with the
real Massachusetts Organ and Tissue Donor Registry through a front end that could be
manipulated experimentally.14 ,15

11

The experiment was run over a period of roughly 20 months since our requirement that subjects
have a Massachusetts State ID card (either a license, permit or state ID) generated a much smaller
potential subject pool than usual. When we designed the experiment, the CLER recruitment
software did not keep track of whether potential subjects had a Massachusetts ID and we
overestimated the percentage of the CLER subject pool that would be eligible to participate in our
study. Our goal of getting 200 subjects who were not already donors was only met during our last
wave of sessions in April 2012.
12
See Appendix A for the full recruitment information.
13
See Appendix B for the full consent form.
14
Given the sensitive information that was required for logging into the Massachusetts RMV
organ donor registry (MA State ID number, last four digits of the social security number, name,
and date of birth) protecting subject privacy was important. The experimental software was built
as an add-on to the Firefox browser so that it could run locally on each computer terminal in the

11

After logging into the registry, all subjects — those who were previously donors
and those who were previously not donors — were asked whether they wanted to change
their organ and tissue donor registration status. After subjects made their organ donor
registration decision, they completed a 40-question survey.
The design of the study software allowed for experimental manipulation of: (1)
how a subject was asked about becoming a donor (i.e. the choice frame) and (2) the
information a subject received about organ donation (i.e. content). Since the software
interacted with the Massachusetts registry, we were able to see the subject’s current
donor status, allowing us to investigate changes in registration status in both directions
(from non-donor to donor and vice versa). Participants were in one of four treatments in a
two-by-two factorial design shown in Table 3. See Figure 4 for the registration question
screens associated with each cell.

2x2
Design

Table 3: Four Treatments (2x2 Design)
Choice Frame

Information
Provided

Opt-In
Active Choice
93 subjects
82 subjects
Control
(55 non-donors
(51 non-donors
and 37 donors)
and 31 donors)
95 subjects
99 subjects
List of
(55 non-donors
(51 non-donors
Organs
and 40 donors)
and 48 donors)
The number of subjects, including initial donors and non-donors, in each of the
four treatments in the 2x2 design.

lab. The software communicated with the Massachusetts RMV site in the background while
displaying the experimental front end to the subject. When the sensitive data was transmitted
from the computer, it was transmitted through the actual Massachusetts RMV online form (i.e. it
was as secure as if the subject had directly entered the information on that form). The software
erased the login information from the computer hard drive and only retained the variables
associated with previous donor status and donor status after the registration decision.
15
The experimental interface hid the Massachusetts RMV logos to prevent subjects from
generating associations of the registry of motor vehicles, including the violent deaths associated
with car and motorcycle accidents that might lead to donation.

12

Panel 3A: Screenshot of login page in Experiment

Panel 3B: Screenshot of login page on the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles
Webpage that subjects did not see due to the experimental interface
Figure 3: Login Screens for the Experiment (Panel 3A) and the Massachusetts Registry of Motor
Vehicles (Panel 3B)

13

In the choice frame variation, subjects were either provided with an opt-in frame
or an active choice frame. In the opt-in frame, subjects were given the opportunity to
change their organ donor status by checking a box and clicking “continue”. Leaving the
box blank and clicking continue kept their organ donor registration status unchanged. In
the active choice frame, subjects were provided with two radio buttons, one that would
add them to the organ and tissue donor registry (or leave them on the registry if they were
already on it) and one would leave them off the registry (or remove them from the
registry if they were already on it). Subjects were required to check one of the buttons
and click “continue” before continuing with the rest of the study.16 See Figure 4 for
screenshots of the opt-in conditions (Panels 4A and 4C) as well as the active choice
conditions (Panels 4B and 4D).
The other dimension that the experiment varied was the information provided to
subjects before they decided whether or not to change their donor status. Subjects were
either provided with a standard control message or a message that included a list of
organs that might be donated in the event of deceased donation. See Figure 4 for
screenshots of the control conditions (Panels 4A and 4B) as well as the list conditions
(Panels 4C and 4D).17

16

If a subject had refused to answer the organ donation question, they would by default have
retained their previous donor status. That said, no subjects made such a refusal.
17
Originally, we intended to have a third dimension of variation in which the request for
registration referenced “head injuries in a car crash” as an explicit cause of death that might lead
to organ donation. We hypothesized that donation would be more costly if associated with
thoughts of death. Unfortunately, a software bug eliminated a line of text (“Those who register as
organ donors agree to donate all their organs and tissues.”) from the screens of the first 43
subjects who received the head injury language without the list of organs. This bug prevented a
clean analysis of the effect of head injuries language. After recognizing this bug and having
continued low recruitment numbers, we decided to cut the head injuries language from future
sessions of the experiment. In total, 121 subjects saw the head injuries language, 70 of those
subjects were not donors when they entered the lab. All of our analysis is qualitatively the same if
we exclude these subjects from the analysis.

14

Panel 4A: Screenshot of Experiment registration page (“Opt-in, Control”)

Panel 4B: Screenshot of Experiment registration page (“Active Choice, Control”)

Panel 4C: Screenshot of Experiment registration page (“Opt-in, List”)

15

Panel 4D: Screenshot of Experiment registration page (“Active Choice, List”)

Panel 4E: Screenshot of Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles registration page
that subjects did not see due to the experimental interface. Note: “Please do not change my
current status.” is the default option that is automatically selected on the page. This selection is
implemented when either the “Exit” or “Submit” button is pressed.
Figure 4: Registration Screens from the Experiment (Panel 4A, Panel 4B, Panel 4C, and Panel
4D) and from Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles (Panel 4E)

16

Of the 368 subjects who participated in our study, 156 participants (42.4%) were
observed to be registered donors and 212 participants (57.6%) were non-donors when
they began the study (i.e. before being asked if they wished to change their status).
Results from these subjects are consistent with the results from the empirical
analysis of the change in choice frame in California. Subjects in our experiment are
somewhat more likely to register as donors when the request to register was provided in
an opt-in frame rather than an active choice frame.
Even though changing the choice frame from opt in to active choice did not
increase registration rates, we are able to increase rates in other ways. Subjects were
significantly more likely to register as donors when exposed to the list of organs than if
they received the standard message. Figure 5 shows the percentage of initially

Probability Registred At End of Study

unregistered subjects who were registered at the end of the study by treatment.

50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Control

Opt In

List

Active Choice

Figure 5: Share of the 212 initially unregistered subjects that registered in the experiment by
condition (standard error bars around each mean). In both control and list conditions, the opt-in
frame generated directionally more registrations than the active choice frame. Combining across
control and list conditions, the active choice frame did not generate more registrants than the optin frame (p=0.093). Combining across opt-in and active choice frames, including a list of organs
made subjects more likely to register (p=0.049).

17

Table 4 reports regression results about whether individuals end up on the registry
(left panel) and whether previous non-donors join the registry (right panel).
Regressions (1) and (2) show that subjects who receive the opt-in frame and the list of
organs are more likely to end up as registered donors than those who do not. Looking
exclusively at subjects who were not donors at the start of the study in regressions (3) and
(4), the active choice frame makes subjects 8 to 9 percentage points less likely to register
as donors (8.2 is a 25% decrease on a base registration rate of 32.7% under the opt-in
frame). The list of organs makes subjects 12 to 16 percentage points more likely to
register as donors (12.3 is a 54% increase on a base registration rate of 22.6 under the
control message).
The coefficients on Active Choice Frame and List of Organs do not change much
as we add dummies for the date of the sessions in (2) and (4). While the experimental
software randomized the treatment at the subject level, the experiment was run on 25
different dates over 21 months and subjects might differ across those dates, the dummy
controls soak up variation in the types of people who come to participate on the different
dates.

Table 4: Organ Donor Registration By Condition
Organ and Tissue Donor Registration (0 or 1)
Active Choice Frame
List of Organs
Initially Registered
Constant
Date Dummies

All Participants
(1)
(2)
-0.050
-0.063
(0.037)
(0.037)*
0.074
0.082
(0.037)**
(0.037)**
0.700
0.680
(0.033)*** (0.035)***
0.275
(0.033)***
No

Yes

All Initial Non-Donors
(3)
(4)
-0.082
-0.093
(0.062)
(0.066)
0.123
0.160
(0.062)**
(0.069)**

0.275
(0.052)***
No

Yes

Observations
368
368
212
212
R-squared
0.50
0.54
0.03
0.12
Robust standard errors are in parentheses: * significant at 10%, ** significant at
5%, *** significant at 1%. Date dummies include a dummy for each of the 25
dates experimental sessions were run.

18

Results from Table 4 show that framing the decision to register as an active
choice in which subjects have to either click “I want to register as an organ and tissue
donor” or “I do not want to register as an organ and tissue donor” makes subjects
directionally less likely to join the registry as compared to an opt-in frame where a
subject simply checks the box next to “I want to register as an organ and tissue donor”
and leaves it blank to not join the registry. While we do not get statistical significance
beyond p<0.1 (and we only get that in some specifications) a one-sided test can reject the
hypothesis that active choice outperforms the opt-in frame among initial non-donors
(25% to 33%, one-sided t-test 212 obs, p<0.1). In our setting, asking people to check a
box to join the registry and leaving it blank to not join the registry is no worse, and
directionally better, than forcing them to choose one or the other. This experimental
result is consistent with results in the previous section analyzing data from California.
The magnitudes estimated here, that the active choice frame decreases registration rates
by 5 to 6 percentage points across all participants, are the same order of magnitude as the
decrease in registration rates of 2.2 to 2.7 percentage points we estimated off of the
California policy change.
Even if there were no change in donation rates as a result of framing the decision
as an active choice, the active choice frame might have a negative effect on
transplantation rates if the way in which the donor is asked to register causes the next of
kin to make a different inference about the deceased’s wishes. For example, next of kin
might interpret the choice “I do not want to register as an organ and tissue donor” as an
explicit wish not to be a donor whereas leaving the box blank next to “I want to register
as an organ and tissue donor” might be interpreted differently. Put another way, not being
on the registry might provide different information to a deceased’s next of kin, depending
on how the deceased was asked to register. We investigate this hypothesis with a followon experiment, discussed in the next section.
While our findings suggest that the recent switches to active choice framed
questions may not increase registration rates (contrary to claims that in many cases
prompted the switch), other results from our experiment suggest hope for encouraging
organ donor registration.

19

Giving information about the benefits of donation, namely providing a list of
organs that might be donated, increased the likelihood of registration among initial nondonors (34.9% with the list vs. 22.6% without the list, p=0.049). That we found an
intervention able to increase registrations without changing the choice frame suggests
that providing information can encourage people to register as donors, a promising result
for policy interventions aimed to educate potential donors of the value of organ donation
(see, e.g. Quinn et al. 2006, Thornton et al. 2012).18
The most pronounced result from our experiment, however, is that giving
individuals the opportunity to change their status on the Massachusetts Organ and Tissue
Donor Registry increased the number of registered donors (42.4% were registered at the
start of the experiment vs. 58.4% at the end; test of proportions, 368 obs, p<0.001) even
though the Massachusetts Department of Transportation had previously asked all of our
subjects to register as organ donors.19 61 of the 212 subjects (28.8%) who were initially
not registered joined the registry while only 2 of the 156 subjects (1.3%) removed
themselves from the registry. Put another way, subjects were 22 times more likely to add
themselves to the registry than remove themselves.

18

Subsequent answers from the survey provide suggestive evidence for why the list of organs
may have had a positive impact on the likelihood that subjects registered as organ donors. Being
exposed to the list appears to make subjects believe that a single donor can save more lives and
they are they are more likely to report a family member having received an organ. Among
previously unregistered subject, those who see the list appear to report that more life-saving
organs can be transplanted from a single deceased donor (12.7 versus 9.6, t-test 211 obs,
p=0.059). In addition, subjects in that group who see the list are more likely to report that a
family member has received an organ transplant the (4.7% versus 0.9%, t-test 212 obs, p=0.099).
The latter result suggests that subjects who are exposed to the list broaden their interpretation of
what constitutes an organ transplant. Together, these results suggest that seeing the list may make
subjects think (1) the value of being an organ donor is higher and (2) that they have personal
connection to organ donation. Neither of these increases in response to seeing the list mediates
the increase in the donation rate, however, suggesting that these effects are not the whole story.
19
Participants in the study must have previously received an identification card issued by
Massachusetts, which means that non-donors in the study had been given the opportunity to
register as a donor and had declined. From the Massachusetts RMV website: “When
the customer applies for a Massachusetts permit/license/ID card, he/she will have the opportunity
to become an organ and tissue donor by checking “yes” on the question “Would you like to
register to be, or continue to be, an organ and tissue donor?” on the permit/license/ID card
application.” (https://secure.rmv.state.ma.us/Policybrowserpublic/PolicyBrowser.aspx under
“License Policy > Organ and Tissue Donor Policy > New Donors” (7/23/2012)

20

The results in Table 5 show that this effect of giving subjects the opportunity to
change their organ registration status leading to more registered donors is not being
driven by any particular subgroup. Table 5 breaks the experimental subjects down by
demographic characteristics identified in our survey. We find directionally positive
effects for every subgroup with more than 14 subjects and positive and statistically
significant effects for every subgroup of more than 75 subjects.
There is no reason to believe that our experiment selected subjects particularly
inclined towards organ donation. Organ donation was not mentioned in the recruitment
materials and the share of subjects who showed up as registered donors was not
statistically different from the share of Massachusetts residents who were registered in
either year of our experiment (39% vs. 44% in 2010, p=0.22; 49% vs. 48% in 2011,
p=0.85) (Donate Life America 2011, 2012).
When considering how our results speak to policy, it is worth addressing a
potential concern of an experimenter demand effect in our study. An experimenter
demand effect would arise if subjects in our laboratory setting try to please the
experimenter by taking actions they believed the experimenters want them to take (e.g.
Levitt and List 2007). In many contexts the concern about an experimenter demand effect
creates a challenge for generalizability outside the lab where such forces are not at play.
We are less concerned about the potential for an experimenter demand effect on the
generalizability of our study given that in natural environments when individuals are
asked to register as donors there is someone who is observing them, recording their
behavior, and possibly directly encouraging them to do so. For example, in many cases
outside of our lab setting from which we aim to generalize, DMV staff who are face-toface with individuals directly ask them to register as donors. If anything, our experiment
presents less pressure that the normal environment in which people might be asked to
register as donors. We ensure anonymity as opposed to a government office where they
are being identified alongside other personal information. In addition, we directly ask
those who registered donors whether they would like to remove themselves from the
registry, and do not observe any demand effect in the reverse direction, although donors
find themselves in a symmetric environment as non-donors in our experiment, with all
options reversed.
21

Table 5: Subject Demographics
Percent of % Donor % Donor PR test
Number Subjects
Before
After
p-value
368
100%
42
58
0.000***

All Subjects
Breakdown by age
18 to 21
108
29%
38
60
0.001***
22 to 30
140
38%
51
62
0.070*
31 and older
120
33%
36
53
0.009***
Breakdown by race
Asian
54
15%
26
41
0.103
Black Hispanic
2
1%
0
0
.
Black Non-Hispanic
39
11%
31
51
0.065*
Native American
3
1%
100
100
.
Other
14
4%
21
21
.
White Hispanic
20
5%
50
55
0.752
White Non-Hispanic
236
64%
48
66
0.000***
Breakdown by Educational Background
Grade School
4
1%
25
25
.
High School
30
8%
13
36
0.037**
Some College
146
40%
38
58
0.001***
College
113
31%
51
65
0.043**
Graduate Degree
75
20%
49
60
0.190
Breakdown by Student Status
No
159
43%
40
55
0.007***
Part-Time
32
9%
53
63
0.448
Full-Time
177
48%
43
61
0.001***
Breakdown by Family Income
<$30,000
151
41%
42
56
0.021**
$30,000 to $90,000
148
40%
41
57
0.005***
$90,000 +
69
19%
45
67
0.010**
Breakdown by Marital Status
Single
318
85%
43
60
0.000***
Married
38
10%
42
61
0.108
Divorced
14
4%
36
36
.
Widowed
2
1%
0
0
.
Breakdown by Number of Kids
0
332
90%
45
61
0.000***
1+
36
10%
17
33
0.103
Provides demographic information about the 368 subjects who participated in the study
as collected in the survey conducted after the registration decision. For each demographic
breakdown, we show the percentage of those subjects who were donors before they
entered the lab and those who were donors when they left. In the “PR test p-value”
column, we denote the p-value associated with a two-sample test of proportions and
indicate whether the change in percentage of registered donors during the experiment is
statistically significant: * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

22

IV. Next-of-Kin Decisions
To investigate the potential effect of the decision frame in which an individual
was asked to register as a donor on the decision of their next of kin, we designed a survey
experiment. 803 subjects recruited on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform participated
on January 8, 2013.20
These subjects saw one of two decision screens from the first experiment (either
the opt-in frame or active choice frame registration question without the list) and were
told that a hypothetical deceased had chosen to join or not join the registry.21 In
particular, for the opt-in frame subjects were told the deceased either: “selected ‘I want to
register as an organ and tissue donor’” or “did not select ‘I want to register as an organ
and tissue donor’”. For the active choice frame subjects were told the deceased either:
“selected ‘I want to register as an organ and tissue donor’” or “selected ‘I do not want to
register as an organ and tissue donor’”. The subject was then asked whether the next-ofkin should donate the organs of the deceased22 and how confident they were in that
answer.23 The subjects were asked to make decisions about all four scenarios, presented
one-at-a-time in one of four random orders.24
20

Mechanical Turk is an online marketplace run by Amazon.com and has become a common
platform for survey experiments https://www.mturk.com/mturk/welcome (Buhrmester, Kwang
and Gosling 2011). Subjects were told the survey would take 5 to 10 minutes (on average it was
completed in just over 5 minutes). Subjects were paid $0.50 for completing the survey, relatively
large compensation on Mechanical Turk.
21
Instructions read: “An individual has died. The individual's next of kin has been asked whether
or not they would like to donate the organs of the deceased. The only information that the next of
kin has about the wishes of the deceased is that the deceased saw this screen...” and subjects were
shown one of two organ donation decision screens from the main experiment (either Figure 4A or
Figure 4B) along with what the hypothetical deceased had chosen in that scenario.
22
We take whether subjects thought next of kin should donate the organs of the deceased as an
indicator for what actual next of kin would do. We considered a number of other question
wordings and deemed this one to be the most reasonable to implement. Asking what a subject
would do if they were the next of kin risked introducing noise based on a subject’s own attitudes
and we worried the question might have negative psychological consequences associated with
thinking vividly about a loved one’s death. Asking what a hypothetical next of kin would do
seemed unreasonable without providing information about whether the next of kin was an organ
donor himself, and we did not want to introduce that dimension of complexity to the survey.
23
Options were: “very confident,” “confident,” “somewhat confident,” and “not confident.”
24
The subject’s first scenario was randomly chosen to be either: (1) a deceased who joined the
registry in an opt-in frame, (2) a deceased who had not joined the registry in an opt-in frame, (3) a
deceased who joined the registry in an active choice frame, or (4) a deceased who had not joined

23

Figure 6, shows subjects’ responses from the first scenario they are asked about
(i.e. using only the between-subject variation). Subjects are more likely to report that
next-of-kin should donate the organs of an unregistered deceased when the deceased
simply did not opt in rather than when the deceased explicitly said “no” to donation under
an active choice frame. When the deceased was not on the registry because the deceased
had not opted in, 38.1% of subjects stated that the next of kin should donate the organs.
When the deceased was not on the registry because they indicated they did not want to
register under an active choice frame, only 26.7% of subjects thought next of kin should
donate. This 11.4 percentage point difference is statistically significant (t-test, 405
observations, p=0.014) and represents a 43% increase (on the base of 26.7 percent) in the

Share saying Next of Kin should Donate

share of subjects who say the next of kin should donate the organs of the deceased.

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Deceased is Registered
Opt In

Deceased is Unregistered

Active Choice

Figure 6. Share of subjects in second experiment saying next of kin should donate organs of the
deceased by condition (standard error bars around each mean). Subjects are much more reluctant
to donate the organs of an unregistered deceased who explicitly indicated that he did not want to
be a donor in an active choice frame than an unregistered deceased who simply did not opt in
(26.7% in active choice vs. 38.1% in opt in, p=0.014).
the registry in an active choice frame. Subjects then saw the opposite decision by the deceased in
the same frame, then saw the first decision by the deceased in the other frame, and finally saw the
opposite decision of the deceased in the other frame.

24

While Figure 6 shows results from the first question subjects are asked, results are
the same when we include all four questions that subjects answered and when we include
their confidence levels. Table 6 displays regression results on data from this experiment.
Regressions (1) and (2) report the results from the first scenario that subjects saw when
asked whether the next of kin should donate the organs of the deceased. Regressions (3)
and (4) use all four scenarios about which subjects answered and combine the within and
between variation, identifying an even stronger impact of the active choice frame on the
likelihood of donating the organs of an unregistered deceased.
In these regressions, the excluded group is beliefs about what next of kin should
do when the deceased chose to register in the opt-in frame. Consequently, the coefficient
Active Choice Frame reflects the change in what subjects think the next of kin should do
when the deceased registered under an active choice frame rather than an opt-in frame.
The coefficient Not On Registry reflects the change when the deceased chose not register
rather than register under the opt-in frame. The interaction Active Choice Frame*Not On
Registry is the differential effect of going from opt-in to active choice for those who are
unregistered rather than registered. The regressions show that people respond
differentially to the active choice frame when the deceased was not on the registry. In
particular, they are significantly less likely to think next of kin should donate the organs
of the deceased when the deceased chose not to register under the active choice frame
than when they chose not to register under the opt-in frame. Results are consistent for the
confidence measure with all the same differences statistically significant (p<0.01).25
Interestingly, these regressions also demonstrate that subjects are somewhat more
likely to think the next of kin should donate the organs of a deceased who registered
under an active choice frame than who registered under an opt-in frame (the difference is
significant when considering all four scenarios in regressions (3) and (4). However, this
difference is small relative the decrease in likelihood of registration among nonregistered donors (the effect of the active choice frame is 3% for registered donors and 14.3% for those who are not registered). In addition, there is reason to be a bit less
25

Data that includes the confidence measures along with the binary choices is presented in Table
A3 in the Appendix.

25

concerned about how next of kin respond when the deceased is registered, since due to
improvements in registration technology, a deceased being registered is increasingly
likely to proceed with donation.
Table 6: Next-of-Kin Decisions By Condition
Should Next of Kin Donate The Organs of the
Deceased (0 or 1)
First Scenario Only
(1)
(2)
0.016
0.012
(0.024)
(0.023)
-0.551
-0.544
(0.038)***
(0.037)***
-0.130
-0.126
(0.052)**
(0.051)**
0.158
(0.027)***
0.932
0.834
(0.018)***
(0.028)***

All Four Scenarios
(3)
(4)
Active Choice Frame
0.030
0.030
(0.009)***
(0.009)***
Not On Registry
-0.564
-0.564
(0.019)***
(0.019)***
Active Choice Frame* Not
-0.173
-0.173
On Registry
(0.016)***
(0.016)***
Registered
0.116
(0.016)***
Constant
0.913
0.838
(0.015)***
(0.020)***
Order Dummies
Yes
Yes
Observations
803
803
3212
3212
Clusters
803
803
R-squared
0.41
0.44
0.36
0.47
Active Choice Frame and Not on Registry are indicators of the scenario the subject was being
asked about. Registered is a dummy variable indicating whether a subject reported in the survey
that followed these scenarios that he was a registered donor on his state registry. OLS
specifications with robust standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the subject level in
regressions (3) and (4): * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

In particular, since the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act of 1968 (UAGA), joining a
state registry has been a legally binding decision to be an organ donor after death, but
next of kin were often consulted about donation anyway, given that the deceased may
have joined the state registry years ago and so their presence on the registry might not
reflect the deceased’s current intent to donate (Glazier et al. 2009).26 Recently, however,
computer-based registries have provided a way for potential donors to easily change their
organ donor status if they change their mind, which means being on the registry can be
more easily interpreted as current intent to donate. Consequently, doctors can now
Next of kin were historically asked since: (1) the driver’s license of a potential donor was often
not available at the time of death and (2) a registered donor might have changed his or her mind
about donation after having been issued the driver’s license and these wishes might have been
communicated to the next of kin (Glazier 2006).
26

26

sometimes recover organs from registered donors (but not from unregistered potential
donors) without receiving explicit permission from the next of kin (Glazier 2006).
Our results suggest that the way in which individuals are asked to become donors
can affect beliefs about what next of kin should do when asked about donating the organs
of a deceased. In particular, subjects thought it was less appropriate to donate the organs
of someone who had chosen not to be a donor under an active choice frame than someone
who had failed to opt-in to be a donor under an opt-in frame.
We must be careful when we extrapolate experimental survey results to questions
of policy. That said, while we can change the way an individual is asked to register as a
donor in the lab, it is impossible to experiment on how next of kin respond to the way a
deceased was asked to register as a donor without a major experimental manipulation of
state policy like the one in California followed by a long wait for people to die and next
of kin to make organ donation decisions. Consequently we think it is reasonable to start
the process with experimental survey data that can provide guidance about how
individuals might respond to state policies and what policy might be best.27

27

Looking at empirical results of policy changes, like we did for registration rates in California in
Section II, will also be a fruitful avenue to pursue. With more data, empirical studies may be
possible in Illinois, New York, and in Great Britain, all of which have changed from opt-in to
active choice when people register for driver’s licenses (in 2006 in Illinois, see Thaler 2009; in
August 2011 in Great Britain, see Wellesley 2011; and in 2013 in New York, see
http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2012/10/04/gov-cuomo-signs-laurens-law-in-effort-to-boostnumber-of-organ-donors/). To study next-of-kin decisions, in addition to waiting a while before
newly registered donors die and either do or do not become actual deceased donors, other changes
in donor registration will also have to be accounted for. For example, in Britain, those with public
insurance are also now given multiple opportunities to register when they interact with the
National Health Service.

27

V.

Discussion
Two sets of results inform the title of our paper: “Don’t Take ‘No’ For An

Answer.” The first is that giving individuals the opportunity to join the organ and tissue
donor registry in Massachusetts generates a significant number of new registrants, even
though these Massachusetts ID holders have been previously asked to register as an organ
donor and have declined. Put simply, asking again for organ donation generates more
donors — we shouldn’t assume that “no” is a final answer (i.e. don’t take no for an
answer). The second set of results is that the active choice frame that asks for a yes or a
no option does not increase the number of registered donors above an opt-in frame either
in the policy change in California or in our experiment (active choice may even decrease
rates of organ donor registration as compared to opt in) and we identify a potential
additional risk of asking subjects to register under active choice, since people become
less supportive of next of kin donating the organs of an unregistered deceased when that
deceased declined to register under an active choice frame. Put simply, our results
suggest that active choice may not improve outcomes over opt-in — when asking people
to register we might prefer an opt-in frame that does not offer a “no” option as an answer
(i.e. don’t take no for an answer).
On the first “don’t take no for an answer,” we saw a large increase in the number
of donors who registered as a result of having the opportunity to change their organ and
donor registration status as part of our study, even though they had declined to register
previously. We are not worried about an experimenter demand effect making our results
difficult to generalize, since we are investigating a decision in which there is usually
scrutiny and pressure when the request is made. Our result suggests that policy makers
who want to increase the number of organ donors may find it useful to ask for organ
donation regularly in a variety of contexts (e.g. on income tax documents as has been
proposed in some states).28 In other contexts, individuals are asked repeatedly to make
28

While it is illegal to pay people to register as donors it is legal to pay people to participate in a
research study where they make an organ donation decision. Consequently, one might wonder
about the cost effectiveness of generating organ donors by inviting people to participate in similar
research studies. We paid 368 subjects $15 for taking our survey and the study generated a net
increase of 59 donors (61 individuals joined the registry while 2 individuals removed themselves

28

the same prosocial decision. For example, charities often ask donors repeatedly to give
during an annual fundraising campaign,29 as do political campaigns during a campaign
cycle.
There are a number of reasons why asking repeatedly may increase the probability
that an agent says yes to a charitable request. First, individuals might not pay attention to
any particular request, where failure to respond to a request keeps the individual in the
default state of not being a donor. In that case, a subsequent request might be addressed
while a first was ignored. Second, individuals might respond differently to a repeated
request if the number of requests is a signal of the value of the action being requested
(e.g. charities might signal the value or need for funds with multiple requests; similarly,
asking repeatedly for organ donor registration might signal the need for registered organ
donors). Third, individuals might feel guilty from saying no to each request and saying
yes might alleviate current and future guilt associated with the related requests. Fourth,
individuals might receive new information between times they are asked the request and
that information might change their mind.
In addition, we observe that subjects who are registered donors are unlikely to
remove themselves from the registry when given the opportunity to do so (only 1.3% of
registered donors in our study remove themselves from the registry even when there are
no transaction costs of doing so). This suggests that once an individual is on the registry,
it may not be necessary to repeatedly ask him to reaffirm his desire to be on the registry
each time they renew their state license, permit or ID as is required in some states,

from the registry). Dividing the total cost of $5,520 in subject payments by 59 suggests that our
experiment generated new donors at a cost of $93.56 per donor. Note that this calculation
includes subject payments only and not other resources associated with the study, including
experimenter time and lab resources. However, it is possible that subjects could be induced to
participate in less extensive studies, for example with a shorter survey, for a lower subject
payment cost. In addition, such studies could also take place outside of the laboratory, and our
results may be indicative of those that would be obtained if it were simply made easy for people
to register as donors in other venues (e.g. when donating blood, when visiting the doctor, or when
paying taxes).
29
Charities generally ask repeatedly for donations regardless of whether individuals have donated
previously, although some charities promise not to send future appeals in a given year (or for a
given campaign) to an individual who donates.

29

including Massachusetts,30 but which could lead to accidental attrition off the registry if
an individual does not pay attention to the question each time he or she is asked. Other
states, such as Ohio,31 do not ask current donors to reaffirm. These results are
additionally relevant for policy in that they suggest that an individual being listed on a
state registry — or having a heart or an organ donor signature on his or her driver’s
license — reliably reflects current intent to be a donor. This supports the policy
established by the Anatomical Gift Act that these intention measures can be used to
reflect the last wishes of a deceased donor (Glazier et al. 2009).
On the second “don’t take no for an answer,” we find that asking subjects to
register in an active choice frame does not increase registrations over an opt-in frame
either in the empirical analysis of the change in question in California or in our controlled
laboratory experiment in Massachusetts. This suggests that over 80% of states may be
requesting organ donation in a suboptimal way. It is worth discussing this result further
since it is contrasts with previous results on organ donation that suggest active choice is
preferable to opt-in (see Johnson and Goldstein 2003, 2004; Thaler and Sunstein 2008;
and Thaler 2009).
First, our results deal with actual donor registration decisions, which may explain
some of the difference from previous papers that rely on hypothetical decisions (Johnson
and Goldstein 2003, 2004). Second, unlike the hypothetical scenarios of Johnson and
Goldstein (2003, 2004), which varied the state’s default for organ donation, we do not
change the default for organ donation in Massachusetts in our laboratory experiment. We
just vary how individuals are asked to register. The policy change in California is a little
less clear-cut since one could interpret the change in the frame of the organ donation
question a change in the default, and yet we still find a decrease in registration rates as a
From the Massachusetts RMV website: “If the customer is currently registered as a donor,
he/she still needs to check “yes” on the question “Would you like to register to be, or continue to
be, an organ and tissue donor?” on the permit/license/ID card application in order to remain in the
Massachusetts Donor Registry.”
(https://secure.rmv.state.ma.us/Policybrowserpublic/PolicyBrowser.aspx under “License Policy >
Organ and Tissue Donor Policy > New Donors” (7/23/2012)
31
The policy in Ohio is described here
http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2013/10/09/bmv-wont-offer-to-take-you-offorgan-donor-list.html (7/3/2014)
30

30

result of adopting active choice. In a strict sense, however, the default of being a nondonor was not changed in California either, since an individual who never went to the
DMV for a state ID would by default not be a registered donor.
Given that our results suggest a negative effect of active choice on registration
rates (i.e. active choice is far from increasing registration rates), it is particularly
worrisome that subjects in our second experiment also report that next of kin should be
less willing to donate the organs of a non-registered deceased who failed to register under
active choice. These results suggest that active choice fails to increase registration rates
over opt-in and then potentially makes it more difficult to convert non-donors through the
decisions of the next of kin.
It is worth emphasizing that in both the active choice and opt-in frames that we
study, participants chose to register despite having previously declined to do so. So
giving individuals repeated opportunities to easily change their registration status and
become registered donors is helpful for both ways of framing the question.
Finally, it is also worth highlighting that giving information about the benefits of
donation, namely providing a list of organs that might be donated, increases the
likelihood of registration, which is promising for policy interventions that aim to educate
potential donors of the value of organ donation (see a growing literature on messaging to
increase organ donor registrations including Quinn et al. 2006 and Thornton et al. 2012).
In conclusion, we note that the frequency with which we ask individuals to
provide public goods can have an impact on contribution decisions. The context of organ
donor registration has an interesting added feature in which how we ask an individual to
register as a donor can also affect the donation decisions of those who might be asked to
donate on their behalf. Both the direct and indirect effects are worthy of consideration
and analysis.

31

VI. References
Ashlagi, Itai, Duncan. S. Gilchrist, Alvin E. Roth, Michael A. Rees. 2011
“Nonsimultaneous chains and dominos in kidney- paired donation-revisited.” American
Journal of Transplantation 11(5): 984-994.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., Rodney J. Garratt, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2009. “One
Chance in a Million: Altruism and the Bone Marrow Registry.” American Economic
Review 99 (4): 1309–34.
Bergstrom, Ted C., Rodney J. Garratt, and Damien Sheehan-Connor. 2011. “Stem Cell
Donor Matching for Patients of Mixed Race.” http://escholarship.org/uc/item/22w466q9
(accessed June 1, 2012).
Buhrmester, Michael, Tracy Kwang, and Samuel D. Gosling. 2011. “Amazon's
Mechanical Turk A New Source of Inexpensive, Yet High-Quality, Data?” Perspectives
on Psychological Science. 6 (1): 3-5.
Donate Life America. 2011. National Donor Designation Report Card 2011. Richmond,
VA: Donate Life America.
Donate Life America. 2012. National Donor Designation Report Card 2012. Richmond,
VA: Donate Life America.
Donate Life America. 2013. National Donor Designation Report Card 2013. Richmond,
VA: Donate Life America.
Fève, Frédérique, Anne Cambon-Thomsen, Jean-François Eliaou, Pierre-Antoine
Gourraud, Colette Raffoux, and Jean-Pierre Florens. 2007. “Évaluation Économique de
l’Organisation d’un Registre de Donneurs de Cellules Souches Hématopoïétiques.” Revue
d’Épidèmiologie et de Santé Publique 55 (4): 275–84.
Fève, Frédérique, and Jean-Pierre Florens. 2005. “Matching Models and Optimal
Registry for Voluntary Organ Donation Registries.” Unpublished.
Glazier, Alexandra K. 2006. “Donor Rights and Registries.” Journal of Medical Ethics 13
(1): 4.
Glazier, Alexandra K., Alessandro Nanni Costa, J. M. Simón i Castellvì, Antonio G.
Spagnolo, Nunziata Comoretto, Jean Laffitte, Håkan Gäbel, et al. 2009. “A Colloquium
on the Congress ‘A Gift for Life. Considerations on Organ Donation.’” Transplantation
88 (7S): S108–58.
Health Resources and Services Administration. 2011. “2011 Annual Data Report”
(available at http://srtr.transplant.hrsa.gov/annual_reports/2011/default.aspx)

32

Johnson, Eric J., and Daniel G. Goldstein. 2003. “Do Defaults Save Lives?” Science 302
(5649): 1338–39.
Johnson, Eric J., and Daniel G. Goldstein. 2004. “Defaults and Donation Decisions.”
Transplantation 78 (12): 1713–16.
Kessler, Judd B., and Alvin E. Roth. 2012. “Organ Allocation Policy and the Decision to
Donate.” American Economic Review 102 (5): 2018-47.
Kessler, Judd B., and Alvin E. Roth. 2014a. “Loopholes undermine donation: An
experiment motivated by an organ donation priority loophole in Israel.” Journal of Public
Economics 114: 19–28.
Kessler, Judd B., and Alvin E. Roth. 2014b. “Getting More Organs For Transplantation”
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 104 (5): 425–430.
Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. 2010. “Social Image Concerns and Prosocial
Behavior: Field Evidence from a Nonlinear Incentive Scheme.” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 76 (2): 225–37.
Lacetera, Nicola, and Mario Macis. 2010. “Do all material incentives for prosocial
activities backfire? The response to cash and non-cash incentives for blood donations.”
Journal of Economic Psychology 31 (4): 738–748.
Lacetera, Nicola, Mario Macis, and Robert Slonim. 2012. “Will There Be Blood?
Incentives and Displacement Effects in Pro-Social Behavior.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 4 (1): 186–223.
Lacetera, Nicola, Mario Macis, and Sarah S. Stith. 2012. Removing financing barriers to
organ and bone marrow donation: The effect of leave and tax legislation in the U.S.
NBER Working Paper, No. 18299.
Lavee, Jacob, Tamar Ashkenazi, Avi Stoler, J. Cohen, and R. Beyar. 2013. “Preliminary
Marked Increase in the National Organ Donation Rate in Israel Following
Implementation of a New Organ Transplantation Law.” American Journal of
Transplantation 13: 780-785.
Levitt, Stephen D. and John A. List. 2007. “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring
Social Preferences Tell Us About the Real World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives
21: 153-174.
Mellstrom, Carl, and Magnus Johannesson. 2008. “Crowding Out in Blood Donation:
Was Titmuss Right?” Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (4): 845–63.

33

Quinn, Michael T., G. Caleb Alexander, Diane Hollingsworth, Kate Grubbs O'Connor,
David Meltzer, Corporate Contributions for Life Consortium. 2006. “Design and
evaluation of a workplace intervention to promote organ donation.” Progress in
Transplantation 16 (3): 253-9.
Rees, Michael A., Jonathan E. Kopke, Ronald P. Pelletier et al. 2009. “A
Nonsimultaneous , Extended, Altruistic-Donor Chain.” New England Journal of
Medicine 360 (11): 1096–1101.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2004. “Kidney Exchange.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 457–88.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2005a. “A Kidney Exchange
Clearinghouse in New England.” American Economic Review 95 (2): 376–80.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2005b. “Pairwise Kidney
Exchange.” Journal of Economic Theory 125 (2): 151–88.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2007. “Efficient Kidney Exchange:
Coincidence of Wants in Markets with Compatibility-Based Preferences.” American
Economic Review 97 (3): 828–51.
Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, Francis L. Delmonico, and Susan L.
Saidman. 2006. “Utilizing List Exchange and Undirected Good Samaritan Donation
through ‘Chain’ Paired Kidney Exchanges.” American Journal of Transplantation 6 (11):
2694–2705.
Saidman, Susan L., Alvin E. Roth, Tayfun Sönmez, M. Utku Ünver, and Francis L.
Delmonico. 2006. “Increasing the Opportunity of Live Kidney Donation By Matching for
Two- and Three-Way Exchanges.” Transplantation 81 (5): 773–82.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2003. “Libertarian Paternalism.” The American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. 93 (2): 175-179.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about
Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Thaler, Richard H. 2009. “Opting in versus Opting out.” The New York Times, September
26.
Thornton, J. Daryl, Marilyn Alejandro-Rodriguez, Janeen B. León, Jeffrey M. Albert, et
al. 2012 “Effect of an iPod video intervention on consent to donate organs: a randomized
trial.” Annals of Internal Medicine. 156 (7): 483-90.

34

Wellesley, Hugo. 2011. “A nudge in the right direction for organ donation—but is it
enough?” BMJ; 343 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.d5726 (Published 14 September
2011).
News Stories and Blog Posts cited:
http://marketdesigner.blogspot.com/2010/05/kidney-exchange-time-series.html
http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2012/10/04/gov-cuomo-signs-laurens-law-in-effort-toboost-number-of-organ-donors/
http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2013/10/09/bmv-wont-offer-to-take-youoff-organ-donor-list.html

35

Appendix A: Study Recruitment Text on CLER Website
“IN ORDER TO PARTICIPATE IN THIS STUDY YOU MUST HAVE A MASSACHUSETTS
DRIVER'S LICENSE, MA PERMIT, OR MA STATE ID AND WILL NEED TO PRESENT IT
FOR ENTRY INTO THE STUDY. THOSE WITHOUT A MASSACHUSETTS DRIVER'S
LICENSE, MA PERMIT, OR MA STATE ID WILL BE TURNED AWAY. YOU MUST ALSO
KNOW THE LAST FOUR DIGITS OF YOUR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER.
Study Description: You will log into a state database, make a decision and complete a survey.
Compensation: Participants who arrive on time and are eligible to participate will receive $15 for
completing the study. There is the possibility that some subjects will be turned away from the
experiment. Those who are eligible and are turned away will receive a $10 turn-away fee and will
not be required to stay for the study.”

36

Appendix B: Consent Form
Please consider this information carefully before deciding whether to participate in this research.
Purpose of the research: To understand the decision to register as an organ donor.
What you will do in this research: You will (1) enter information that will be used to log you
into a registry of organ and tissue donors in Massachusetts, (2) be provided with information
about organ and tissue donation, (3) decide whether or not you would like to register as an organ
and tissue donor, and (4) complete a survey.
Time required: Participation will take approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Risks: There are no anticipated risks associated with participating in this study.
Benefits: At the end of the study, we will provide a thorough explanation of the study and of our
hypotheses. We will describe the potential implications of the results of the study both if our
hypotheses are supported and if they are disconfirmed. If you wish, you can send an email
message to Judd Kessler (jkessler@hbs.edu) and we will send you a copy of any manuscripts
based on the research (or summaries of our results).
Compensation: You will receive $15 for participating in this study.
Confidentiality: Your participation in this study will remain confidential, and your identity or
personal information will not be stored with your data. Your responses will be assigned a code
number, and we will not connecting your name or any of your personal information with this
number.
Participation and withdrawal: Your participation in this study is completely voluntary, and you
may withdraw at any time without penalty. You will receive payment based on the proportion of
the study you completed. You may withdraw by informing the researcher that you no longer
wish to participate (no questions will be asked).
To Contact the Researcher: If you have questions about this research, please contact Judd
Kessler, Doctoral Candidate, Baker Library 420F, 617-495-8845, jkessler@hbs.edu.
Whom to contact about your rights in this research, for questions, concerns, suggestions, or complaints that
are not being addressed by the researcher, or research-related harm: Jane Calhoun, Harvard University
Committee on the Use of Human Subjects in Research, 1414 Massachusetts Avenue, Room 234,
Cambridge, MA 02138. Phone: 617-495-5459. E-mail: jcalhoun@fas.harvard.edu

Agreement:
The nature and purpose of this research have been sufficiently explained and I agree to participate
in this study. I understand that I am free to withdraw at any time without incurring any penalty.
Signature: _____________________________________ Date: __________________
Name (print): ________________________________________________

37

Appendix C: Appendix Tables
Table A1: State Registration Rates from Q4 2010 to Q1 2012
State
Q4 2010
Q1 2011
Q2 2011
Q3 2011 Q4 2011 Q1 2012
Alaska
75.00%
77.00%
77.00%
78.00%
78.00%
79.00%
Arizona
26.34%
20.92%
22.61%
25.03%
23.51%
25.87%
California
26.66%
27.31%
27.43%
26.36%
26.07%
26.41%
Colorado
66.53%
66.74%
67.36%
67.15%
66.99%
65.94%
Connecticut
39.05%
38.53%
39.52%
40.31%
38.64%
39.84%
District of Columbia
33.19%
28.66%
29.51%
40.24%
37.91%
36.46%
Florida
37.53%
37.95%
39.47%
41.81%
40.37%
40.70%
Hawaii
41.70%
41.05%
42.71%
42.94%
43.07%
41.08%
Louisiana
53.72%
54.60%
56.19%
59.49%
55.10%
54.86%
Maryland
46.35%
45.29%
46.79%
45.90%
49.50%
45.60%
Michigan
15.63%
14.91%
19.23%
24.61%
22.94%
42.16%
Minnesota
53.58%
51.73%
52.02%
52.46%
52.80%
53.98%
Missouri
40.25%
39.87%
40.63%
40.89%
41.50%
41.27%
Montana
64.29%
64.06%
65.78%
66.83%
66.74%
65.23%
Nebraska
45.41%
43.37%
43.60%
44.05%
43.89%
45.19%
New Hampshire
55.76%
55.94%
56.43%
53.34%
52.48%
52.53%
New Jersey
30.37%
31.09%
30.39%
31.09%
31.27%
33.34%
New York
12.49%
12.67%
13.14%
14.51%
12.77%
12.29%
North Carolina
52.39%
51.90%
53.20%
53.40%
52.84%
51.26%
Ohio
55.45%
55.93%
57.01%
57.01%
57.51%
56.45%
Pennsylvania
45.31%
45.36%
45.53%
45.59%
45.51%
45.27%
South Carolina
30.83%
26.17%
25.56%
26.41%
29.66%
22.80%
Tennessee
32.68%
32.49%
33.82%
34.28%
33.85%
34.00%
Virginia
26.45%
36.23%
34.55%
35.90%
34.43%
37.01%
Washington
58.11%
58.93%
58.82%
58.46%
58.42%
59.47%
Wisconsin
57.35%
57.10%
57.20%
56.88%
56.60%
58.14%
Wyoming
59.31%
59.46%
59.37%
59.11%
58.54%
58.81%
Table A1 shows quarterly registration rates for the three quarters before and three quarters after
the policy change in CA for all the states that made quarterly registration rate data available to
Donate Life California or Donate Life America for the entire sample period.

38

Table A2: Change from Opt-in to Active Choice: Robustness Checks
All Available States
All Available States
Low Rate States
Q1 2011 to Q4 2012
Q2 2011 to Q3 2011
Q4 2010 to Q1 2012
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Post*
-0.024
-0.023
-0.020
-0.016
-0.033
-0.032
California (0.005)*** (0.004)*** (0.007)***
(0.006)**
(0.012)**
(0.011)**
Post
0.013
0.012
0.009
0.05
0.025
0.023
(0.005)**
(0.004)***
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.012)*
(0.011)*
Constant
0.443
0.382
0.452
0.383
0.312
0.282
(0.003)*** (0.002)*** (0.003)*** (0.003)*** (0.006)*** (0.005)***
State FE
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Obs.
112
44,352,681
64
25,807,549
84
41,062,194
Clusters
28
28
32
32
14
14
R-squared
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.90
0.93
This table shows additional specifications for estimating the differences-in-differences coefficient
Post*California, representing the effect on registration rates of changing the organ donor
registration question from an opt-in framed question to an active choice framed question.
Regressions (1), (3) and (5) use state-quarters as observations while regressions (2), (4) and (6)
use binary choices of each individual who visits the DMVs as the unit of observation. All include
state fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered by state are in parentheses: * significant at
10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

Table A2 shows robustness checks for the empirical analysis of the policy change
in California in which the organ donation question went from being asked as an opt-in
framed question to an active choice framed question. In regressions (1) and (2), we
restrict attention to data from 2011 only (i.e. the two quarters before and two quarters
after the policy change). This allows us to add data from one additional state (Idaho) that
had data from those four quarters but not all six we used in the original analysis. We see
results are nearly identical to the main text where the estimated effect of changing the
framing of the organ donation question is around 2.3 to 2.4 percentage points. In
regressions (3) and (4) we restrict attention to data from the quarter before and the quarter
after the policy change only, which allows us to add data from 4 additional states that had
data from these two quarters. The coefficient on Post*California is still negative and
significant. Finally, in regressions (5) and (6) we return to looking at 6 quarters of data,
but restrict attention to states that had low (i.e. similar to CA) registration rates in the preperiod. In particular, we use as a control group for CA the 13 jurisdictions (12 states and
DC) that had registration rates of below 44% in Q2 2011. The coefficient on
Post*California gets larger in magnitude, suggesting a decrease in registration rates of
3.2 to 3.3 percentage points.
39

Table A3: Decisions and Confidence By Condition

Percent who said next of
kin should donate
Deceased
was:

Registere
d

Question
was:

First Choice

All Four
Scenarios

Opt-in

93.2%

92.0%

2.65

2.62

94.7%

94.9%

2.71

2.83

-1.6%

-3.0%**

-0.064

-0.209***

38.1%

35.5%

-0.552

-0.728

26.7%

21.2%

-1.31

-1.69

11.4%**

14.3%***

0.753***

0.966***

Active
Choice
Difference
(Opt–PC)
Opt-in

Unregiste
red

Average confidence: from
confident should donate
(3.5) to confident should
not donate (-3.5)
All Four
First Choice
Scenarios

Active
Choice
Difference
(Opt–PC)

Table A2 shows the percentage of subjects who said the next of kin should donate the organs of
the deceased as well as their confidence on a 7-point scale (with mean 0) constructed from the
confidence answers. The scale ranges from “very confident” that the next of kin should donate
equal to 3.5, and “very confident” the next of kin should not donate equal to -3.5, with confidence
levels spaced 1 unit each, and with a 1 unit jump from “not confident” that the next of kin should
donate to “not confident” the next of kin should not donate, from 0.5 to -0.5. The “First Scenario
Only” columns focus on the first scenario the subject saw (restricting the analysis to be between
subjects) while the “All Four Scenarios” columns look at all the data (conducting analysis both
within and between subjects). The stars indicate that the difference in responses between Opt-in
and Active Choice are significantly different from 0 in a t-test: * significant at 10%, **
significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

40

