                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SELF-SELECTION INTO CREDIT MARKETS:
                         EVIDENCE FROM AGRICULTURE IN MALI

                                            Lori Beaman
                                            Dean Karlan
                                          Bram Thuysbaert
                                          Christopher Udry

                                        Working Paper 20387
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20387


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




The authors thank partners Save the Children and Soro Yiriwaso for their collaboration. Thanks to
Yann Guy, Pierrick Judeaux, Henriette Hanicotte, Nicole Mauriello, and Aissatou Ouedraogo for excellent
research assistance and to the field staff of Innovations for Poverty Action – Mali office. We thank
Dale Adams, Alex W. Cohen and audiences at Cambridge University, Columbia University, Dartmouth
College, MIT, BU, University of Michigan, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Stanford, the University
of CaliforniaBerkeley, University of CaliforniaSan Diego, and the University of Maryland for helpful
comments. All errors and opinions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lori Beaman, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Self-Selection into Credit Markets: Evidence from Agriculture in Mali
Lori Beaman, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry
NBER Working Paper No. 20387
August 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. D21,D92,O12,O16,Q12,Q14

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine whether returns to capital are higher for farmers who borrow than for those who do not,
a direct implication of many credit market models. We measure the difference in returns through a
two-stage loan and grant experiment. We find large positive investment responses and returns to grants
for a random (representative) sample of farmers, showing that liquidity constraints bind. However,
we find zero returns to grants for a sample of farmers who endogenously did not borrow. Thus we
find important heterogeneity, even conditional on a wide range of observed characteristics, which
has critical implications for theory and policy.


Lori Beaman                                       Bram Thuysbaert
Department of Economics                           Ghent University
Northwestern University                           Sint-Pietersnieuwstraat 25
2001 Sheridan Road                                9000 Gent, Belgium
Evanston, IL 60208                                bram.thuysbaert@ugent.be
and NBER
l-beaman@northwestern.edu                         Christopher Udry
                                                  Economic Growth Center
Dean Karlan                                       Yale University
Department of Economics                           Box 208269
Yale University                                   New Haven, CT 06520
P.O. Box 208269                                   and NBER
New Haven, CT 06520-8629                          udry@yale.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
1    Introduction

The return to investment in productive activities depends on a myriad of influences, reflecting
both the realization of risk and underlying heterogeneity in the characteristics of and
opportunities available to producers. Some of this variation may be apparent to outside
observers; much may not. A primary role of financial markets is to permit investment flows to
respond to this variation. We study this process of allocation across farmers in poor villages in
Mali, in the context of the randomized expansion of a microcredit program.

We show that agricultural investment is subject to liquidity constraints, and measure the return
to agricultural investment in the general population of rural Mali. We show that returns are on
average quite high, as can be expected in a capital‐poor economy not well integrated into
global financial markets. We also show that there is a great deal of variation in the return to
agricultural investment across farmers, even across farmers who on many measurable
dimensions appear quite similar. We do so by comparing the distribution of returns to
investment among the endogenously selected sample of farmers who do not borrow in the
expanded microcredit program, to the distribution of returns in the general rural population.
For those who did not borrow, returns to investment are significantly lower, indeed, zero, on
average. Thus farmers with particularly high returns to investment are much more likely to
select – or be selected ‐‐ into borrowing. This implies that much of the variation in returns is ex
ante, and that farmers are aware of the heterogeneity in expected returns.

High average returns to agricultural investment could emerge when farmers lack capital and
face credit constraints. Microcredit organizations have attempted to relieve credit constraints,
but most microcredit lenders focus on small business financing. The typical microcredit loan
requires frequent, small repayments and therefore does not facilitate investments in
agriculture, where income comes as lump sums once or twice a year. By contrast, the loan
product studied here is designed for farmers by providing capital at the beginning of the
planting season and requiring repayment as a lump sum after the harvest. However, lending
may not be sufficient to induce investments in the presence of other constraints.2 Farmers may

2
  The evidence from traditional microcredit, targeting micro enterprises, is mixed: some randomized studies find
an increase in investment in self‐employment activity (Crépon et al. 2015; Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2015)
while others do not (Attanasio et al. 2015; Augsburg et al. 2015; Banerjee, Duflo, et al. 2015; Tarozzi, Desai, and
Johnson 2015). See Banerjee, Karlan and Zinman (2015) for an overview of the above six studies. Rarely have
randomized evaluations of microcredit found an increase in the profitability of small businesses as a result of
access to microcredit, at least at the mean or median (Banerjee, Duflo, et al. 2015; see Crépon et al. 2015 as the
exception). These limited results from microcredit come in spite of evidence that the marginal returns to capital
can be quite high in micro‐enterprise (de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2008).

                                                        2
be constrained by a lack of insurance (Karlan et al. 2013), have time inconsistent preferences
(Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson 2011), or face high costs of acquiring inputs (Suri 2011). We
investigate whether capital constraints are binding among farmers in Mali, and then, critically, if
farmers with higher marginal returns to investment are those most likely to borrow.

We use an experiment which offered some farmers access to loans and other farmers
unrestricted cash grants. Out of 198 study villages, our partner microcredit organization, Soro
Yiriwaso, offered loans in 88 randomly assigned villages. In those “loan” villages, women could
get loans by joining a local community association. In the remaining “no‐loan” villages, no loans
were offered. In the no‐loan villages, we randomly selected households to receive grants worth
40,000 FCFA (US$140). In loan villages, we waited until households (and the associations) had
made their loan decisions and then we gave grants to a random subset of those households
who did not borrow. We compare the average returns to the grant in the representative set of
farmers in no‐loan villages to the average returns to the grant in the self‐selected sample of
households who did not take out loans in loan villages. This allows us to test an important
question on selection: do those who do not borrow have lower average returns than those who
do borrow?

The cash grants in no‐loan villages led to a significant increase in investments in cultivation. We
observe more land being cultivated (8.4%, se=3.2%), more fertilizer use (16.2%, se=6.0%), and
overall more input expenditures (15.0%, se=4.4%). These households also experienced an
increase in the value of their agricultural output and in net revenue3 by 13.4% (se=3.8%) and
12.7% (se=4.9%), respectively. Thus, we observe a statistically significant and economically
meaningful increase in investments in cultivation and an increase in net revenue from relaxing
capital constraints. This impact on net revenue even persists after an additional agricultural
season. Thus in this environment, capital constraints are limiting investments in cultivation.4


3
  We do not have a complete measure of profits, and thus are using the term “net revenue” as this is the value of
agricultural output net of most, but not all, expenses. Net revenue is the value of harvest (whether sold, stored or
consumed) minus the cost of fertilizer, manure, herbicide, insecticide, hired labor, cart and traction animal
expenses (rental or maintenance), and seed expenses (although valuing last year’s seeds at zero). We do not
subtract the value of own, family or other unpaid labor or the implicit rental value of land used, because both the
labor and land markets are too thin to provide reliable guidance on these values. Instead, we examine the use of
these inputs directly.
4
  The increase in investment contingent upon receipt of the grant is sufficient to reject neoclassical separation, but
not to demonstrate the existence of binding capital constraints. For example, in models akin to Banerjee and Duflo
(2012) with an upward‐sloping supply of credit each farmer, a capital grant could completely displace borrowing
from high‐cost lenders, lower the opportunity cost of capital to the farmer and induce greater investment even
though the farmer could have borrowed more from the high cost lender and thus was not capital constrained in a
                                                          3
In loan villages, households given grants did not earn any higher net revenue from the farm
than households not provided grants. This contrasts sharply with households given grants in the
no‐loan villages who had large increases in net revenue relative to those not provided grants.
Therefore, we conclude that households which borrowed, and were thus selected out of the
sample frame in loan villages, had higher marginal returns than those who did not borrow. The
differences in the impact of the grants between households who borrow and those who do not
are substantial. We estimate that among borrowing households, $110 of the $140 grant is
accounted for by increases in cultivation expenses, while farm output increases by $240 (both
impacts significantly different from zero at the 1% level). In contrast, we estimate that among
households who do not borrow, receipt of the grant generates only $20 of additional
expenditure on cultivation and output (neither being statistically significantly different from
zero).

We also look at other outcomes such as livestock ownership and small business operations.
There is no evidence that grant recipients in loan villages are investing the capital in alternative
activities more than their counterparts in no‐loan villages. We conclude that there are
heterogeneous returns across farmers, and specifically that the lending process sorts farmers
into higher and lower productivity farmers.

Thus the impacts of cash grants in the loan villages versus no‐loan villages reveal important
selection effects induced by the lending process. The experimental design allows us to show
that farmers who use capital more productively are also more likely to take loans and to
measure the magnitude of that difference. We can then ask whether this composition effect is
predictable by observables. If the heterogeneity is predictable by information observable to the
lender ex‐ante, then the lender could use this information both for social purposes (to focus
their efforts marketing to those who stand the most to gain, from a poverty alleviation
perspective) as well as expand access to credit (i.e., risk‐based pricing, to alleviate adverse
selection problems). We find that even after conditioning on the rich set of characteristics in
our data, the positive selection induced by the lending process remains strong.

But which aspects of the lending process create the positive selection? Is this driven by
borrower self‐selection, lender selection or both? The experimental design itself does not allow
us to separate these mechanisms, nor does the institutional setting of this credit market
provide benefit or cost shifters that would permit estimates of the selection process using local


strict sense. However, there is no evidence that these grants lowered total borrowing. Therefore, we refer to the
range of capital market imperfections that could cause investment responses to cash grants simply as credit
constraints.

                                                       4
instrumental variables methods as in Heckman (2010) or Eisenhauer et al (2015). We instead
provide a simple economic model of the selection process and combine this with information
generated by the second stage randomization of grants in the random and selected samples to
suggest that the positive effect operates through a combination of both self‐selection and
lender screening. By looking at the distribution of returns, we find that whereas in no‐loan
villages there is no correlation between baseline net revenue and marginal returns to the grant,
in the loan villages, the marginal returns to the grant are close to zero for those with high
baseline net revenue, but positive for those with low baseline net revenue. If the lender (either
the outside organization or the community association) were selecting borrowers, they would
select based on profit level, not marginal profits, since profit levels are more important in
determining repayment. On the other hand, if the borrower is self‐selecting, the borrower will
do the reverse: select in based on marginal profits, not profit level. Using our best proxy of
profits, net revenues, we find both that high marginal, low average profit farmers are under‐
represented among borrowers, suggesting that they are screened out of borrowing by the
lender; and that low marginal, high average profit farmers are under‐represented among
borrowers, suggesting self‐selection.

We also estimate the intent‐to‐treat impacts of offering loans on a range of agricultural
decisions, in order to compare behavior changes induced by the loan and cash grants. About
21% of households in our sample received loans (in loan villages), which is a take‐up rate far
below that of the grants ‐ all households accepted the grants ‐ but similar to other microcredit
contexts. The average loan size was 32,000 FCFA (US$113). Like the grants, we find that offering
loans led to an increase in investments in cultivation, particularly fertilizer, insecticides and
herbicides, and an increase in agricultural output. We do not detect, however, a statistically
significant increase in net revenue. Therefore we observe farmers investing in cultivation when
capital constraints are relaxed through credit. Our treatment on the treated (ToT) estimates of
the impact of borrowing on the cultivation activities and harvests of those who borrowed are
large and consistent with our entirely separate estimates of the impact of grants on borrowers.
Therefore, it does not appear that the lending process leads to dramatically different behavior
on the part of farmers than cash grants.

These loan impact results are in stark contrast to a long history of failed agricultural credit
programs (Adams 1971), which often were implemented as government programs and thus
plagued by politics (Adams, Graham, and Von Pischke 1984). In the expansion of microcredit in
the 1980s and onward, we have seen several changes occur at once: a shift from individual to
group lending processes (although now this trend is reversing (Giné and Karlan 2014; de Quidt,
Fetzer, and Ghatak 2012)), a shift from balloon payments to high frequency repayment (Field et
al. 2013 study a lending product that partially reverses this trend, with a delayed start to
                                               5
repayments), a shift from government to nongovernment (and now to for‐profit) institutions,
and a shift from agricultural focus to entrepreneurial focus (Karlan and Morduch 2009;
Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch 2010). The loan impact component of this study effectively
returns to this older question, but tests an agricultural lending model that is different than had
been employed in the past, one with group liability, little to no subsidy, and no government
involvement.

The random choice of communities into which to enter by the lender is sufficient for us to
estimate ITT effects of the lending program, avoiding strong assumptions on the selection
process. Our results provide evidence of quantitatively important selection on unobserved
variables, which has methodological implications for impact evaluation. Had we matched
borrowers to non‐borrowers on observable characteristics to assess the impact of lending to
farmers, we would have overestimated the impact of credit, since conditional on an unusually
wide range of observed characteristics those who borrow have substantially higher returns to
capital than those who do not borrow.

2    The Setting, experimental design and data

Agriculture in most of Mali, and in all of our study area, is exclusively rainfed. Evidence from
nearby Burkina Faso suggests that income shocks translate into consumption volatility
(Kazianga and Udry 2006), so improving agricultural output can have important welfare
consequences not only on the level of consumption but also the household’s ability to smooth
consumption within a year. The main crops grown in the area include millet/sorghum, maize,
cotton (mostly grown by men); and rice and groundnuts (mostly grown by women). At baseline,
about 40% of households were using fertilizer5, and 51% were using other chemical inputs
(herbicides, insecticide).

The loans were marketed, implemented, serviced and financed by Soro Yiriwaso (SY), a Malian
microcredit organization (and an affiliate of Save the Children, an international
nongovernmental organization based in the United States). The cash grants were implemented
by Innovations for Poverty Action. Figure 1 demonstrates the design, and Figure 2 presents the
timeline.




5
  The government of Mali introduced heavy fertilizer subsidies in 2008. The price of fertilizer was fixed to 12,500
FCFA per 50kg of fertilizer. This constituted a 20% to 40% subsidy, depending on the type of fertilizer and year.
Initial usage of the subsidy was low in rural areas initially but has grown over time, helping to explain the increase
in input expenses we observe in our data from baseline to endline (Druilhe and Barreiro‐Huré 2012).

                                                          6
2.1     Experimental design

The sample frame consisted of 198 villages, located in two cercles (an administrative unit larger
than the village but smaller than a region) in the Sikasso region of Mali.6 The randomization
consisted of two steps: First, we assigned villages to either loan (88) or no‐loan (110) treatment.
In loan villages, anyone could receive a loan by joining a women’s association created for the
purpose of administering loans for SY. Second, after loan participation had been decided, those
households who did not borrow were randomly assigned to either receive a grant or not. Below
we describe each component in detail.

Loans

SY offered their standard agricultural loan product, called Prêt de Campagne, in 88 of the study
villages (village‐level randomization). This product is given exclusively to women, but money is
fungible within the household. Unlike most microloan products, it is designed specifically for
farmers: loans are dispersed at the beginning of the agricultural cycle in May‐July and
repayment occurs after harvest. Administratively the loan is given to groups of women
organized into village associations, but each individual woman receives an informal contract
with the association. Qualitative interviews with members outside the study villages, prior to
the intervention, revealed that the application process is informal with few administrative
records at the village level. For example, there are no records of loan applications or denial. Nor
is a record kept of more subtle, informal processes of “application” or “denial”, such as women
who discuss the possibility of joining the group to get a loan but who are discouraged from
joining (such data would have been helpful for ascertaining the extent of peer versus self‐
selection, for instance). The size of the group is not constrained by the lender: a group could
add a member without decreasing the size of loan each woman received. The size of the loan to
each woman is also determined though an informal, iterative process. Repayment is tracked
only at the group level, and there is nominally joint liability. On average there are about 30
women per group and typically 1, though up to 3, associations per village. This is a limited
liability environment since these households have few assets and the legal environment of Mali
would make any formal recourse on the part of the bank nearly impossible. However, given
that loans are administered through community associations, the social costs of default could


6
  Bougouni and Yanfolila are the two cercles. Both are in the northwest portion of the region and were chosen
because they were in the expansion zone of the MFI, Soro Yiriwaso. The sample frame was determined by
randomly selecting 198 villages from the 1998 Malian census that met three criteria: (1) were within the planned
expansion zone of Soro Yiriwaso, (2) were not currently being serviced by Soro Yiriwaso, and (3) had at least 350
individuals (i.e., sufficient population to generate a lending group).

                                                       7
be quite high. In practice we observe no defaults over the two agricultural cycles where we
were collaborating with SY.7

The annual interest rate is 25% plus 3% in fees and a mandatory savings of 10%. SY offered
loans in the study villages for the 2010 and 2011 agricultural seasons. The average loan size in
2010 was 32,000 FCFA (US$113).8

Grants

Grants worth 40,000 FCFA (US$140) were distributed by Innovations for Poverty Action (with
no stated relationship to the loans or SY) to about 1,600 female survey respondents in May and
June of the agricultural season of 2010‐2011. In the 110 no‐loan villages, households were
randomly selected to receive grants and a female household member – to parallel the loans –
was always the direct recipient. US$140 is a large grant: average input expenses, in the absence
of the grant, were US$196 and the value of agricultural output was US$522. The size of the
grant was chosen to closely mimic the size of the average loan provided by SY, though ex post
the grant ended up being slightly larger on average than loans. In no‐loan villages, we also
provided some grants to a randomly selected set of men, but we exclude those households
from the analysis in this paper.9

In loan villages, grant recipients were randomly selected among survey respondents who did
not take out a loan.10 We attempted to deliver grants at the same time in all villages, but
administrative delays on the loan side meant that most grants were delivered first in no‐loan
villages, and there is an average 20‐day difference between when no‐loan households received
their grants from their counterparts in loan villages. We discuss the implications of this delay in
section 3.2.1.

7
 This is not atypical for Soro. In an assessment conducted by Save the Children in 2009, 0% of Soro’s overall
portfolio for this loan product was at risk (> 30 days overdue) in years 2004‐2006, rising to only .7% in 2007.
8
    We use the 2011 PPP exchange rate with the Malian FCFA at 284 FCFA per USD throughout the paper.
9
  These data are intended for a separate paper analyzing household dynamics and bargaining, and we do not
consider them useful for the analysis here since loans were only given to women.
10
  We determined who took out a loan by matching names and basic demographic characteristics from the loan
contracts between the client and Soro Yiriwaso, which Soro Yiriwaso shared with us on an ongoing basis. There
were a few cases (67) where Soro Yiriwaso allowed late applications for loans and households received both a
grant and a loan. The majority (41 out of 67) of these cases occurred because there were multiple adult women in
the household, and one took out a loan and another received a grant. We include controls for these households.
The results are similar if the observations are excluded.

                                                        8
In order to minimize the possibility of dynamic incentives to not borrow, we informed
recipients that the grants were a one‐time grant, not an ongoing program, and also distributed
some grants in loan villages to some borrowers who were not in the survey, so that it was not
obvious that borrowing precluded someone from being a grant recipient.

2.2    Data

Figure 2 shows the timeline of the project. The baseline was conducted in January‐May 2010. A
first follow‐up survey was conducted after the first year of treatment and the conclusion of the
2010 agricultural season11 in January‐May 2011, and a second follow‐up survey was conducted
after the second year of treatment and the conclusion of the 2011 agricultural season in
January‐May 2012. In the three rounds, similar survey instruments covered a large set of
household characteristics and socioeconomic variables, with a strong focus on agricultural data
including cultivated area, input use and production output at individual and household levels.
We also collected data on food and non‐food expenses of the household as well as on financial
activities (formal and informal loans and savings) and livestock holdings.

2.3    Randomization, balance check and attrition

The randomization was done after the baseline using a re‐randomization technique ensuring
balance on key variables.12 The randomization of the provision of grants was done at the
household level, while the loan randomization was at the village level. Moreover, we did

11
  We also conducted an “input survey” on a subsample of the sample frame right after planting in the first year
(September‐October 2010), in order to collect more accurate data on inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and other
chemicals, labor and equipment use. This input survey covered a randomly selected two thirds of our study villages
(133 villages) and randomly selected half of the households (stratifying by treatment status) to obtain a subsample
of 2,400 households. We use the input survey if conducted, and if not we use the end of season survey. We also
control for timing of the collection of the data in all relevant specifications.
12
   First, a loop with a set of number of iterations randomly assigned villages to either loan or no‐loan, and then we
selected the random draw that minimized the t‐values for all pairwise orthogonality tests. This is done because of
the difficulties stratifying using a block randomization technique with this many baseline variables. The variables
used for the loan randomization were: village size, an indicator for whether the village was all Bambara (the
dominant ethnic group in the area), distance to a paved road, distance to the nearest market, the percent of
households having a plough, the percentage of women having a plough, fertilizer use among women in the village,
average literacy rate, and the distance to the nearest health center. For household‐level randomization we used:
whether the household was part of an extended family; was polygamous; the primary female respondent’s: land
size, fertilizer use, and whether she had access to a plough; an index of the household’s agricultural assets and
other assets, and per capita food consumption. See Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) for a more detailed description of
the randomization procedure.

                                                         9
separate randomization routines for the grant recipients in the loan and no‐loan villages. We
control for all village and household‐level variables used in the re‐randomization routine and
interactions of the household‐level variables with village type (loan or no‐loan) in all analyses.

We conduct different tests to verify that there are no important observable differences
between the different groups in the sample, using variables not included in the randomization
procedure. Appendix Table A1 looks at baseline characteristics across three comparisons: (i)
loan to no‐loan villages; (ii) grant to no‐grant households in no‐loan villages; and (iii) grant to
no‐grant households in loan villages. Few covariates are individually significantly different
across the three comparisons, and an aggregate test in which we regress assignment to
treatment on the set of 11 covariates fails to reject orthogonality for each of the 3 comparisons
(p‐value of 0.26, 0.91 and 0.67, respectively, reported at the bottom of the table).

Our attrition rate is low: approximately one percent each round. Regardless, Appendix Table A2
reports tests for differential attrition comparing the same groups as in Table A1, from baseline
to the first follow‐up and to the endline. For each of the three comparisons, we fail to reject
that attrition rates are on average the same in the compared groups for both follow up years. In
a regression of attrition on the nine covariates, treatment status, and the interaction of nine
covariates and treatment status, a test that the coefficients on treatment status and the
interaction terms are jointly zero fails to reject for all but one of the six regressions (results on
bottom row of Appendix Table 2).

3   Selection into loans

We focus on agricultural outcomes, so consider agricultural output .          , is the output of
a household that borrows and          , is the output of a household that does not borrow ( ,
  and will denote particular realizations of the random variables , and ).              depends on
  (a vector of characteristics of the household all of which are known to the household and to
the SY lending group in the household’s community but which may or may not be observed by
us) and      (the realization of random production shock, which is unknown to either the
household or the lender at the time the loan decision is made). Of course, we never observe
both       and       for any particular household. The selection process into borrowing
depends on the same vector of household characteristics ; the institutional structure of the SY
lending group provides no suggestion that the selection process involves characteristics other
than those that may also influence the distribution of output. The household borrows and we
observe       if and only if        0. The line of research culminating in Heckman and Vytlacil
(2005) and Eisenhauer et al (2015) provides a robust approach to understanding the selection
process and to estimating important aspects of the joint distribution of     ,     . In the context
of this credit market, however, we lack suitable exclusion restrictions to directly apply this line
                                                10
of research. Instead, our two‐stage randomization provides important information about
expected returns to investment conditional on selection (or not), and then in section 4, we add
additional structure from a model of the credit market that distinguishes self‐selection from
lender screening (thus our approach incorporates a dimension of the selective trials discussed
by Chassang et al (2012)). We show that these different selection processes have
distinguishable implications for the observed distribution of farming outcomes for those with
and without grants, in the random sample of all households versus in the selected sample of
non‐borrowers.

In the random set of communities not offered loans, cash grants were distributed to randomly
selected households. Compliance with respect to take up of these grants was 100%. Hence
there is no selection into the grant program itself. Let     ,    be the output for a household
that receives a grant and        , be the output of a household that does not receive a grant.
We assume that            ,   ≡        , ; conditional on the household’s characteristics, a
household not receiving a grant achieves the same output as a household not borrowing. The
household‐level randomization of grants permits us to estimate the unconditional expectation
        ,           ,    and also the unconditional marginal distributions        and       .

Similarly, in the random set of communities offered loans, cash grants were distributed to
randomly selected households who did not borrow. Thus, for households in these communities
that did not borrow (i.e.,            0), we are able to estimate the conditional expectation
        ,           , |         0 and the conditional marginal distributions       |        0
and         |        0 . In the villages offered loans,             0 is observed, so we can
estimate          ,           , |         0 . Thus we can estimate the returns to cash grants
achieved in agriculture by households who select into borrowing, versus those who do not.13

3.1    Observable characteristics of borrowers versus non‐borrowers

Take‐up of the loans, determined by matching names from administrative records of SY with
our sample, was 21% in the first agricultural season (2010‐11) and 22% in the second (2011‐
2012). Despite the similarity in overall take‐up numbers, there is a lot of turnover in clients.

13
   If     ,    ≡      , , that is, the grant is used in the same way that a similarly ‐sized loan would be put, we
also can estimate the returns to loans for those who borrow versus those who do not. This is likely too strong an
assumption, because households with a variety of possible investments to make could choose to invest a grant
differently from a loan. However, in section 5, we show that a comparison between our direct estimate of
        ,           ,   |       0 and the independent ToT estimate of the impact of the lending program does
not permit us to reject the hypothesis that grants and loans have the same effects on investment and output
among the selected set of borrowers.

                                                       11
Only about 65% of clients who borrowed in year 1 took out another loan in year 2. This overall
take‐up figure is similar to other evaluations of group‐=based microcredit focusing on small
enterprise (Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2015; Attanasio et al. 2015; Banerjee, Duflo, et al.
2015; Banerjee, Karlan, and Zinman 2015; Crépon et al. 2015; Tarozzi, Desai, and Johnson
2015). Table 1 provides descriptive statistics from the baseline on households who choose to
take out loans in loan villages, compared to non‐clients in those villages. Information on the
household as a whole as well as the primary female respondent and primary male respondent
is reported. There is a striking pattern of selection into loan take‐up: households that invest
more in agriculture, have higher agricultural output and net revenue. Net revenue is our best
proxy for profits: it is net of most, but not all, expenses. It is the value of harvest (whether sold,
stored or consumed) minus the cost of fertilizer, manure, herbicide, insecticide, hired labor,
cart and traction animal expenses (rental or maintenance), and seed expenses (although
valuing last year’s seeds at zero). We do not subtract the value of own, family or other unpaid
labor or the implicit rental value of land used, because both the land and labor markets are too
thin to have relevant market prices to use in a calculation of profits. Borrowers also have more
agricultural assets and livestock. Figure 3 demonstrates that this holds across the whole
distribution. Women in households who borrow are also more likely to own a business and are
more “empowered” by three metrics: they have higher intra‐household decision‐making
power, are more socially integrated, and are more engaged in community decisions.14
Households that borrow also have higher consumption at baseline than non‐clients.

3.2    Returns to the grant in loan and no‐loan villages

Panel A of Table 2 shows the estimates from the following regression using the two years of
follow up data we have on farm investments and output.




14
    All three of these variables are indices, normalized by the no‐grant households in no‐loan villages. The
household decision‐making index includes questions on how much influence she has on decisions in the following
domains: food for the household, children’s schooling expenses, their own health, her own travel within the
village, and economic activities such as fertilizer purchases and raw materials for small business activities. The
community action index includes questions on: how frequently she speaks with different village leaders, and
different types of participation in village meetings and activities. The social capital index includes questions about 7
other randomly selected community members from our sample and whether the respondent knows the person,
are in the same organization, would engage in informal risk sharing and transfers with the person, and topics of
their discussions (if any).

                                                          12
                                         ∙        2011                   ∙     2011 ∙
(1)                           ∙         2012                   ∙        2012 ∙
                             2012                  2012 ∙

where            indicates individual i received a grant in May‐June 2010, and            indicates that
the MFI offered loans in village j.         2011 is an indicator of the data round. We also include
year by village type (loan vs no‐loan) controls, and additional baseline controls (               which
                                                                  15
include the baseline value of the dependent variable                 plus its interaction with year by
village type, village fixed effects, and stratification controls described in section 2.3 and listed in
the notes of the table. and           are the primary coefficients of interest. is the effect of the
cash grant on the outcome          in the no‐loan villages, i.e., the average effect of the cash grant
among all potential borrowers.           shows the differential impact of receiving a grant on the
outcome        for the households that did not borrow (in loan villages) compared to the random,
representative sample in no‐loan villages.

Panel A of Table 2 shows the estimates from this regression for a variety of cultivation
outcomes (inputs along with harvest output and net revenue) and Panel A of Table 3 shows the
analogous estimates for other, non‐cultivation outcomes such as livestock, small business
ownership, consumption, and female empowerment.

      3.2.1 Agriculture

Columns (1)‐(6) look at agricultural inputs. We see in the first row that in households who did
receive a grant in no‐loan villages, compared to those who did not, the amount of land
cultivated increased (0.17 ha, se=0.065) a small but significant amount. The grant also induced
an increased in hired labor days (2.7 days, se=0.80). 2.7 days over the entire agricultural season
is a small number, but these households use very little hired labor: the mean in the control in
2011 is only 17 days. Fertilizer ($12, se=4.3) and other chemical inputs ($9, se=2.2) also
increased by 14 and 19 percent respectively. Total input expenses (excluding family labor and
the value of land) increased by US$28 (se=8.2), a 14 percent increase. The grants therefore led
to an increase in agricultural investment. Columns (7)‐(8) show that output and farm net
revenue also went up significantly. Output went up by 13 percent ($67, se=19) and net revenue




15
   In cases where the observation is missing a baseline value, we instead give the lagged variable a value of ‐9 and
also include an indicator for a missing value.

                                                        13
by 13 percent ($40, se=15). Overall, we see significant increases in investments and ultimately
net revenue from relaxing capital constraints. 16

Table 2 shows that the selected sample of households who did not take out a loan do not
experience such positive returns when capital constraints are relaxed. Across the board, the
estimates of the impact of the grant in loan villages in 2011 (year 1) are near zero. Column (1)
shows that while households in no‐loan villages increased the amount of land cultivated as a
result of the grant, households in loan villages (who did not take out a loan) by contrast did not
( is ‐0.15 ha, se=0.09 and the p value of the test that the sum of and is zero is 0.69). The
interaction term for family labor days (‐8, se 6.5), fertilizer expenses (‐$9, se=6.5) and other
chemical expenses (‐$6, se=3) are all negative, though only the latter is statistically significant.
Total input expenses in loan villages do increase in response to the grant by $20 (p value is
0.03), which is not statistically different from the estimate in no‐loan villages of $28. However,
we see no corresponding increase in output nor in net revenue. The             interaction coefficient
for output is similar in magnitude and negative (‐$47, se=28), offsetting the increase in output
in no‐loan villages ($67, se=19). The test that the sum of the two coefficients is different from
zero is not rejected (p=0.33). Similarly for net revenue, the total effect in loan villages is actually
negative (‐$3.30) and not significantly different from zero (p=.84). Thus while there is some
evidence that among households who did not take out loans, the grant induced some increase
in inputs, there is no evidence of increases in agricultural output nor net revenue – in stark
contrast to the random sample of households in no‐loan villages.

These estimates imply that there is a great deal of heterogeneity in marginal returns to relaxing
capital constraints across farmers, and that those who borrow are disproportionately those
with high returns. The return in year 1 to the grant implied for would‐be borrowers in no‐loan
villages is $145.96 (se=67.75) in additional net revenue per $100 of grant.17 In contrast, the
return for non‐borrowers is negative, although not statistically significantly different from zero.

The analysis indicates that households who do not borrow are those without high returns in
agriculture to cash transfers. In contrast to the literature on health products, where much of


16
  We are not estimating the marginal product of capital as in de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2008) but instead
the “total return to capital”– i.e., cash. Beaman et al. (2013) showed in this same area that labor inputs also adjust
along with agricultural inputs, making it impossible to separate the returns to capital from the returns to labor
without an additional instrument for labor inputs. We are therefore capturing the total change in profits and
investment behavior when capital constraints are relaxed.
17
  Calculated as        0.79    / .21 ∗ 1.4 where 0.21 is the loan takeup rate in loan villages, and the grant size is
$140.

                                                         14
the evidence points towards limited screening benefits from cost sharing (Cohen and Dupas
2010; Tarozzi et al. 2013), we find that the repayment liability does lead lower return
households to be screened out. The design does not allow us to experimentally determine
whether households are self‐selecting (demand side) or being screened by the lender (supply
side). We return to this question in section 4.

Year 2

We observe a persistent increase in output and net revenue in the 2011‐2012 agricultural
season (year 2) from the grant given in 2010, as shown by the coefficients in Panel A of Table
2: output is higher in grant recipient households by $50 (se=22) in Column (7) of Table 2 and net
revenue by $46 (se=17). This is striking since we do not observe grant‐recipient households
spending more on inputs in Column 6 ($2, se=10). One thing to note, however, is that some of
the investments in year 1 may benefit year 2 output. There are also changes in agricultural
practices which we may not capture with our measure of input expenses. For example, in 2011
grant‐recipient households spend more on purchasing seeds. In 2012 these households spend
no more on seeds than control households but they do use a larger quantity of seeds. This
could reflect learning but also could reflect the use of hybrid seeds in year 2011 which provide
some yield benefits the following year, even without re‐purchasing seeds. This highlights that
our simple accounting of 2011 net revenue as 2011 output minus 2011 inputs is imperfect as a
measure of profits, but we have no way of constructing a depreciation rate for the various
inputs. We also see a continued increase in the extensive margin of fertilizer use but not in
(average) expenses.

In year 2, we see a similar negative interaction term, , on net revenue in Column (8) as in year
1, though not significant at the 10% level (‐$33, se=23). The lower net revenue may be a result
of higher input use: Column (6) shows that, in loan villages, grant‐recipient households spent
more on input expenses ($30, se=17.1) than control households in 2012.

Timing

One concern about our interpretation of the results is that on average, households received
grants in loan villages 20 days later than in no‐loan villages because of delays in the
administration of the loans. If farmers in no‐loan villages received grants too late in the
agricultural cycle to make productive investments, we would erroneously conclude that there is
positive selection into agricultural loans when in reality the result is attributable to our
experimental implementation. This is particularly a concern since we observe farmers increase
the amount of land they farm, which is a decision which occurs very early in the agricultural
cycle. In Appendix Table A3, we look at land cultivated (i.e., an investment decision made early

                                               15
in the process) and an index of all the agricultural outcomes and find no relationship with the
timing of the grant, among the grant‐recipient households in no‐loan villages.18

Spillovers

It is possible that households received neither grants nor loans were indirectly affected by the
study interventions, either positively (if grants or loans were shared) or negatively (through
general equilibrium effects on locally determined prices). We do not have a perfect way to
address such spillovers. We do, however, have data from an additional 69 villages in the same
administrative units (cercles) as our study villages.19 Appendix Table 4 shows that no‐grant
households in no‐loan villages had similar agricultural practices to households in villages where
we did no intervention. There are no significant differences in land cultivated, suggesting that
the increase in land cultivated among grant recipients was not zero‐sum with households who
did not get a grant. There are also no significant differences in total input expenses, value of the
harvest, and net revenue. The one significant difference is the number of hired labor days
(column 3). Non‐grant recipients in no‐loan villages hired more labor by four labor days. While
this is precisely estimated and a point estimate comparable to main treatment effect in Panel A
of Table 2, recall that this is four man‐days over the entire course of the agricultural season and
therefore unlikely to have affected total output and net revenue.

     3.2.2 Other outcomes

Table 3 shows the estimates of equation (1) looking at outcomes other than agriculture. The
most striking result is in Columns (1) and (2): grant‐recipients households in no‐loan villages are
more likely to own livestock (11 percentage points, se=0.014), and there is a large ($163, se=70)
increase in the value of total livestock compared to no‐grant households. This represents a 13%
increase in the value of household livestock, and is slightly larger than the value of the grant
itself. Recall we saw in Table 3 that households also spent an extra $28 on cultivation
investments. The livestock value is measured several months after harvest; these results may

18
  We look at two main specifications: one in which we include date the grant was received linearly and with its
square, and a second which splits the sample into the first half of the grant period and the second half (since most
of the grants in the loan‐available villages were distributed in the second half). In both cases we control for
whether this was the team’s first visit to the village (revisit to village).
19
   Our partner organization would only commit to not enter 110 villages, which serve as our no‐loan villages. The
villages we use as no‐intervention villages were leftover replacement villages and not entirely randomly selected.
For example, the no‐intervention villages have larger average population size but fewer children per household
than study villages. SY may have offered loans in up to 15 of the 69 villages in year 1. Removing those 15 villages
leaves Appendix Table 4 qualitatively unchanged.

                                                        16
indicate that post‐harvest, households moved some of their additional farming profits into
livestock.20 We also find evidence that the grant increased the likelihood in no‐loan villages that
a recipient household had a small enterprise (3.8 percentage points higher, se=0.015), as shown
in Column (3).21 Grant recipient households also consumed more, including 12% more food
(Column 4, $0.38 per day in adult equivalency, se=0.11) and 6% in non‐food expenditures
(Column 5, $2.69 per month, se=1.4). We find the latter persistent in year 2 but food
consumption not. Columns (6)‐(9) show no main effect of the grant on whether the household
has any financial savings, membership in rotating, savings and loans associations (ROSCAs),
education expenses or medical expenses.22

The investment and spending patterns among grant recipient households in loan villages for the
most part echo those described above in no‐loan villages. Column (1) shows that while grant
recipients in loan villages were overall more likely to own livestock than their control
counterparts, the magnitude of the effect is about half as large as in the no‐loan villages
(interaction term is ‐3.9 percentage points, se=0.022). The remainder of the outcomes however
show few differences.23

Taken together, Panel A of Table 3 shows that the grants benefited households in a variety of
ways. However, we have no strong evidence that households in loan villages, who did not
experience higher agricultural output and net revenue as in no‐loan villages, used their grants
to invest in alternative higher‐return activities other than cultivation.




20
   We may also over‐value recently‐purchased livestock which may be younger or smaller in treatment households
since we use village‐level reports of livestock prices to value livestock quantities for all households.
21
 Appendix Table 5 shows in Column (1) that despite increasing the extensive margin of small business, we do not
measure an increase in business profits after year 1.
22
   Columns (2) through (4) of Appendix Table 5 also show no impact in year 1 on women’s empowerment,
involvement in community decisions nor social capital, respectively.
23
   The only outcome which suggests potential heterogeneity in behavior upon receiving a grant between our
random, representative households in no‐loan villages and our selected sample in loan villages is medical
expenses, in Column (9). Medical expenses (in the last 30 days) are marginally‐significantly higher in loan grant
households ($4.90, se=2.51), since medical expenses may have declined (‐$2.53, se=1.85) among grant recipients
in no‐loan villages. The total effect in loan villages is not statistically different from zero (p=0.16). This is a difficult
outcome to interpret because having more resources could mean a household is more likely to treat illnesses they
experience but are also more able to invest in preventative care, making the prediction of the treatment effect
ambiguous.

                                                            17
Year 2

In year 2, we see persistent impacts for some key outcomes in no‐loan villages ( ). Columns (1)
and (2) demonstrate that grant‐recipient households are more likely to own livestock (0.09,
se=0.015) and continue to hold more livestock assets ($180, se=101) than control households in
no‐loan villages. They are also more likely to own a business (3 percentage points, se=0.013).24
There is no increase in food consumption in year 2 ($0.05, se=0.17) but an increase in monthly
non‐food expenditure ($3.72, se=2.1). Households are also more likely to have financial savings
(3.5 percentage points, se=0.019) and be members of rotating savings and loans associations
(ROSCAs) (3.9 percentage points, se=0.019). Columns (9)‐(10) show that there continues to be
no measurable impact on educational expenses ($0.42, se=3.64), or medical expenses (‐$0.76,
se=1.80).25

Table 3 shows that, similar to year 1, there is little evidence of households in no‐loan villages
using grants differently than those in loan villages across this set of non‐agricultural outcomes
(livestock ownership, owning a small business, and consumption) in year 2. There is an
alternative hypothesis that the loan selected in people with short‐run investments (i.e., those
with payoffs within one year), and non‐borrowers invested their grants in longer‐term
investments. However, even by the end of the second year, we do not see profit increases (for
non‐borrowers in loan villages who receive grants) from enterprise investment, longer‐term
farm investments, or other long‐term investments such as education, to support this
hypothesis; nor does the qualitative information from the field support this alternative
hypothesis.

3.3      Unobservable versus observable predictors of marginal returns
Table 1 demonstrated that loan‐takers are systematically different at baseline than those who
do not take out loans on a number of characteristics, including those which are surely
important in cultivation: they have more land, spend more in inputs, and enjoy higher output
and net revenue. These baseline characteristics may be enough to predict who could most
productively use capital on their farm. Theoretically the prediction is ambiguous: many models
would predict that those who have the highest returns are households who are the most credit

24
     Appendix Table A5 shows in Column (1) that business profits increase by 18% ($41, se=18.5) in year 2.
25
   Appendix Table A5 also suggests no change in intra‐household bargaining (0.059 of a standard deviation,
se=0.039) or community action (0.021, se=0.045). The social capital index in column (4) shows a significant rise of
0.09 of a standard deviation (se=0.034) in year 2.



                                                          18
constrained. We observe individuals who take out loans have on average more wealth in the
form of livestock. This could mean they have lower returns to investments in cultivation.
However, they may also have access to better technologies, like a plough, which could increase
their returns to capital.

Here we examine whether the marginal returns from grants and the selection effect discussed
above are predicted fully by characteristics observed in the baseline, or if there is additional
selection that occurs based on unobservables. We use the same specification as earlier but also
include baseline characteristics (Z) interacted with an indicator for receiving a grant, for year 1
and year 2.

                                       ∙    2011                 ∙     2011 ∙
                                 ∙    2012                 ∙    2012 ∙
(2)                            ∙    ∙    2011                 ∙    ∙    2012
                            ∙      2011        ∙           2012
                              2012          2012 ∙

We structure our analysis by sequentially increasing the controls we include in the regression,
by first focusing on Z variables which would be fairly observable to microcredit institutions
(MFIs), then including variables which would be fairly observable to the community and
therefore may be included in peer screening mechanisms (as in group‐lending), and finally
adding in our measure of risk aversion.

Table 4 shows our main empirical specification with net revenue as the outcome, with different
baseline household‐level controls. Column (1) is identical to Column (8) in Table 2 and is
included for ease of comparison. Column (2) includes Z variables measured at baseline, and
their interactions with grant receipt, that an MFI may be able to easily observe: the household’s
landholdings (in hectares), the value of their own livestock, agricultural net revenue, an
indicator for whether the household has six or more adults (the 90th percentile), an indicator for
the presence of an extended family, and the number of children in the household. Column (2)
shows that the estimates of the differential effect of the grant in loan versus no‐loan villages is
reduced in magnitude slightly (‐$38.75, se=21.97 compared to ‐$44 without controls) but
continues to be significant at the 10% level. We show the coefficients from the interactions
between some of these Z variables and grant receipt. Strikingly, higher baseline net revenues
do not predict higher returns to the grant, on average. We also do not observe a statistically
significant relationship between baseline livestock value or land size and returns to the grant.
However, larger households do benefit more from the grants in years 1 and 2 than smaller
households.

                                                19
Column (3) adds in additional information which would likely be known within the community
and thus usable in a peer lending screening process: the primary female respondent’s intra‐
household decision‐making power, her engagement in community decision‐making and her
social capital. Finally, Column (4) also adds in a measure of risk aversion. Respondents were
asked to choose between a series of lotteries, which vary in terms of their expected value vs
risk. We include an indicator for choosing the perfectly safe lottery, which about half the
sample chooses. In all specifications, the estimates on the differential impacts of the grants in
loan versus no‐loan villages are slightly smaller in magnitude but still negative and statistically
significant at the 10% level. We therefore conclude that our estimates of selection effects are
not driven by the rich set of observables we measure at the baseline, but by characteristics
more difficult for outsiders to observe, such as land productivity, access to complementary
inputs, or farmer skill. In the next section we examine whether the selection is a demand‐side
effect (people choosing whether to borrow or not) or a supply‐side effect (lenders or peers
choosing whether to let a farmer into their lending circle).

4    Is screening driven by supply‐side or demand‐side forces?
In section 3.2 we showed that providing cash grants to households who did not take out loans
led to lower agricultural returns – and in fact zero returns – compared to households who were
randomly selected in no‐loan villages. The experimental design provided us with a transparent
method for showing that the impact of the grants on agricultural output in the random sample
of households is greater than their impact in the selected sample of non‐borrowers. In contrast,
the experimental design itself does not allow us to differentiate how the screening itself occurs:
it may be the result of self‐selection on the part of farmers (demand‐side) or due to lender
screening on the part of the MFI or community associations (supply‐side).26

We begin with a simple model to illustrate what we mean by self‐selection and by lender
screening. In order to distinguish these concepts, the model requires three elements. First,
there is liquidity constraint that generates a potential demand for credit. Second, some
potential conflict of interest between the borrower and the lender is required if self‐selection
and lender screening are to be distinguished. In this model, the conflict emerges from limited
liability. Third, multiple dimensions of heterogeneity across borrowers will generate patterns of
self‐selection that differ from those caused by lender screening. Self‐selection will be largely
driven by heterogeneity in marginal productivity; screening of borrowers by lenders will depend
more on heterogeneity that affects the total value of output.

26
   The MFI itself has little to no information about individual loan applicants. However, women must go through a
community association – which in principle has joint liability for the loan – in order to get a contract with the MFI.
It is therefore possible that the associations are screening out some farmers who want to borrow.

                                                         20
The heterogeneity was introduced in section 3 as a vector of characteristics of the household Z.
We focus on two dimensions of this heterogeneity of endowments:                     , .       is an
average productivity shifter that affects output but not the marginal product of the input,
and affects the marginal product. We consider a situation of symmetric information – both
the farmer and the lender know the farmer’s endowment before the loan is transacted, but
neither knows the realization of , which we think of as a random shock to output realized
after borrowing is completed. The lender provides loans normalized to size 1, at an interest rate
of r (these parameters are set exogenously at a national level by SY). At the start of the farming
season, i chooses whether to borrow           ∈ 0,1 , and the lender chooses whether to lend
   ∈ 0,1 . The loan is made if and only if            1. We are assuming that the farmer has no
                                                   27
alternative use for capital outside of agriculture.

Farm        net      revenue                    for       borrowers           (non‐borrowers)           is
          , ,     (        , ,               ). A convenient specification for net revenue that satisfies
the assumptions on and is

(3)

where            reflects the liquidity constraint that generates the demand for credit. For
shorthand, we refer to differences across farmers in as differences in average productivity
and to differences in as differences in marginal productivity.

Output is produced, and because of limited liability, the loan is repaid in full if and only if net
revenue is sufficiently high.28 The lender receives min 1            ,       1            and the
farmer keeps max           1          , 0 , where        is the cost of funds to the lender. We
assume that both farmer and the lender maximize expected profits.

As a consequence of limited liability, a borrowing farmer earns zero if                   , where

(4)                                          ≡ 1

The farmer will want to take a loan if and only if

27
     This assumption implies that   ≡    , that is, that the farmer uses the grant in the same way he/she would use
the loan. This possibly unrealistic assumption can be generalized, at the cost of additional notation, while
preserving the lessons we draw for patterns of selection in the following paragraphs. In section 5, we provide
evidence that the uses of and returns to the grants are similar to those of the loans.
28
     We make assumptions to ensure that output is nonnegative. So             ,    ∈         ,          ,       with
              ≡      0, and     is drawn from a continuous density        with positive support on          ,   with
            . The expected value of is 0.

                                                       21
(5)                                                    1           1

The set


                          ,       |                            1                   1


defines the characteristics of farmers who would choose not to borrow. Define ∗ as the level
of marginal productivity such that a loan that will not be defaulted on has an expected return
just equal to the interest cost:
                                                               ∗
(6)                                                                                                1
     ∗
    is independent of . We can say something about the magnitude of ∗ , because the
marginal cost of borrowing is on the order of 30%. No household with expected returns under
this magnitude will borrow to invest in agriculture unless the probability of default is positive.

Second, define ∗ ≡ 1               ∗
                                           . A borrowing farmer with an endowment ∗ , ∗
                                                                    ∗
never defaults, and (5) is satisfied with equality. For all           , a farmer with endowment
   ∗                                                ∗
     ,  chooses to borrow. Similarly, for all         , a farmer with endowment , ∗ defaults
with positive probability, and chooses to borrow because of the limited liability constraint.29 In
Figure 4, we show the set of ,        such that a farmer would choose           1. The solid curve
labeled B partitions the space such that farmers with endowments to the southeast of B choose
to borrow.30

The lender will choose to make the loan if expected profits are positive. So the lender is willing
to lend to i if and only if


(7)                   1               1                                                                                    1       .




29               ∗                                ∗                                            ∗       ∗           ∗                           ∗
  From (3)                1                             and                1                               . For       ,       1                           0.
                     ∗                                                 ∗
Therefore,                                            1   ,0                           .
30                                        ∗       ∗
     B is upward‐sloping below                ,       by reasoning analogous to that in the preceding note. If                         ,       is a point on B
with a positive probability of default: then for all                           ,           1                               1               _         and the
farmer endowed with           ,   strictly prefers to borrow.

                                                                                   22
          ,   | 1      1                                                1        defines the set
of borrower characteristics such that the lender would not be willing to lend to the borrower
with those characteristics. Equation (7) is satisfied for farmer i with endowment ∗ , ∗ ,
because        . In Figure 4, the dashed curve labeled partitions the space such that the lender
is willing to make a loan to farmers with endowments to the northeast of L; the set        is the
area to the southwest of L.

We can now consider the consequences of self‐selection versus lender screening for the
observed distribution of net revenue. In the no‐loan villages, where grants were given to a
random sample of the population, we have


(8)


for farmers i and j randomly selected into the no grant and grant treatment groups,
respectively. Let  , denote the joint density of and in the rural population of our study
area, then given our randomization, the distributions of  and       simply reflect draws
from the full density h(). The left panel of Figure 5 depicts these distributions; as can be
anticipated from our preceding results, the distribution of    lies to the right of that of
over virtually the whole range.

In the loan villages, grants were given to a random sample of non‐borrowers. Suppose that
selection into borrowing is being driven by the simultaneous operation of both borrower side
self‐selection and by lender‐side screening; that is, that the selection is driven jointly by
equations (5) and (7). In this case, the joint density of and      in the population of non‐
borrowers is the truncated probability distribution

                                                         ,
(9)                               ,
                                                 ,   ∈       ∪

with support , ∈            ∪       . As can be seen in Figure 4, the endowments of the
approximately 80 percent of the population who do not borrow differ from the overall
population in two ways. First, because of lender screening, the distribution of endowments in
the selected population of non‐borrowers has greater weight on low values of average
productivity . Second, because of borrower self‐selection, the selected population contains a
higher proportion of farmers with low marginal productivity. Put differently, self‐selection
implies that among non‐borrowers with high average productivity, a disproportionately large
share will have low marginal productivity. And lender screening implies that among non‐

                                               23
borrowers with high marginal productivity, a disproportionate share will have low average
productivity.

The right panel of Figure 5 depicts the distributions of      and      for the randomly chosen
grant recipients and non‐grant recipients among the population of non‐borrowers in the loan
villages. There are two distinctive feature of this graph. First is the presence of a significant
fraction of non‐borrowers with relatively high net revenue (> $500), but approximately zero
marginal return from the grant. This feature corresponds to the mechanism of self‐selection.
Second is the presence of a significant fraction of non‐borrowers with high marginal
productivity but low average productivity (measured by net revenue). This feature corresponds
to the mechanism of lender screening. We infer that the realizations of             and       are
determined jointly by equations (5) and (7), so that non‐borrower endowments are drawn from
      , . Both self‐selection and lender screening are occurring in this credit market.

Correlations between observable characteristics of borrowers and non‐borrowers and the
return to grants are also informative of the nature of the selection process. We saw in Table 1
that there are a number of observable characteristics that are strongly (positively) correlated
with loan take‐up. Consider any such attribute, Z, that we a priori expect to be correlated with
average productivity, . For example, baseline net revenue would be one such attribute. In
Table 5, we report the results of estimating

                                      ∙    2011                   ∙       2011 ∙
                                ∙    2012                  ∙     2012 ∙
                              ∙    ∙    2011                   ∙    ∙      2012
(10)
                           ∙      2011        ∙            2012
                              ∙    ∙     2011 ∙                       2012
                             2012 ∙

where we have augmented specification (2) with an additional interaction of Grant * Z * Loan
village * Year 1. This additional interaction permits us to examine whether the correlation
between Z and the marginal return to the grant is different for the general population ( ) than
for a selected population of non‐borrowers (              ). This helps illuminate whether the
underlying mechanism is self‐selection driven, lender driven, or both. The higher average
productivity, , associated with the higher value of Z reduces the likelihood that the farmer has
been screened out of borrowing by the lender, so non‐borrowers with higher values of Z are
more likely to have self‐selected out of borrowing because they have low marginal productivity.
Hence, among the population of non‐borrowers in loan villages, higher values of Z are
associated with lower values of , relative to the association in the population in general.

                                               24
Column (1) of Table 5 examines the association between baseline net revenue and the marginal
return to the grant in the overall population and in the selected sample of non‐borrowers. In
accord with our model, households in loan villages have a significantly more negative
correlation between baseline net revenue and the return to a grant than households in the
overall population (‐$0.17, se=0.07). The inclusion of the additional interaction terms erodes
the primary selection effect on Grant * Loan village * year 1. In the context of our model, both
lender screening and self‐selection are required to generate this pattern. Screening by the
lender generates the positive correlation between baseline net revenue and loan take‐up, and
households with low returns to additional liquidity self‐select out of borrowing.

In columns (2)‐(4), we report the estimates of (10) for three additional characteristics of
households that are positively associated with loan take‐up and plausibly with average
productivity . In column (2), we find no significant difference in the correlation between
baseline livestock and the return to the grant in the overall population and in the loan villages (‐
$0.017, se=0.013), so this measure provides no evidence in support of the hypothesis that both
dimensions of selection are operating. In column (3), we examine baseline harvest period
expenditure on food (choosing the harvest period to minimize the likelihood of strong nutrition‐
productivity effects). The association between baseline food expenditure and the return to the
grant in loan villages is much lower than the same correlation in the overall population villages
(‐$14.53, se=6.15). Similarly, in column (4), we use baseline non‐food consumption per capita as
Z, hypothesizing that this quantity may be strongly positively correlated with a household’s
permanent income (and hence with ) and less strongly correlated with the marginal product of
additional agricultural investment. Again, we find a much lower association between non‐food
consumption and the effect of the grant on net revenue in loan villages than in the overall
population (‐$1.53, se=0.60).

5      Impact of the loans

We also show our estimates of the intent‐to‐treat (ITT) effects of being offered an agricultural
loan on the same set of outcomes already discussed in section 3. In this analysis, we exclude all
grant recipients, from both loan and ineligible villages. Panel B of Tables 2 and 3 show the
results of the loan intent‐to‐treat analysis. We use the following specification:

(11)                                 ∙       2011               ∙       2012

where ( includes the baseline value of the dependent variable , cercle fixed effects, and the
village stratification controls described in section 2.3 and listed in the notes of the Table 2. The
specification uses probability weights to account for the sampling strategy, which depends on
take‐up in the loan villages.
                                                25
Panel B of Tables 2 and 3 show the ITT estimates. In Table 2, we observe an increase in input
expenditures on family labor days (8.6, se=4.8) and in fertilizer expenses ($9.23, se=4.79); total
input expenses rose by $19.87 (se=8.87) in villages offered loans. Land cultivated also increases
but is not statistical significant at conventional levels (0.082 ha, se=0.057). The value of the
harvest also increases by $34 (se=19), but we do not measure a statistically significant increase
in net revenues ($19, se=16). Year 1 Treatment on the Treated (ToT) estimates for the 18% of
the population who take up loans in the treatment population (divided by average loan
size/100) are reported in row 3 of Panel B. The per $100 dollar estimated effects of grants for
would‐be borrowers in the control villages are reported in row 7 of Panel A. Rows 4 and 5 of
Panel B show that it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that the per $100 dollar effects of
grants and loans are the same for any of the agricultural outcomes in Table 2, including net
revenue. The standard errors are calculated using a bootstrap routine: the difference in the
impact of the grant and loan is estimated for 1,000 draws of households (with replacement),
with probability weights for households calculated in each bootstrap sample for the loan impact
estimation. Taken as a whole, the grants and loans are having similar effects on agricultural
outcomes.

Panel B of Table 3 shows a reduction in medical expenses (‐$5.03, se=1.64) in Column (9). We
do not detect an impact on the other outcomes, including food and non‐food consumption,
whether the household has a small business, nor educational expenses.31 The comparison of
ToT for loans and the per $100 dollar impact of the grants is provided in rows 4 and 5 of Panel
B. The only outcome which differs significantly is whether the household owns any livestock:
the grant has a larger impact on livestock ownership than the loan. This is intuitive since the
loan has to be repaid and households would be less likely to use a loan to acquire buffer stock
savings.

These results on impact of loans stand in stark contrast both to the recent literature on the
impact of entrepreneurially‐focused credit (see Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2015; Attanasio
et al. 2015; Augsburg et al. 2015; Banerjee, Duflo, et al. 2015; Crépon et al. 2015; Karlan and
Zinman 2011; Tarozzi, Desai, and Johnson 2015, and an overview in Banerjee, Karlan, and
Zinman 2015), and an earlier agricultural lending literature that documented consistent
institutional failures, typically with high default rates (Adams, Graham, and Von Pischke 1984;

31
  Appendix Table 4 further shows no detectable effect on business profits, women’s decision‐making power within
the household, women’s involvement in community decisions, nor on women’s social capital. This is similar to the
existing evaluations of microcredit (Attanasio et al. 2015; Augsburg et al. 2015; Banerjee, Duflo, et al. 2015; Crépon
et al. 2015; except Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2015). SY did not have any explicit component of the program
emphasizing women’s empowerment.

                                                         26
Adams 1971). The institutional results are also promising: the perfect repayment, and the
retention to the following year (65%) is on par with typical client retention rates for sustainable,
entrepreneurially‐focused microcredit operations.

6   Conclusion

Capital constraints are binding for at least some farmers in Southern Mali, and we find that
agricultural lending with balloon payments (i.e., with cash flows matched to those of the
intended productive activity) can increase investments in agriculture. This is an important policy
lesson since the majority of microcredit has focused on small enterprise lending, and the typical
microcredit loan contract – where clients must start repayment after a few weeks – is simply ill‐
suited for agriculture. Field et. al. (2013) find similar results merely from delaying the onset of
high frequency repayment, within the context of microenterprise. In Mali, for example, Soro
Yiriwaso is among very few microcredit organizations with a product specially designed for
agriculture, despite the fact that the vast majority of households in rural Mali depend on
agriculture for a sizeable part of their livelihood.

These results are also important for policy, for example the targeting of social programs. Cash
transfer programs are often means‐tested and recent work suggests that both community
targeting, where community members rank‐order households to identify the poor, and ordeal
mechanisms can be an effective way of generating screening on wealth/income in developing
countries (Alatas et al. 2012; Alatas et al. 2013). Price is the screening mechanism we look at
here with agricultural loans. In a different agricultural setting, Jack (2013) finds that a
willingness to accept mechanism can induce self‐selection among landholders in Malawi,
leading to improved project success for tree planting. We find that the lending process is a
mechanism that generates positive selection so farmers who benefit the most from relaxing
capital constraints are more likely to choose to borrow.

We find that the returns to capital in cultivation are heterogeneous and that higher marginal‐
return farmers self‐select into borrowing more so than low marginal‐return farmers. This has
important implications for models of credit markets. In particular, our results provide rigorous
empirical evidence for optimal selection into contracts, which is embedded in models like Evans
and Jovanovic (1989), Buera (2009) and Moll (2013) but which has lacked clear empirical
evidence. Our results also highlight the need to incorporate heterogeneity of returns in such
models, as recognized by Banerjee et al (2015) and Kaboski and Townsend (2011).




                                                27
References

Adams, Dale W. 1971. “Agricultural Credit in Latin America: A Critical Review of External
        Funding Policy.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 53 (2): 163–72.
        doi:10.2307/1237428.
Adams, Dale W., Douglas H. Graham, and J. D. Von Pischke, eds. 1984. Undermining Rural
        Development with Cheap Credit. Westview Special Studies in Social, Political, and
        Economic Development. Boulder: Westview Press.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A Olken, and Julia Tobias. 2012. “Targeting
        the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.” The American Economic
        Review 102 (4): 1206–40.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Olken, Benjamin, Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew
        Wai_Poi. 2013. “Self‐Targeting: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.”
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Microcredit Impacts: Evidence
        from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
        Banco.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (1): 151–82.
        doi:10.1257/app.20130537.
Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch. 2010. The Economics of Microfinance.
        2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ashraf, Nava, James Berry, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2010. “Can Higher Prices Stimulate Product
        Use? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Zambia.” American Economic Review 100 (5):
        2383–2413. doi:10.1257/aer.100.5.2383.
Attanasio, Orazio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph De Haas, Emla Fitzsimons, and Heike Harmgart. 2015.
        “The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint‐Liability Lending in Mongolia.”
        American        Economic    Journal:    Applied     Economics     7      (1):   90–122.
        doi:10.1257/app.20130489.
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph De Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2015. “The Impacts of
        Microcredit: Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 7 (1): 183–203. doi:10.1257/app.20130272.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Emily Breza, Esther Duflo, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015. “Do Credit Constraints
        Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeneity in the Returns to Microfinance.” Working Paper.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2012. “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit
        Constraints Using a Directed Lending Program.” M.I.T. Working Paper.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2015. “The Miracle of
        Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 7 (1): 22–53. doi:10.1257/app.20130533.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2015. “Six Randomized Evaluations of
        Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps.” American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics 7 (1): 1–21. doi:10.1257/app.20140287.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2013. “Profitability of
        Fertilizer: Experimental Evidence from Female Rice Farmers in Mali.” American
        Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, May.

                                              28
Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie. 2009. “In Pursuit of Balance: Randomization in Practice in
        Development Field Experiments.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (4):
        200–232.
Buera, Francisco J. 2009. “A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Constraints:
        Theory and Evidence.” Annals of Finance 5 (3‐4): 443–64.
Chassang, Sylvain, Gerard Padre I Miquel, and Erik Snowberg. 2012. “Selective Trials: A
        Principal‐Agent Approach to Randomized Controlled Experiments.” American Economic
        Review 102 (4): 1279–1309. doi:10.1257/aer.102.4.1279.
Cohen, Jessica, and Pascaline Dupas. 2010. “Free Distribution or Cost‐Sharing? Evidence from a
        Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment *.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1):
        1–45. doi:10.1162/qjec.2010.125.1.1.
Crépon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. 2015. “Estimating the
        Impact of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized
        Experiment in Morocco.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (1): 123–50.
        doi:10.1257/app.20130535.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
        Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        123 (4): 1329–72.
De Quidt, Jonathan, Thiemo Fetzer, and Maitreesh Ghatak. 2012. “Group Lending Without Joint
        Liability.” London School of Economics Working Paper.
Druilhe, Z., and J. Barreiro‐Huré. 2012. “Fertilizer Subsidies in Sub‐Saharan Africa.” FAO ESA
        Working Paper No 12‐04.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer, and Jonathan Robinson. 2011. “Nudging Farmers to Use
        Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review
        101 (6): 2350–90. doi:10.1257/aer.101.6.2350.
Dupas, Pascaline. 2013. “Short‐Run Subsidies and Long‐Run Adoption of New Health Products:
        Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” Econometrica forthcoming.
Eisenhauer, Philipp, James J. Heckman, and Edward Vytlacil. 2015. “The Generalized Roy Model
        and the Cost‐Benefit Analysis of Social Programs.” Journal of Political Economy 123 (2):
        413–43. doi:10.1086/679498.
Evans, David S, and Boyan Jovanovic. 1989. “An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice
        under Liquidity Constraints.” The Journal of Political Economy 97 (4): 808.
Field, Erica, Rohini Pande, John Papp, and Natalia Rigol. 2013. “Does the Classic Microfinance
        Model Discourage Entrepreneurship Among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from
        India.” American Economic Review 103 (6): 2196–2226. doi:10.1257/aer.103.6.2196.
Giné, Xavier, and Dean S. Karlan. 2014. “Group versus Individual Liability: Short and Long Term
        Evidence from Philippine Microcredit Lending Groups.” Journal of Development
        Economics 107 (March): 65–83. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2013.11.003.
Heckman, James J. 2010. “Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation
        Approaches to Evaluating Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (2): 356–98.
        doi:10.1257/jel.48.2.356.


                                              29
Heckman, James J., and Edward Vytlacil. 2005. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and
        Econometric Policy Evaluation1.” Econometrica 73 (3): 669–738. doi:10.1111/j.1468‐
        0262.2005.00594.x.
Jack, B Kelsey. 2013. “Private Information and the Allocation of Land Use Subsidies in Malawi.”
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3): 113–35.
Kaboski, Joseph P., and Robert M. Townsend. 2011. “A Structural Evaluation of a Large‐Scale
        Quasi‐Experimental Microfinance Initiative.” Econometrica 79 (5): 1357–1406.
        doi:10.3982/ECTA7079.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Morduch. 2009. “Access to Finance.” In Handbook of Development
        Economics, edited by Dani Rodrick and M. R. Rosenzweig. Vol. 5. Elsevier.
Karlan, Dean, Isaac Osei‐Akoto, Robert Darko Osei, and Christopher R. Udry. 2013. “Agricultural
        Decisions after Relaxing Credit and Risk Constraints.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        Forthcoming. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2169548.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2011. “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using
        Randomized Credit Scoring for Impact Evaluation.” Science 332 (6035): 1278–84.
        doi:10.1126/science.1200138.
Kazianga, Harounan, and Christopher Udry. 2006. “Consumption Smoothing? Livestock,
        Insurance and Drought in Rural Burkina Faso.” Journal of Development Economics 79 (2):
        413–46. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2006.01.011.
Kremer, Michael, and Edward A Miguel. 2004. “The Illusion of Sustainability.” Center for
        International and Development Economics Research Paper C05‐141.
Moll, Benjamin. Forthcoming. “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self‐Financing
        Undo Capital Misallocation?” American Economic Review
Suri, Tavneet. 2011. “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption.”
        Econometrica 79 (1): 159–209. doi:10.3982/ECTA7749.
Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. 2015. “The Impacts of Microcredit:
        Evidence from Ethiopia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (1): 54–89.
        doi:10.1257/app.20130475.
Tarozzi, A., Mahajan, A., Blackburn, B., Kopf, D., Krishnan, L., & Yoong, J. 2013. “Micro‐Loans,
        Bednets and Malaria: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial.” American
        Economic Review Forthcoming.




                                              30
             Table 1: Comparison of baseline characteristics of clients vs. non-clients in loan treatment villages
                                                                                                             Difference
                                                                                       Did Not
                                                                      Tookup                         (from regression with
                                                                                        Takeup
                                                                                                      village fixed effects)
                                                                         (1)               (2)               (3)
A. Agriculture, Livestock & Business
   Household
     Land size (ha)                                                      2.64             2.21              0.59       ***
                                                                        (2.71)           (2.64)            (0.13)
     Total input expenses                                              205.82           151.87             46.37       ***
                                                                      (300.42)         (285.75)           (14.22)
     Value of output                                                   709.04           596.10            132.60       ***
                                                                      (752.17)         (827.66)           (39.79)
     Net revenue                                                       503.22           444.23             86.23       ***
                                                                      (555.12)         (642.11)           (30.84)
     Total value of livestock                                         1871.22          1294.65            504.65       ***
                                                                     (3037.90)        (2549.92)          (135.22)
B. Household Demographics
     Nb of people in small HH                                            8.66              7.29              1.63      ***
                                                                        (3.67)           (3.51)            (0.18)
C. Primary Female Respondent
     Age                                                                36.58            34.92               2.46      ***
                                                                       (10.29)          (11.68)            (0.58)
     Married (0/1)                                                       0.98              0.92              0.07      ***
                                                                        (0.13)           (0.27)            (0.01)
     Not first wife (0/1)                                                0.33              0.19              0.13      ***
                                                                        (0.47)           (0.39)            (0.02)
     Number of children                                                  4.86              4.34              0.70      ***
                                                                        (2.34)           (2.40)            (0.12)
     Risk aversion: safe lottery                                         0.46              0.50             -0.03
                                                                        (0.50)           (0.50)            (0.02)
     Index of intra-household decision making power                      0.08             -0.03              0.14      ***
                                                                        (0.97)           (1.05)            (0.05)
     Index of community action                                           0.28             -0.03              0.26      ***
                                                                        (1.03)           (0.99)            (0.05)
     Social integration index                                            0.23             -0.09              0.18      ***
                                                                        (1.04)           (0.98)            (0.05)
D. Consumption
     Value of food consumed per adult equiv (past 7 days)                3.93              3.83              0.40      *
                                                                        (4.69)           (4.82)            (0.24)
     Non-food expenses by HH (past 30 days)                             48.09            39.77             10.04       ***
                                                                       (45.38)          (38.44)            (2.03)
Notes
1 The household decision-making index includes questions on how much influence she has on decisions in the
  following domains: food for the household, children’s schooling expenses, their own health, her own travel within
  the village, and economic activities such as fertilizer purchases and raw materials for small business activities. The
  community action index includes questions on: how frequently she speaks with different village leaders, and
  different types of participation in village meetings and activities. The social capital index includes questions about 7
  other randomly selected community members from our sample and whether the respondent knows the person, are
  in the same organization, would engage in informal risk sharing and transfers with the person, and topics of their
  discussions (if any). All three of these variables are indices, normalized by the no-grant households in loan-
  unavailable villages.
2 Clients are defined by households who took out a loan in the 2010 agricultural season.
                                                                                                          Table 2: Agriculture
                                                                Land                                                                                    Other
                                                                                  Family labor              Hired labor          Fertilizer                              Total input         Value                Net
                                                              cultivated                                                                              chemicals
                                                                                    (days)                    (days)             expenses                                 expenses           output             Revenue
                                                                 (ha)                                                                                 expenses
                                                                  (1)                   (2)                     (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)               (7)                 (8)
Panel A. Grant recipients, Size of grant: $140
  Grant * year 1                                                 0.174      ***         6.2                     2.7       ***     11.61       ***       9.06      ***       28.02      ***    67.03     ***       40.33     ***
                                                               (0.065)                 (4.3)                   (0.8)              (4.32)               (2.19)               (8.23)           (19.08)             (15.36)
   Grant * loan village * year 1                                -0.147                  -8.0                    1.4                -9.19               -5.89      *         -8.30             -46.78    *         -43.60    *
                                                               (0.094)                 (6.5)                   (1.5)              (6.45)               (3.01)              (12.14)           (28.17)             (22.22)
   Grant * year 2                                                0.071                  -5.3                    1.1                -3.16                0.85                 1.94             49.73     **        46.22     ***
                                                               (0.077)                 (4.0)                   (0.8)              (6.03)               (2.77)              (10.32)           (22.34)             (16.90)
   Grant * loan village * year 2                                 0.089                 11.0       *             1.6               12.42                 8.49      **        30.19      *       -6.60              -33.27
                                                               (0.111)                 (6.1)                   (1.2)              (9.98)               (4.26)              (17.21)           (32.17)             (23.16)

   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 1)                    0.688                 0.707                    0.001              0.615                 0.125               0.029            0.330               0.839
   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 2)                    0.047                 0.218                    0.003              0.245                 0.004               0.021            0.064               0.414
   Per $100 impact for loan takers, year 1                      0.520         *       25.94                    -1.778              33.00          *    22.29       ***      42.33            173.57      **      145.96     **
                                                               (0.286)               (19.60)                  (4.257)             (19.53)              (9.30)              (36.86)           (85.50)             (67.75)
  N                                                             10643                 10642                    10640               10639               10640                10641             10639               10533
  Mean of control (year 1)                                      2.066                134.16                    17.03               71.52               46.41               186.83            501.91              316.46
  SD (year 1)                                                   2.221                128.02                    23.24              144.78               65.09               251.75            595.30              428.12
Panel B. Loan ITT, Average loan size: $113
  Loan village - year 1                                          0.082                  8.61      *            -0.88               9.23       *          4.14               19.87      **     34.49     *         18.97
                                                               (0.057)                (4.82)                  (1.01)              (4.79)               (2.63)               (8.67)           (19.52)             (16.08)
   Loan Village - year 2                                        -0.002                 -1.16                   -1.08               1.40                 -0.54                6.48             17.18               14.53
                                                               (0.070)                (4.72)                  (1.06)              (6.03)               (3.08)              (11.40)           (23.51)             (16.04)

   Per $100 impact, TOT, year 1                                 0.347                 36.29           *        -3.702              38.90          *     17.45               83.73      **    145.36         *     79.94
                                                               (0.238)               (20.32)                  (4.244)             (20.19)              (11.08)             (36.53)           (82.27)             (67.74)
   Diff in per $100 impact: Grants - Loans                      0.174                 -10.35                    1.92               -5.91                 4.84               -41.40            28.21               66.02
   SE from Bootstrap on Difference                             (0.315)               (18.86)                   (4.15)             (21.76)              (10.20)             (36.71)           (85.81)             (66.65)
   N                                                            8768                   8770                     8769               8766                 8766                 8768             8767                8687
   Mean of control (year 1)                                     2.066                134.16                    17.07               71.52                46.57              186.24            500.49              315.44
   SD (year 1)                                                  2.221                128.02                    23.35              144.78                65.50              250.17            591.41              425.38
Notes
1 Rows showing Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 1) shows the p value of the test of whether the total effect of grants in loan villages is statistically different from zero.
2 Total input expenses includes fertilizer, manure, herbicide, insecticide, farming equipment and hired labor but excludes the value of family labor. Net revenue is revenue net of most, but not all, expenses. Specifically,
  the formula includes value of harvest (whether sold, stored or consumed) minus fertilizer, manure, herbicide, insecticide, hired labor, cart and traction animal expenses (rental or maintenance), and seed expenses
  (although valuing last year’s seeds at zero). Thus this does not substract value of own labor, value of family (i.e., any unpaid) labor, and the implicit rental value of land used.

3 Additional controls include in Panel A include: the baseline value of the dependent variable, village fixed effects, round x village type (loan-village vs no-loan-village) fixed effects, the baseline value of the dependent
  variable interacted with round x village type effects, an indicator for whether the baseline value is missing, an indicator for the HH being administered the input survey in 2011, and stratification controls (whether the
  household was part of an extended family; was polygamous; an index of the household’s agricultural assets and other assets; per capita food consumption; and for the primary female respondent her baseline: land size,
  fertilizer use, and whether she had access to a plough). Village-level stratification controls are not included since there are village fixed effects.
4 Additional controls in Panel B include: cercle fixed effects; the baseline value of the dependent variable, along with a dummy when missing, interacted with year of survey indicators; and village-level stratification
  controls: population size, distance to nearest road, distance to nearest paved road, whether the community is all bambara (dominant ethnic group) distance to the nearest market, percentage of households with a plough,
  percentage of women with access to plough in village, percentage of women in village using fertilizer and the fraction of children enrolled in school. The specification uses probability weights to reflect sampling design.
  All grant-recipients households are removed from the analysis in both loan and no-loan villages.
5 Standard errors are in paranetheses and clustered at the village level in all specifications.
6 Mean of control in Panel A is the mean of the dependent variable in the column heading among households that received no grants in no-loan villages. In panel B, it is households in no-loan villages.
7 In Panel A, the per dollar return for loan takers is calculated as: (Grant * Yr1-.79*(Grant * Yr1+Grant * loan village * Yr1))/(.21*140) where .21 is the loan take up rate and 140 is the value of the grant. In Panel B, the
  per dollar return, TOT, year 1 is analogously: Loan village - year 1 / (.21*113) since the average value of the loan was $113. The standard error on the difference in per dollar impact is the result of a bootstrap of 1000
  draws comparing the per dollar impact of the grant vs the loan using re-sampling of households. Probably weights were calculated in each bootstrap sample and used in the estimate of the loan impact.
                                                                                                  Table 3: Other Outcomes
                                                                                                              Food
                                                                                                                                  Monthly          HH has any           Primary is
                                                  Own any             Total value         HH has a         consumption                                                                       Educ     Medical
                                                                                                                                  non-food          financial           member of
                                                  livestock           of livestock        business          EQ (past 7                                                                     expenses   expenses
                                                                                                                                    exp              savings             ROSCA
                                                                                                              days)
                                                      (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                    (5)               (6)                 (7)              (8)        (9)
Panel A. Grant recipients vs control
  Grant * year 1                                     0.114     ***       163.03      **     0.038    **          0.38       ***       2.69    **       0.024                0.017             2.22      -2.53
                                                   (0.014)              (70.32)           (0.015)              (0.11)               (1.37)            (0.016)             (0.015)           (3.04)     (1.85)
   Grant * loan village * year 1                    -0.039     *         -27.64            -0.003               -0.12                 2.19             0.033               -0.004            -0.17       4.90    *
                                                   (0.022)             (101.72)           (0.023)              (0.17)               (2.01)            (0.028)             (0.023)           (5.36)     (2.51)
   Grant * year 2                                    0.092     ***       180.44      *      0.030    **          0.05                 3.72    *        0.035       *        0.039     **      0.42      -0.76
                                                   (0.015)             (101.17)           (0.013)              (0.17)               (2.09)            (0.019)             (0.019)           (3.64)     (1.80)
   Grant * loan village * year 2                     0.006              -159.14            -0.023                0.31                -1.09             0.039               -0.011             1.89       1.78
                                                   (0.023)             (136.89)           (0.020)              (0.24)               (2.76)            (0.026)             (0.025)           (5.14)     (2.75)


   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year           0.000                0.067             0.034               0.043                0.001              0.014               0.451            0.643      0.163
   1)
   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year           0.000                0.818             0.667               0.036                0.144              0.000               0.105            0.525      0.625
   2)
   Per $100 impact for loan takers, year 1          0.186       ***      190.7             0.035               0.596                -3.96             -0.073               0.023            2.04       -14.97        *
                                                   (0.066)              (310.2)           (0.068)             (0.515)               (6.10)            (0.083)             (0.069)          (15.75)     (7.76)
  N                                                 10462                10358             10464               10367                10063              10347               10347            7194       10370
  Mean of control (year 1)                          0.777                 1213             0.833                3.17                43.83              0.635               0.263            69.87       33.66
  SD (year 1)                                       0.417                 2049             0.373                3.17                37.31              0.482               0.440            81.20       45.92
Panel B. Loan villages vs control
  Loan village - year 1                              0.009               112.9             -0.008               0.10                 -0.19             0.016               -0.012            2.70       -5.03    ***
                                                   (0.014)               (74.9)           (0.023)              (0.13)               (2.10)            (0.024)             (0.024)           (4.01)     (1.64)
   Loan Village - year 2                            -0.011               68.93              0.002               0.07                 -0.60             0.003               -0.019            1.86       -1.36
                                                   (0.017)              (97.64)           (0.015)              (0.17)               (2.50)            (0.027)             (0.026)           (3.44)     (1.81)
   Per $100 impact, TOT, year 1                     0.036                475.9             -0.033              0.433                  -0.8             0.065              -0.052            11.37     -21.18     ***
                                                   (0.061)              (315.7)           (0.099)             (0.535)                (8.8)            (0.101)             (0.100)          (16.88)    (6.899)

   Diff in per dollar impact                        0.150       ***     -285.1             0.068               0.163                 -3.2             -0.138               0.075            -9.33       6.22
   SE from Bootstrap on difference                 (0.059)              (377.7)           (0.048)             (0.528)               (6.4)             (0.079)             (0.692)          (15.56)     (7.18)
   N                                                8634                 8558              8634                8564                 8294               8533                8533             6021        8550
   Mean of control (year 1)                         0.777                1219              0.833                3.17                43.99              0.635               0.263            69.87      33.46
   SD (year 1)                                      0.417                2071              0.373                3.17                37.67              0.482               0.440            81.20      45.44

Notes
1 Rows showing Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 1) shows the p value of the test of whether the total effect of grants in loan villages is statistically different from zero.
2 See the notes of Table 2 for details on specifications.
                                        Table 4: Are Returns Predicted by Baseline Characteristics?
                                                                                                          Net Revenue
                                                                                           (1)        (2)          (3)                (4)
    Grant * Year 1                                                                       40.33 *** 66.89 *       70.31        *     76.55    *
                                                                                        (15.36)    (39.80)      (40.94)            (42.01)
    Grant * Loan village * Year 1                                                        -43.60 *   -38.75 *     -38.66       *     -40.77   *
                                                                                        (22.22)    (21.97)      (21.89)            (21.98)
    Grant * Year 2                                                                       46.22 *** 42.88         45.37              28.58
                                                                                        (16.90)    (41.58)      (41.76)            (45.69)
    Grant * Loan village * Year 2                                                        -33.27     -31.97       -32.75             -33.29
                                                                                        (23.16)    (23.31)      (23.39)            (23.92)
    Grant * Baseline social index * Year 1                                                                        -9.06              -8.68
                                                                                                                (12.15)            (12.11)
    Grant * Baseline social index * Year 2                                                                        5.50               6.27
                                                                                                                (13.30)            (13.36)
    Grant * Baseline net revenue * Year 1                                                            0.03         0.03               0.03
                                                                                                    (0.05)       (0.05)             (0.05)
    Grant * Baseline net revenue * Year 2                                                            -0.04        -0.04              -0.04
                                                                                                    (0.03)       (0.03)             (0.03)
    Grant * Baseline land * Year 1                                                                  -16.76 *     -16.66       *     -16.74   *
                                                                                                    (9.89)       (9.86)             (9.87)
    Grant * Baseline land * Year 2                                                                   3.16         3.52               3.53
                                                                                                    (9.81)       (9.81)             (9.76)
    Grant * Large HH at baseline* Year 1                                                            78.51 *      77.41        *     76.58    *
                                                                                                   (43.65)      (43.41)            (43.47)
    Grant * Large HH at baseline * Year 2                                                           47.02        45.94              43.59
                                                                                                   (43.54)      (43.20)            (43.10)
    Grant * Risk averse at baseline* Year 1                                                                                          -9.59
                                                                                                                                   (19.89)
    Grant * Risk averse at baseline * Year 2                                                                                        31.80
                                                                                                                                   (26.76)

    Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (Year 1)                                           0.839          0.471         0.439          0.397
    Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (Year 2)                                           0.414          0.796         0.765          0.914
    N                                                                                   10533          10531         10528          10506
    Additional HH structure controls interacted with grant & year                         No                Yes       Yes            Yes
    HH decision-making/community action interacted with grant & year                      No                No        Yes            Yes


    Mean of Baseline profits                                                                           396.14
    SD of Baseline profits                                                                             481.35
    Mean of Baseline land                                                                                   2.11
    SD of Baseline land                                                                                     2.53
Notes
1 Rows showing Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (Year 1) shows the p value of the test of whether the total effect of grants in loan villages is
  statistically different from zero.
2   See the notes 3 and 5 of Table 2 for details on specification.
3   Risk averse is an indicator for the household choosing the safe lottery, which about half the sample seleted. Large household is 6 or more
    adults in the household.
4   Other household structure controls include: an indicator for the presence of an extended family and the number of children in the household.
5   The value of livestock interacted with grant receipt in year 1 and 2 is also included in columns 2-4.
                                                     Table 5: Peer and Lender Selection
                                                                                                    Net Revenue
                                                                              (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)
   Grant * Year 1                                                           19.88      32.04 *                28.54 *         16.33
                                                                           (22.78)    (17.09)                (17.09)         (19.61)
   Grant * Loan village * Year 1                                            25.16      -20.34                  9.28           18.58
                                                                           (28.91)    (24.37)                (26.21)         (30.27)
   Grant * Year 2                                                           48.72 *** 44.61 ***               33.33 *         22.26
                                                                           (17.09)    (17.08)                (18.54)         (20.43)
   Grant * Loan village * Year 2                                            -14.17     -31.05                 -0.20            5.79
                                                                           (24.40)    (24.71)                (25.48)         (30.08)
   Grant * Baseline net revenue * Year 1                                     0.05
                                                                            (0.06)
   Grant * Baseline net revenue * Loan village * Year 1                      -0.17 **
                                                                            (0.07)
   Grant * Baseline livestock * Year 1                                                  0.006
                                                                                      (0.008)
   Grant * Baseline livestock * Loan village * Year 1                                  -0.017
                                                                                      (0.013)
   Grant * Baseline food consumption * Year 1                                                                 3.41
                                                                                                             (4.49)
   Grant * Baseline food consumption * Loan village * Year 1                                                 -14.53 **
                                                                                                             (6.15)
   Grant * Baseline non-food expenditure * Year 1                                                                              0.58
                                                                                                                              (0.39)
   Grant * Baseline non-food exp * Loan village * Year 1                                                                       -1.53 **
                                                                                                                              (0.60)

   N                                                                       10533            10531            10497            10207
   Mean of Baseline Variable                                               396.14          1424.46            3.54            41.10
   SD of Baseline Variable                                                 481.35          2795.29            4.59            41.29
Notes
1 Rows showing Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (Year 1) shows the p value of the test of whether the total effect of grants in loan
  villages is statistically different from zero.

2 See the notes of Table 2 for details on specification.
                            Figure 1: Experimental Design


                                     198 Villages
                                       N = 6,807


                                Randomization


        88 Villages                                              110 Villages
        Offered loans                                            No loans offered
         N = 2,818                                                 N = 3,989

                                                                Randomization


Women who           Women who do                            Grants to female        No grant (Control)
 take loan           not take loan                              N = 804                 N = 2,397
  N = 597             N = 2,221

                    Randomization



            No grant        Grants to female
            N = 1,454          N = 767
                                                                              Figure 2: Timeline of the study


                                                  Ag Season 2010                                                  Ag Season 2011



                 Jan                            July                            Jan                            July                            Jan                             July
                 2010                           2010                            2011                           2011                            2012                            2012


    Interven-                       Loan campaign #1                                                 Loan campaign #2
      tions
     roll-out
                                  Grants distribution




     Surveys Census + Baseline                        Input survey                        Follow up                                                        Endline




Notes
1 Grant distribution, across all villages, spans a longer time than loan distribution since grants distribution started in no-loan villages, followed by loan disbursement in loan villages, then
   grants in loan and some no-loan villages.
     Figure 3: Baseline characteristics of borrwers vs. non borrowers in loan treatment villages

                    Land Size                                           Input Expenses                                          Agricultural Output
1




                                                           1




                                                                                                                      1
.8




                                                                                                                      .8
                                                           .8
.6




                                                                                                                      .6
                                                           .6
.4




                                                                                                                      .4
                                                           .4
.2




                                                                                                                      .2
                                                           .2
0




                                                                                                                      0
     0          2          4          6          8              0        200        400        600        800              0        500      1000       1500       2000
               Non Borrower               Borrower                        Non Borrower              Borrower                         Non Borrower              Borrower
     p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0        p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0        p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0



               Net Revenue                                              Livestock Value
1




                                                           1
.8




                                                           .8
.6




                                                           .6
.4




                                                           .4
.2




                                                           .2
0




     0           500           1000          1500               0       2000       4000       6000       8000
               Non Borrower               Borrower                        Non Borrower              Borrower
     p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0        p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0
Figure 4: Selection into borrowing
                                                                       Figure 5: CDF of Net Revenue

                    CDF of Net Revenue in No-loan villages                                                   CDF of Net Revenue in Loan villages




                                                                                      1
1




                                                                                      .8
.8




                                                                                      .6
.6




                                                                                      .4
.4




                                                                                      .2
.2




     0                               500                      1000             1500        0                               500                   1000     1500

                                             Control          Grants                                                               Control       Grants
     p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= .008                                p-value of KSM test of equality of distributions= 0
                                                                       Appendix Table 1: Balance check
                                            Loan vs no-loan villages               Grants vs no-grants in no-loan villages       Grants vs no-grants in loan villages
                                 Mean of      Difference                          Mean of    Difference                       Mean of    Difference
                                 control      between T    p-value      N         control    between T     p-value      N     control    between T    p-value       N
                                  group         and C                              group       and C                           group       and C
Household size                     7.41          0.03        0.76      6,828        7.43        -0.06       0.62      3,151     7.37        -0.05       0.75      2,415
Land                               1.92          0.22        0.03      6,856        1.92        0.04        0.68      3,174     2.09        -0.00       0.96      2,422
Days of family labor              139.41        -0.13        0.98      6,858       139.61       2.91        0.60      3,165    133.69       4.94        0.29      2,426
Days of hired labor                 11           1.02        0.32      6,856         10         0.08        0.91      3,170      11         -0.56       0.45      2,419
Input expenses                    126.95        17.68        0.13      6,856       127.49       9.80        0.25      3,172    138.55       0.55        0.95      2,422
Agricultural output               523.02        36.67        0.24      6,856       523.74       5.07        0.84      3,176    537.61      11.06        0.66      2,415
Livestock value                  1,520.29      -120.52       0.28      6,924      1,515.83      2.63        0.98      3,199   1,389.71     -36.17       0.79      2,448
Has a Business                     0.54          0.01        0.67      6,924        0.53        0.02        0.35      3,200     0.54        0.01        0.61      2,447
Monthly non-food expenses         39.48          0.18        0.92      6,568       39.75        -0.83       0.52      3,041    38.82        0.58        0.68      2,322
Male age                          46.57          0.19        0.66      6,427       46.67        -0.35       0.50      2,947    45.93        0.53        0.31      2,272
Male is illiterate                 0.77         -0.01        0.45      6,562        0.78        -0.00       0.82      3,015     0.77        0.01        0.58      2,321

F- test for joint significance                                         0.26                                           0.91                                         0.67
                                                                               Appendix Table 2: Attrition
                                           Loan vs no-loan villages                       Grants vs no-grants in no-loan villages         Grants vs no-grants in loan villages

                                        Year 1                      Year 2                      Year 1                 Year 2                 Year 1                     Year 2

                                (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)           (11)         (12)
Treatment                     0.0002        -0.0073       0.0075       0.0058         0.0062        0.0166     -0.0004     0.0123     -0.0001     0.0056        -0.0036      -0.0020
                             (0.0032)      (0.0117)      (0.0056)     (0.0168)       (0.0051)      (0.0198)   (0.0046)    (0.0220)   (0.0043)    (0.0213)       (0.0059)    (0.0234)
Interaction of treatment and:                                          -0.0010                                             -0.0001                                           0.0022
    Household size                          -0.0002                   (0.0010)                      -0.0002               (0.0013)                -0.0014                   (0.0022)
                                           (0.0009)                    -0.0021                     (0.0019)                0.0056                (0.0016)                    0.0015
   Land                                     0.0003                    (0.0035)                      0.0009                (0.0057)                0.0015                    (0.0045)
                                           (0.0026)                    -0.0005                     (0.0046)                -0.0008               (0.0043)                    -0.0016 *
   Days of family labor†                    0.0003                    (0.0005)                      -0.0008               (0.0005)                -0.0012                   (0.0008)
                                           (0.0004)                    -0.0024                     (0.0006)                0.0050                (0.0009)                    -0.0018
                   *
   Input expenses                           0.0007                    (0.0033)                      0.0029                (0.0042)                0.0027                    (0.0064)
                                           (0.0027)                    0.0041 *                    (0.0041)                -0.0017               (0.0065)                    -0.0018
   Ag Output*                               0.0003                    (0.0022)                      -0.0007               (0.0016)                -0.0008                   (0.0028)
                                           (0.0010)                    -0.0002                     (0.0016)                -0.0001               (0.0021)                    -0.0001
                       *
   Livestock value                          -0.0001                   (0.0002)                      0.0001                (0.0002)                -0.0001                   (0.0003)
                                           (0.0001)                    0.0227 ***                  (0.0002)                -0.0009               (0.0002)                    0.0238 *
   Has a small business                     0.0133 ***                (0.0066)                      0.0080                (0.0099)                0.0129                    (0.0125)
                                           (0.0050)                    -0.0001                     (0.0119)                0.0000                (0.0106)                    0.0001
                                                                      (0.0001)                                            (0.0001)                                          (0.0002)
   Monthly non-food exp                     -0.0002 *                                               -0.0001                                       0.0003
                                           (0.0001)                    -0.0068                     (0.0001)                -0.0058               (0.0002)                    -0.0054
   Household head is
                                                                      (0.0109)                                            (0.0165)                          *               (0.0205)
   illiterate                               0.0014                                                  0.0021                                        -0.0031
                                           (0.0095)                                                (0.0151)                                      (0.0195)

Number of observations         6926         6022          6926          6022          3201           2779      3201         2779      2448         2118          2448         2118
Mean attrition control         0.013                      0.013                       0.012                    0.012                  0.015                      0.015
F- test for joint
significance of coefficients
of treatment and
interaction terms                           0.08                        0.16                         0.60                   0.62                   0.20                       0.17
Notes
* Variables divided by 100 for ease of exposition.
† Variable divided by 10 for ease of exposition.
                                     Appendix Table 3: Timing robustness (No-loan villages)
                                               Index                                                Land Size
                              (1)               (2)              (3)                (4)              (5)              (6)
  Date (linear)            0.00094           0.00290                               0.002            0.005
                           (0.004)            (0.008)                             (0.011)          (0.023)
  Date squared                               -0.00007                                             -0.00011
                                              (0.000)                                              (0.001)
  1 if before June 1st                                          -0.045                                               -0.176
                                                               (0.140)                                              (0.407)
  Revisit to Village        -0.022            -0.007            -0.034             0.124            0.147            0.051
                           (0.106)           (0.119)           (0.121)            (0.307)          (0.344)          (0.351)
  Observations               787               787               787                774              774              774
  Fixed effects              None              None              None              None             None              None
Notes
1 Index includes: land area, number of family labor days, number of hired labor days, an indicator for whether fertilizer was
  used, value of fertilizer expenses, value of other chemical expenses, value of al input expenses, value of harvest, and
  profits.
2 Sample includes only grant recipients in no-loan villages.
                                                                    Appendix Table 4: Spillovers in No-loan Villages
                                            Land                                                                 Other
                                                              Family       Hired labor        Fertilizer                                Total input          Value             Net
                                         cultivated                                                           chemicals
                                                           labor (days)       (days)          expenses                                   expenses            output          Revenue
                                            (ha)                                                               expenses
                                             (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)              (5)                      (6)                (7)               (8)
  Intervention (No-loan) village           -0.171              10.6             4.0     ***     -0.19             -5.82                    -9.61             -18.79            -15.61
                                          (0.148)              (7.9)           (1.4)           (6.88)            (4.48)                   (16.04)           (45.05)           (29.65)

  N                                         3654               3650               3652               3653               3648               3654               3652             3619

  Mean of excluded group                     2.1              135.4               16.9               71.5               46.4               186.8             504.9             325.4
  SD of excluded group                       2.3              130.8               23.0               144.8              65.1               251.7             603.5             447.1

Notes
1 The sample includes households in (i) no-intervention villages and (ii) households in no-loan villages who did not receive a grant (Intervention villages). The analysis uses only data
  from follow up year 1.
2 The excluded group are households in no-intervention villages.
3 Additional controls include: cercle fixed effects; the baseline value of the dependent variable, along with a dummy when missing, interacted with whether the No-intervention village
  dummy; and village-level stratification controls: population size, distance to nearest road, distance to nearest paved road, whether the community is all bambara (dominant ethnic group)
  distance to the nearest market, percentage of households with a plough, percentage of women with access to plough in village, percentage of women in village using fertilizer and the
  fraction of children enrolled in school. Standard errors are clustered at the village level.
4 Also included are the following individual controls: the number of adult household members, the number of children in the household, the average age of adults in the household and
  the share of adults with primary school education level.
                                               Appendix Table 5: Additional Outcomes
                                                                            Intra HH
                                                        Business                                                          Social
                                                                            Decision-            Community
                                                       Profits: 12                                                        Capital
                                                                             making              Action Index
                                                        months                                                            Index
                                                                              Index
                                                           (1)                 (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Panel A. Grant recipients vs control
  Grant - year 1                                         20.54               -0.0003                 0.068                 0.031
                                                        (13.74)              (0.042)                (0.043)               (0.039)
   Grant * loan village - year 1                         -25.54               0.076                  0.018                 0.076
                                                        (17.41)              (0.058)                (0.061)               (0.051)
   Grant - year 2                                        41.49       **       0.059                  0.021                 0.090       ***
                                                        (18.50)              (0.039)                (0.045)               (0.034)
   Grant * loan village - year 2                         -11.14               0.007                  0.106                 0.019
                                                        (27.11)              (0.058)                (0.064)               (0.050)

   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 1)             0.640                0.056                 0.045                  0.001
   Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 2)             0.127                0.122                 0.006                  0.004
   N                                                     10359                9599                   9639                   9476
   Mean of control (year 1)                               228                 0.035                 -0.024                 -0.065
   SD (year 1)                                            362                 0.958                 0.983                  0.931
Panel B. Loan villages vs control
  Loan village - year 1                                   2.06                0.000                  0.052                 -0.001
                                                        (19.41)              (0.043)                (0.052)               (0.048)
   Loan Village - year 2                                  9.75                0.038                  0.065                 0.043
                                                        (26.71)              (0.054)                (0.048)               (0.043)
   N                                                     8552                 7900                    7934                  7808
   Mean of control (year 1)                               228                 0.035                  -0.024                -0.063
   SD (year 1)                                            362                 0.958                  0.983                 0.933

Notes
1 Rows showing Grant + Grant * loan village = 0 (year 1) shows the p value of the test of whether the total effect of grants in loan
  villages is statistically different from zero.
2 See the notes of Table 2 for details on specification.
