NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAIR WEATHER AVOIDANCE:
UNPACKING COSTS AND BENEFITS IN REPLICATION OF 'AVOIDING THE ASK'
Hannah Trachtman
Andrew Steinkruger
Mackenzie Wood
Adam Wooster
James Andreoni
James J. Murphy
Justin M. Rao
Working Paper 20385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20385
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

Andreoni thanks the National Science Foundation, and the Science of Philanthropy Initiative for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20385.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Hannah Trachtman, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James Andreoni,
James J. Murphy, and Justin M. Rao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Fair Weather Avoidance: Unpacking Costs and Benefits in Replication of 'Avoiding the Ask'
Hannah Trachtman, Andrew Steinkruger, Mackenzie Wood, Adam Wooster, James Andreoni,
James J. Murphy, and Justin M. Rao
NBER Working Paper No. 20385
August 2014
JEL No. D03,D64,H41
ABSTRACT
If being asked to give to charity stimulates an emotional response, like empathy, that makes giving
difficult to resist, a natural self-control mechanism might be to avoid being asked in the first place.
We replicate a result from a field experiment that points to the role of empathy in giving. We conduct
an experiment in a large superstore in which we solicit donations to charity and randomly allow shoppers
the opportunity to avoid solicitation by using the other door. We find the rate of avoidance by store
entrants to be 4.5 percent. However, we also find that the avoidance effect disappears in very cold
weather, suggesting that avoidance behavior is sensitive to its cost.
Hannah Trachtman
Department of Economics
Yale University
PO Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06511
htrachtm@gmail.com

James Andreoni
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
andreoni@ucsd.edu

Andrew Steinkruger
University of Alaska Anchorage

James J. Murphy
Department of Economics
University of Alaska Anchorage
3211 Providence Drive
Anchorage, AK 99058
murphy@uaa.alaska.edu

Mackenzie Wood
University of Alaska Anchorage
Adam Wooster
University of Alaska Anchorage

Justin M. Rao
Microsoft Research
641 Avenue of the Americas, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10011
justinra@microsoft.com

1

Introduction

Why do people give to charity? Research has made it clear that pure altruism cannot fully explain
many of the giving behaviors that we see, and thus it must be that people derive some positive
utility from the act of giving (Andreoni, 1989; Andreoni, 1990). In a recent study, ”Avoiding the
Ask: A Field Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving,” Andreoni, Rao, and
Trachtman (henceforth ART) explored a particular channel by which giving might affect utility:
the emotional pressure that people experience when asked to give. Psychologists suggest that a
request to donate first triggers an emotional response, such as empathy, that makes it difficult for
people to resist giving (Batson, 1991; Batson, 2011; Preston and deWaal, 2002; Andreoni and Rao,
2011). Avoiding being asked, and thereby evading the emotional response that induces giving, can
serve as an important self-control mechanism.
Several recent laboratory studies show that people do incur costs in order to avoid opportunities
to give (Dana et al., 2006; Lazear et al., 2006; Broberg et al., 2007), which appears consistent with
the psychological mechanism described above. ART run a field experiment in partnership with
the Salvation Army’s familiar Red Kettle (bell ringer) campaign. At a supermarket in Boston,
they randomly vary whether solicitors are placed at both doors–prohibiting avoidance–or at just
one door–allowing for avoidance through the other. They also vary whether solicitation is active
(verbal and with eye contact) or passive (simply ringing the bell) to uncover potential interactions
between social pressure and sorting. They find that one third of patrons avoided active solicitation
by using the other door when they had the opportunity to do so, suggesting that patrons were
using the defense mechanism of avoiding being asked.
We run a similar experiment that both replicates and expands upon this finding. We solicited
donations outside of a supermarket in Anchorage, Alaska with two entrance doors, and randomly
varied whether a solicitor was present at the door located on the right side of the parking lot.
By chance, we were also able to investigate the effect of increasing the cost of avoidance: one of
the four days in our sample had extremely cold temperatures, so taking a longer route to avoid
solicitation was presumably less comfortable. We find that on average, adding a solicitor to the
right door results in a 3.5 percentage point increase in traffic through the left door. However, this
effect depends on the cost of avoidance. When we restrict our analysis to the days with normal
temperatures, avoidance jumps up to 4.5 percent, and if we look only at the day that was extremely
cold, avoidance is negligible.

2

Experiment Design

To test the robustness of ART’s results, our experiment was designed to contrast with theirs on
several dimensions. ART used a well-known charity, posted college-age females at the supermarket
doors, solicitors asked for donations directly, and conducted the study in the eastern United States.
1

Figure 1: Pin-back button for PKD Foundation

In contrast, this study chose a relatively unfamiliar charity, the Polycystic Kidney Disease (PKD)
Foundation. Our solicitors were college-age males. Rather than asking for unspecified donations,
we sold pins, shown in Figure 1, for $1.00. Finally, our study was conducted in Anchorage, Alaska.
We conducted the experiment over four days in November, 2013. We divided each of the four
days into three one-hour time blocks: 12:00PM to 1:00PM, 1:05PM to 2:05PM, and 2:10PM to
3:10PM. Finally, we assigned each of the 12 total blocks to be control or treatment, making sure
that the treatment was distributed as evenly as possible across days and time blocks. The exact
schedule is depicted in Table 1. The layout of the supermarket and its two doors is depicted in
Figure 2.
Table 1: Experiment Schedule

Block 1: 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 p.m.
Block 2: 1:05 p.m. to 2:05 p.m.
Block 3: 2:10 p.m. to 3:10 p.m.

Saturday
11/9
Control
Treatment
Control

Thursday
11/14
Treatment
Control
Treatment

Saturday
11/16
Treatment
Control
Treatment

Wednesday
11/20
Control
Treatment
Control

In blocks assigned to control, there was no solicitation.1 In blocks assigned to treatment,
we placed a male solicitor at the right door who actively solicited sales of the PKD Foundation
pins.2 He stood by a small table that had an informative poster about the PKD Foundation and a
collection box for proceeds. In all blocks, experimenters in vehicles in the parking lot counted how
many customers entered through each of the two doors. Importantly, we only counted incoming
shoppers, and ignored outgoing shoppers.3
1
In the ART experiment, blocks assigned to control had solicitors at both doors, but there is no reason why the
distribution of traffic should differ between the two.
2
Since ART did not see avoidance for passive solicitation, we chose to focus our efforts only on active solicitation.
3
ART counted both incoming and outgoing shoppers, which could explain the difference magnitudes of reported
effects.

2

Figure 2: Supermarket Layout

3

Results

Over the four days we observed 7,276 entrances through both doors. During the first three days of
the study, temperatures were within the normal range for Anchorage (between 20 and 30 degrees
Fahrenheit). However, on the fourth day (November 20), temperatures were unseasonably cold,
with the daytime temperature of zero degrees approaching a new record for that date. The cold
weather presumably reduces the appeal of walking to the less convenient door, allowing us to test
whether the avoidance effect is sensitive to its cost. As shown in Figure 3, on the three normal
days combined, 53.8 percent of customers entered through the left entrance (without the solicitor)
in the treatment, relative to 48.8 percent in the control, which is a five percentage point avoidance
effect. On the fourth day, the extremely cold temperature had a significant impact on entrances
through the left door, yielding no discernible difference between the treatment and control (49.1
percent and 48.4 percent, respectively).
We use a probit regression to confirm these findings, and report marginal effects in Table 2.4
Column (1) shows a significant effect of the treatment on traffic through the left door (the door
without the solicitor). Column (2) shows that when we control for cold and its interaction with the
treatment, adding the solicitor to the right door increases the fraction of entrances through the left
door by 4.5 percentage points. This result is significant at the 1% level. Moreover, cold weather
dampens the effect of the treatment, reducing the fraction of entrances through the left door by
4.2 percent. This negative effect is significant at the 1% level. Thus, the extremely cold weather
essentially neutralized the effect of the treatment on avoidance.
4

A linear probability model gives almost exactly the same results.

3

Figure 3: Mean fraction of passings through left door by condition and weather. Bars give 1.96 standard
errors from identical regressions restricted to normal days and the cold day, respectively (for the cold day,
standard errors are not clustered by block since only one block received the treatment).

Table 2: Marginal Effects of Probit Regression: Left Door Choice on Treatment

VARIABLES
treatment
cold
treatXcold

(1)
.

(2)
.

0.0351***
(0.00839)

0.0454***
(0.00659)
0.00568
(0.0161)
-0.0416***
(0.0161)

Observations
7,276
7,276
Date/time fixed effects
YES
YES
Standard errors clustered by block in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

4

4

Conclusion

We conducted an experiment that was similar to Andreoni, Rao and Trachtman (2011), but which
also differed in many key respects. We solicited money for a relatively unknown charity, while they
used the Salvation Army. Our solicitors were male while theirs were female. We asked for $1 in
exchange for lapel buttons rather than an unspecified donation. We ran our study in Anchorage,
Alaska, while they ran theirs in Boston. Our results confirm the findings of Andreoni, Rao and
Trachtman that there is significant avoidance of charitable solicitation. This replication is notable
given difference in methods and setting, and the fact that this study measured only entrances
to the store. Moreover, our findings shed some light on the cost-benefit calculation that underlies
avoidance. As ART hypothesized, if giving only increases utility by resolving the feeling of empathy
experienced when asked, then there is a major benefit to avoiding feeling empathy in the first place,
and thereby avoiding the guilt (or giving) that results. Both experiments indicate that the benefit is
big enough to induce avoidance under most circumstances. But the fact that avoidance behavior is
also sensitive to its cost triggers further questions about the precise trade-offs faced by individuals,
providing important direction for future research.

5

References
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with impure altruism: Applications to charity and ricardian equivalence. Journal of Political Economy, 97:1447–58.
Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure altruism and donations to public goods: A theory of warm-glow giving.
Economic Journal, 100:464–477.
Andreoni, J. and Rao, J. M. (2011). The power of the ask: How communication affects selfishness,
empathy and altruism. Journal of Public Economics, 95:513–520.
Batson, C. (1991). The altruism question: Toward a social psychological answer. Lawrence Erlbaum
Assoc Inc.
Batson, C. (2011). Altruism in Humans. Oxford University Press.
Broberg, T., Ellingsen, T., and Johannesson, M. (2007). Is generosity involuntary? Economics
Letters, 94(1):32–37.
Dana, J., Cain, D., and Dawes, R. (2006). What you don’t know won’t hurt me: Costly (but quiet)
exit in dictator games. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 100(2):193–
201.
Lazear, E., Malmendier, U., and Weber, R. (2006). Sorting in experiments. NBER working paper,
12041.
Preston, S. D. and deWaal, F. B. M. (2002). Empathy: Its ultimate and proximate bases. Behavior
and Brain Sciences, 25:1–72.

6

