                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INTERNATIONAL OLIGOPOLY AND
                        ASYMMETRIC LABOUR
                       MARKET INSTITUTIONS




                         James A. Brander

                        Barbara 3. Spencer




                      Working Paper No. 2038




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                            October 1986




We thank an anonymous referee for very helpful comments. A version
of this paper was presented at the Trade and Industrial Organization
Workshop, held at Massey College, University of Toronto, June 1986.
Financial support from the UBC Center for International Business
Studies is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2038
                                                  October 1986




         International Oligopoly and Asymmetric Labor Market Institutions




                                    ABSTRACT




       Asymmetries in labour relations can have important effects on
  imperfectively competitive rivalries between firms.      Such asymmetries are

  particularly striking in cross-country comparisons and are therefore of

  greatest interest in international markets. Using a simple duopoly model, we

  focus on two asymmetries. First, one firm may face a noncooperative union and

  second, institutional factors may allow one firm to commit itself to

  particular labour input before its rival sets output, giving it a natural

  Stackelberg leadership role. We examine the trade policy incentives resulting

  from these labour asymmetries, focusing on profit shifting tariffs, quotas and

  subsidies.




James A. Brander
                                                Barbara Spencer
Faculty of Commerce                             Faculty of Commerce
University of British Columbia                  University of British Columbia
Vancouver, B.C.                                 Vancouver, B.C.
V6T 1Y8, CANADA                                 V6T 1Y8, CANADA
1. Introduction

    The institutional structure of labour markets varies from country to country. The contrast between

Japanese labour relations and labour relations in North America arid Vstern Europe has been a

particularly popular recent theme in the business press. The formal economics literature, hvever,

has relatively little to say about the consequences of asymmetries in labour institutions for rivalries

between firms based in different countries. This paper has two principle objectives. The first objective

is to examine the positive implications of two particular labour market asymmetries in an imperfectly

competitive international environment. Our second objective is to analyze the consequences of these

labour market asymmetries for strategic trade policies.

    We use a two country, two firm Cournot duopoly model, with one firm located in eath couury. One

of the two labour market asymmetries concerns the role of unions and is modelled as follvs. One firm

employs labour belonging to a monopoly union, while the other firm empl's labour at its opportunity

cost. The second asymmetry is that one firm treats labour as a fixed factor while the other firm treats

labour as a variable factor. Using a standard noncooperative representation of union behaviour       find,

as one would expect, that the introduction of a union in one country causes output in the industry

to fall and reduces profit for the unionized firm. Union members benefit, of course (relative to the

nonunion base), but this benefit falls short of the loss to the firm, so the unionized industry loses as

a whole, despite the fact that worldwide producer surplus in the industry rises as output is reduced

toward the monopoly level. The other firm is, therefore, a substantial beneficiary of union activity.

    The second asymmetry leads to what           call the "labour commitmert" effect. The modelling

approac}i taken in the paper is to assume that one firm in the international duopoly makes a commitment

to a labour force while the other does not. The point to be made is that sudt a commitment to

labour might be translated (taking capital as fixed) into a commitment to a particular output level.

The ability to make such a commitment would then provide that firm with a natural Stackelberg

leadership advantage in its output rivalry with a firm that treats labour as a variable factor. The labour

                                                    1
commitment effect in itself (without the other firm being unionized) benefits the firm that is able to

make the commitment and reduces the profit of its rival. Combined producer surplus in the industry

tends to fall. In an extension      consider whether precommitment is advantageous in the presence of

uncertainty, providing some insight into the question of why some firms may precommit while others do

not.

       The policy implications of these labour market asymmetries are interesting in that significant mod-

ifications are required in the recently rejuvenated subject of trade policy under imperfect competition.

The principle effect of unionization is that the union is able to "skim off" part of the benefits of ar

interventionist trade policy, such as a rent-shifting subsidy or tariff,1 while simultaneously partially

undercutting the objectives of the policy. The optimal policy may. h'ever, involve a higher level of
intervention with a union than without. In effect, the policy has to undo the effect of the union in

influencing output market behaviour.

       The labour market asymmetries       examine are stylized versions of what v.e take to be important

contrasts between North American or European and Japanese labour relations The labour commit-

ment idea is motivated by the "lifetime contract" that is standard in parts of the Japanese economy.

The union asymmetry has more general relevance, but is also of particular interest in cross-country

comparisons. We emphasize, however, that w— are not trying to model the institutional detail of either

the Japanese or other stern economies. Many firms in Japan do not make long term commitments

to labour, and unions are an important force in some parts of the Japanese economy. Nevertheless,

to the extent that one accepts the idea that major parts of the Japanese economy are systematically

different from rivals in these two respects: the relative "friendliness" of unions and the commitment to
  1
    Basic references on rent-shifting trade policies include Brander and Spencer (1981, 1985), Dixit
(1984), and Eaton and Grossman (1986).
  2 One
          popular account of these contrasts is Crocker et. al. (1986) which claims '1n Japan, unions
are company unions. For the most part there is cooperation between the executive members and
management. Conflict is abhorred, and the union assumes the role of keeping wrkers in line....Strils
are ... of short duration, and occur during emplc.'ee's lunch hours or in their cwn time after wrk....ln
large companies in Japan, there is lifelong emplcyment; that is, permanent emplc'ees are not laid off or
terminated.

                                                    2
labour, then we would argue that the simplifications made in this paper are a useful starting point for

the analysis of market rivalry.3


     This paper draws on three themes in the economics literature: the theory of unions, precornmitmer

under imperfect competition, and strategic trade policy. Our treatment of unions is similar to Sampson

(1983) and is also related to papers by McDonald and Sol (1982) and OsId (1982). There is relatiwly

little work on the asymmetric impact of unions in partially unionized imperfectly competitiw industries.

which is the setting in this paper.4 As for the precommitment leterature, most work assumes that capital

is the committed variable. Widely cited papers by Di,dt (1980), and Eaton and Lipsey (1980). among

others, contain the idea that by installing a high level of capital in one period a firm can commit itself to

a high level of output in subsequent periods, which acts as a credible threat in influencing the behaviour

of potential (or actual) rivals. In this paper the commitment idea is extended to labour. The most

closely related existing literature to our paper is the recent w)rk concerning trade policy in imperfectly

competitive markets of the oligopoly type. in such markets firms may earn profits, and firms (and

governments) have incentives to undertake strategic activities in an effort to capture such profits or

rents. Relevant papers include Brander and Spencer (1984, 1985), Dixit (1984), Eaton and Grossman

(1986) and Krugman(1984).


    In Section 2 of this paper we analyze the basic model of asymmetric unionization, and Section 3 is

devoted to a simple model of labour commitment. In Section 4 we examine the trade policy consequences

of union power and labour commitment. Section 5 discusses extensions, including consideration of

the trade-off between commitment and flexibility under uncertainty. Section 6 contains a concluding

summary.


    Two references on Japanese labour relations are Hanami(1979) and Tsurumi(1978). Hanaxni reports
(p. 88) that over 90% of unionized workers belong to "enterprise" or company unions. There is a
substantial business policy literature on comparisons between Japanese and American business and
labour relations. See, for example, Patrick and Roscwsky (1976).
    A tangentially related issue is described by Williamson (1968), in which a dominant firm conspires
with a union to set high industry-wide ges so as to weaken the competitiw position of smaller and
more labour-intensive firms. (See also Salop and Scheffman (1983).)

                                                     3
 2. Asymmetric Union Power

       This section presents a simple model capable of capturing the rele'van t aspects of asymmetric union

power. There are two countries, country A and country B, and two goods: good z and good m. The

a.gents in the model are households, firms, a union in country A, and the national gwernment of country
A.

Hou8eholds


      Each household, i. maximizes utility subject to a budget constraint:


                               max u(z', m')       s.t. pz' -i-   rn   =w    r1 —
                                                                                                          (1)


where z' and in' are household i's consumption of goods z and in respectively, and where w' represents

the wage income of household i, ir' represents its profit income, and t represents the taxes it        ps.
The price of good in is normalized to be 1, so p is the relative price of good z. Each household offers

(inelasticallv) 1 unit of labour to the labour market, for which it receives its wage w'. The maximization

given by (1) leads to indirect utility function6


                                            v' = v'(p, ir', t', u')                                      (2)


where the partial derivatives t =     = —v      are all equal to the household's marginal utility of income,

X'. Using Roy's identity, household demand for good z is given          z'   = —v/)'.   The aggregate demand
for z is the sum of the individual demands, leading to inverse demand functionp(z;').

Ftrm

      There is a unified rld market for each good, and labour is the only factor of production. Good

m is produced in both countries by a perfectly competitive zero-profit sector operating under constant

returns to scale. The marginal product (and average product) of labour in this sector is c. Since the

price of good in is 1, it follows that the wage in the competitive sector is also c.
  '   Basic   duality theory is well exposited in many sources. A standard textbook reference is Varian
(1978).

                                                      4
     The world market for z is served by two firms: firm A and firm B. which are located in countre

A and B respectively. The two firms produce a homogeneous product and he access to identical

technologies. hnplicitly the duopoly is maintained by some barrier to entry such as a sunk entry cost.

We abstract from this since it is not directly relevant to our analysis. Firm A is assumed to he a

monopoly union which sets the wage, w. Firm B faces a competitive labour supply and therefore hires

labour at the competitive wage. c. AU households receive either wage w or wage c. For simplicity

assume that one unit of labour produces one unit of good z. The outputs of firms A and B are denoted

r and y respectively, so, surpressing income arguments. industry inverse demand can be written as

p = p(z — i'). Profits for the two firms are:

                                            y, w) = (p(x — y) — w)r                                (3)



                                        irB(z, y)   = (p(z -- v) — r)y                             (4)



    The decisions of firms and households are taken to be decentralized. In other wrds, a household

does not take into account the effect its consumption demand has on the profit of firms and, corre-

spondingly, on its own income through its profit share. Similarly, firms do not take ixo account the

effect own price changes have on the utility of shareholders through those shareholders' consumption.

Profit maximization by firms and utility maximization by firms are treated as independent decisions.

                                                            -
Unzon Behaviour

     There is considerable debate concerning the appropriate choice for a union's ma.ximand. Prominent

alternative ma,ximands include union surplus (the excess of earnings cwer opportunil cost). the wage

bill, and the wage of the median wrker. (See Oswald (1982) for a good discussion of the alternatives.

A particularly good treatment of the median wter approach to unions is Grossman (1984).)

     Probably the most widely accepted view of the union is simply that it maximizes some function in

which both the real wage and total union emplcment enter positively. (See Dertouzos and Pencavel

(1981) for some empirical support.) We adopt this approach, and, folkwing Sampson (1983), assume

                                                        5
the following form for the union's objective function,


                                       U(w,z)= z(w)--(n—z)(c)                                              (5)


where ii   is   the number of union members. Recalling that x union members are emplcied at union ge

w, while the n — z remaining    union members earn ge c in the residual sector, one can think of L'(w.z)

as   the expected utility of a representative union member.8 lJnder this "expected utility' interpretation.

th(.) is the reduced form indirect utility (derived from the t functions) of the represernative work er.

      Formulation (5) is consistent with the idea that the union may take into account the effect that

v has on price p and on profits and therefore on the utilit of wrkers in their role as consuming
households and as shareholders of firms. We prefer a decentralized interpretation, hocvever. in which

the union is vied as ignoring the profit and product price effects of its v.ge policies on orker utility.

This interpretation is appropriate as long as the product produced by the union firm is a small part of

the consumption bundle of a typical rker and if equity 'nership in the union firm is a small part

of any one worker's portfolio. We take this to be the normal case. \Ve do not require this indirect

utility foundation for      ); an alternative interpretation is simply that   (.)   represents a behavioural

description of union decision-making. The only restriction e actually impose on o(.) is the wry natural

requirement that it be increasing in its argument.

Ftrm and Union Interaction

       The model of firm and union behaviour is a two stage game in which the union can act first, setting

the wage in the first stage before either firm can set its output. The second stage equilibrium is a Nash

equilibrium in outputs, taking the ge of wrkers in firm A as given by the previous stage. The union

is assumed to understand the dependence of the second stage equilibrium outputs on the vge, leading

to a sequentially rational equilibrium in the two stage game.7 By assuming that the union can act first.

      This interpretation presupposes, of course, that the utility functions of the differer
worker/households are comparable, and that the conditions required for the estence of a represen-
tative worker are satisfied.
      We intend the term "sequential rationality" to describe the following idea. Ai each stage, each

                                                      6
this structure abstracts from bargaining between the union and firm A.8

     As is normally the case with sequential models, the equilibrium is best characterized by considering

the second stage first. In the second stage, firm A chooses z to maximize irA (z, y, w), from equation (3).

given y and w, while firm B chooses v to maximize 7r (z. i,), from equation (4), taking r as giwn. Using

subscripts to denote partial derivatives, the first order conditions are:


                                         ir=zp'-4-p—-w=0                                                (6)



                                          ir=yp'-'-p—c=0                                                (7)


with second order conditions

                               A   = —,.zpU < 0;        B   =    is        is
                                                                      -'- yp    <0                      (8)


We also assume that own marginal revenue falls as the rival's output rises, as indicated by condition (9).


                               ir=p'+ vp" <0; ir=p'-i-zp" <0                                           (9)


Conditons (8) and (9) are assumed to hold globally, which ensures that the output reaction functions

of both firms are downward sloping, and in addition 'we assume that the following condition also holds

globally.

                                        _   A...B _rArB
                                          — z'ytj   x yx        ",                                    (ifl

Expression (10) is the Gale-Nikaido condition for global uniqueness of the Nash equilibrium in x and y

player acts in its own noncooperative best interest, and this is anticipated by players in earlier stages.
The first precise formulation is due to Selten, who used the term subgame perfection to desribe the
idea. We prefer the more descriptive term "sequential rationality", first coined by Kreps and Wilson
(1983) to describe a refinement of subgame perfection for games of incomplete information.
   $ We should emphasize that the union is not assumed to be "smarter" than the firms. Its asymmetric
position arises solely from its ability to act first. The second stage Nash equilibrium output beiw een
firms need not arise from naive disequilibrium adjustment. On the contrary, it can be argued that
the Nash equilibrium is the natural equilibrium that wuld arise between calculating, fully informed
agents. We do not wish to take a particular stand on this point, although 'we 'would claim that the Nash
equilibrium is a natural starting point for analyzing noncooperatiw games. A helpful discussison of the
case for and against the Nash equilibrium can be found in Pearce (1984).
     These conditions hold for a wide variety of standard cost and demand conditions. They can,

                                                    7
      Assuming that the conditions of the implicit function theorem hold, it then follows that first order

 conditions (6) and (7) define the outputs of the two firms as functions of the wage in firm A.


                                             z=              V   = v(w)                                  (11)


From total differentiation of (6) and (7) and application of Cramer's rule, the slopes of these functions
are as follows.

                                x'(w)   =       <0           y'(v) =         > 0                         (12)

Conditions (8) and (10) ensure that x'(w) < 0, while (9) and (10) ensure that the equilibrium output of

firm B increases as the wage rate within firm A rises: y'(w) > 0.

     We now analyze the preceeding stage, in which the union in firmA sets the lage to maximize union

objective function (5), knowing that z = x(w) and y = y(w) from (11). The first order condition is:


                                        dU,/d = ((w) — (c))z'(w) - x'(w) = 0                             (13)


Rearrangement yields:

                                        4(w) — 4(c)   = —z'(w)/z'(w) > 0                                 (14)

Because (.)    is   strictly increasing, it follows from (14) that w must exceed c: the union raises the sage

above the opportunity cost of labor: w > c.

Cove rnnze n


     We focus on policies that might be undertaken by the government ofcountrvA, although extensions

to the two country strategic game between governments A and B can be easily constructed. Country A

includes households 1,..N. All members of the union are residents of country A, as are all shareholders

however, be violated by by quite plausible structures, particularly if marginal cost is strongly dcwvn'rd
sloping or if demand is strongly convex. The properties of these "perwrse" cases are well understand
and will not be taken up here. The basic point is that comparative static properties and consequent
policy recommendations reverse for such cases. Because of their poor stability properties it can be
argued that these cases are of no empirical relevance, although it can also be argued that the traditional
treatment of stability is inconsistent with proper game theoretic foundations for the Cournot model and
therefore is meaningless as a criterion for ruling out certain cases. V'k take no position on sud issues
here.

                                                         8
of firm A. while all shareholders of firm B and workers in firm B are residents of country B. The

government maximizes a social welfare function, WA, defined over the utilities of individual households.


                           yrA     y,rA(t.I ( 1:.1 t ,       ..., v"(p, 7r)V, tN, w'))                        (15)


The government is able to maximize (15) using lump sum taxes t', subject to its budget constrairt.

Writing down the appropriate Lagrangian, with p as the Lagrange multiplier associated with the gc.-

ernmem budget constraint, taking the first order conditions with respect to              .   ...t, and rearranging
yields the following condition (using W1 to denote 8 144/8v').


                                           = p for all i, e= 1                                                (16

Condition (16) implies that '1fare maximization leads to an outcome in which an extra dollar of

income has the same social value, p, nomatter which household receiws it. This is a consequence of the

assumption that the government has nondistortionary taxes t' allable.

    Wel.fare effects are examined using the total differential of 'welfare.


                            dWA = E(w.A(t,tdp+ vd,r+ vdt'-- rdw'))                                            (17)


Note that 'ir' a .A, and let / a Ef'z, the consumption of z in Couxtry A. Then, recalling that
X = v.   = —v = v,. and using Rc's identity: = —X'z. expression (17) simplifies to the follving.
                                 dWA = p(_zAdp..         dlrA   —EdtEdu1)                                     (18)



     The terms inside expression (18) are standard surplus measures: —2/'dp is the diange in consumer

surplus, and the other three terms are changes in profit, taxes, and factor income respectiwly. Net taxes.

Et1 will differ from zero when tariffs and subsidies are introduced. Labour is supplied inelastically to the

economy so all factor income can be thought of as a factor rent. For infinitesimal dianges p is just some

number which can be normalized to equal 1 by the appropriate choice of units for utility index W'

For discrete changes, welfare effects are calculated by integratingdW. lithe changes are large,p ,which

                                                         9
is the social marginal value of income, may vary 'er the range of integration. Ewn for large changes,

however, it is clear from the form of (18) that the procedure of adding together surplus measures is 'alid

for obtaining qualitatively correct welfare effects. (This fact that optimal lumpsum redistribution allows

this "surplus-equivalent" approach has been made by Starrett (1979), among others.) The presence of

a variable u merely makes welfare a (presumably concave) monotonic transformation of .rerall surplus.

In the rest of the paper we make the logically inessential but expositionally convenient assumption that

the changes we consider are small enough that i can be treated as a constant, and we normalize it to

equal 1. The total differential of welfare is then as follows.

                                      d4 = —z'dp-- dir'4 —Edtt-'- Edw'                                 (19)


Welfare Effects of Unionization

    It is fairly clear that the output and profit of firmA are reduced by the introduction of a union mA,

as would be the case if firm A were a monopoly, but in addition, the consequent increase in the output

of its rival further reduces firm A's profit. Total rents to union members rise as a result of unionization.

(Without unionization all werkers earn only the competitive vge, c.) Producer surplus in Courry A,

which is the sum of profit and rent to workers, falls. These ideas are expressed in Proposition 1.

Propo3ition 1: (i) Unionization of firm A reduces producer surplus in Country A: the gain to union

members falls short of the loss to firm A.

(ii) Unionization of firm A reduces total output of the industry. The gain in profit to firm B more than

ofisets the loss of surplus in A so wrld producer surplus rises.

Proof                             -



(i) Producer surplus in A is S' (w) .A(z(w), y(w), u')           wx(w) (N — r)c Noting that          0 and

   = airA/aw = —z, it follows that
                                       dS'/dw = ir y'(w) + (ti — c)x'(w)                               (20)


Noting also that ir = zp' < 0 and using (12), expression (20) naist be negatiw. The result stated
                                                      10
in the proposition then follows because the effect of increasing w on producer surplus in A is negatiw

everywhere on the path from a wage equal to c to to the union wage.

(ii) The introduction of the union reduces industry output if z'(w)--y'(w) < 0 for all age lels on the

path from c to the union wage. From (10) and (12),


                                             y'(w)    (7r1, —          = p'/D < 0                               (21)


The change in world producer surplus is obtained by             adding the change   in 7rE to the change in 5A•


                            d(SA         r8)'dti   = ry'(tr) (w    —
                                                                       c)z'(u) — ,1BrI(w)                       (22)


Using    (6) and (7) and the fact that ir =          yp' yields w — c   —      = zp'. Then from (21). (22). and
    = zp', we obtain
                                     d(SA     TB)/dw = zp'(z'(w)-- y'(u)) > 0                                   (23)

as was   to be shown.


       It is an immediate corollary of Proposition 1 that eifare in Country A          and in   the world as a whole


falls as a result of unionization.



A Linear Example

       Calculations using a linear example provide some indication of the relati magnitudes of the effects

analyzed above. Assuming a linear demand curve of the form p = a — b(z                      and assuming a1sc that

44w)   = w, so U(z, w) = (w   —
                                  c)z,   one obtains the following illustratis comparisons° of the nonunion

Nash equilibrium and the Nash equilibrium arising from unionization of firm A.

Unionization causes:

1. Output of firm A to fall by 50%

2. Output of firm B to rise by 25%

3. World output to fall by 12.5%

4. Profit of firm A to fall by 75%
       Details of the calculations are available from the authors upon request.

                                                          11
5. Profit of firm B to rise   by 56%

6. Producer surplus in A to fall by 37%

It is clear from this example that the effects of partial unionization in the presence of imperfect compe-

tition can be very substantial.


     Perhaps the most striking abstraction in the paper is our characterization of the domestic union.

The union, as we model it, is able to unilaterally set the domestic wage. This is 'unrealistic" in that

unions do not set wages unilaterally, but engage in some kind of bargaining process with firms. As

pointed out by the referee, if the union and firm could come t.o an efficient wage bargain (in the sense of

being on the contract curve) then the results would be very different. One alternatiw approach would

be to analyse the interaction between firm and union as a cooperative game. For example, if the Nash

bargaining solution is adopted as the solution concept. then the presence of a maximizing union would

have little effect. hi essence, the union becomes a partner of the firm which shares in profits and wants

the firm to be able to use labour efficiently. This simple minded cooperatiw game model of union

behaviour fails to capture asymmetries between union and nonunion firms that observation suggests are

important. Richer cooperative models with incomplete information and bargaining costs offer promising

directions for understanding union behaviour, but we know of no simple accepted model that is a more

natural candidate for analysis than the model we use.


    As for empirical relevance, our model is consistent with one of the most robust empirical findings of

labour economics: the union wage differential. Freeman and Medoff (1984) report that a wide variety of

studies all find a substantial differential between union and non-union workers in the same occupation

of between l0 and 30%. This differential seems to be due simply to the monopoly per of unions.

This kind of magnitude is consistent with plausible parameters for the model we use here. In addition,

our model of imperfect competition offers a simple explanation of why a wage differertial between union

and non-union firms in the same industry can persist. With imperfect competition of the Cournot ip e,

low cost (non-union) firms do not drive high cost (union) firms out of business.

                                                   12
3. Asymmetric Labour Commitment

    The last section has been devoted to the union pver asymmetry. This section considers the
possibility of commitment to labour as a strategic tool. We assume that firm B can precommit its

labour force. This means that when firms A and B make their final output decisions, firm Bs labour

costs will have become a fixed or unavoidable cost. Thus the marginal riable cost of using the labour

force on hand becomes zero. It is then in firm Bs interest to use this labour force as long as marginal

revenue remains positive. By shifting labour costs from the variable to the fixed category, firm B

therefore creates a credible commitment to use its labour force. Ii the absence of other factors, this

labour commitment implies a commitment to a particular level of output, giving firm B a Stack elberg

leadership advantage.

    One might ask why one firm should have the opportunity to precommit while the other does

not. Ideally, one would like a theory in which the opportunity or the decision to precommit emerged

endogenously. In the Japanese case, the practise of precommitment to labour arises from a riety of

institutional forces. These institutional forces are themselves the product, at least in part, of economic

forces. The modelling of the reasons for these institutions is, hever, a wry ambitious task and
is beyond the scope of the present paper. Nevertheless, we regard the existence of important cross-

country differences in labour market institutions as undeniable, and think it is worthwhile to explore

the consequences of such differences, as w do here. \ do make some comments about endogenus

emergence of precommitment opportunities in Section 5.

     With no union in country A, firms have profit functions as given by (3) and (4), where w        c in


(3). In the second stage firm A chooses output based on first order condition (6). This implicitly defines

the reaction function:

                                               z = z(y, c)                                           (24)


The effect of y on z is determined by totally differentiating (6) with respect to x to yield


                                                = —,/ir                                               (25)

                                                    13
In the first stage, firm B maximizes (4) given x = z(y, c) from (24). The first order condition for firm B

is therefore

                                    d7rB/dy   = yp'(l -- z,) -- p — c = 0                              (26)

with second order condition (B/dyz < 0. Some vell knvi properties of the Sta&elberg equilibrium

relative to the (non-union) Cournot equilibrium are summarized in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2: Firm B has a higher output and profit level as leader in the asymmetric labour
commitment equilibrium than in the non-union Cournot equilibrium: firm A (the follcwer) has a lcMer

output and profit. Total output and isorid \wlfare are higher with asymmetric labour commitmer.

while industry profit is lower.

     Propostion 2 indicates that if a firm is able to commit itself to empIcing a certain quartit y of

labour, then it does better than its rival and better than it did at the Cournot solution. This gain

occurs entirely at the expense of the rival firm, which suffers both a fall in price and a fall in output.

A Linear Example

    As in the previous section, a linear example can be used to give some idea of the possible magni-

tudes of these effects. Without a union, comparison of the commitment and noncommitment regimes

yields the following results. With labour commitment

1. output of firm A is 25 % lower,

2. output of firm B is 50 7c higher,

3. world output is 12.5 % higher,

4. profit of firm A (and producer surplus in A) is 48 % lower,

5. profit of firm B is 12.5 % higher,



    Comparing these results with those for unionization, w see that asymmetric labour commitment

imposes larger costs on the firm A and has a smaller benefit for firm B. The reason is clear. While both

asymmetries improve the relative position of firm B, unionization is anti-competitive and raises overall

                                                      14
surplus in the industry. Labour commitment, on the other hand, is procompetiti and therefore lver

the overall surplus, shrinking gains and magnifying losses. World ffare is of course higher under the

commitment regime than under the unionized regime.

      Labour is not the only factor of production; indeed, the idea that firms migli underta1 strategic

commitments using capital has been an important recent theme in the industrial organization literature.

Our results can be readily extended to the case of more than one factor.1' The main economic poiri

is that the presence of capital does not alter the basic principle associated with asymmetric labour

commitment, although it does add some interesting complications. In particular. if firm A is able to

choose its capital before firm B chooses labour, it will have an incentive to use capital strategically so

as to partially offset the strategic advantage of commitment to labour by firm B.

4. Trade Policy Implications

      The study of trade policy in the presence of imperfect competition is itself a new, or at least receiily

rejuvenated subject. Recent rk has shown that imperfect competiton allows an additional motive,

referred to as "profit-shifting, for the use of trade policy instruments suth as tariffs and subsidies.

      The motivation for a tariff arises when a foreign imperfectly competitive firm earns rents from

an international market, at least part of which is in the domestic country. As shown in Brander and

Spencer (1984), a tariff simply extracts some of these rents from the foreign firm, and suth a policy is

usually optimal from the domestic point of view, whether or not a domestic firm is also in the industry

      A subsidy to domestic firms is optimal when foreign and domestic firms are in Cournot competition

for a profitable international market, which may or may not be located partly in the domestic country.

As shown in Brander and Spencer (1985), this subsidy transfers rent from the foreign to the domestic

firm, increasing the domestic firm's profits by more than the amount of the subsidy, and is therefore

a welfare increasing policy for the domestic country.12 In this section         examine the implications of

     Details are available from the authors.
 12  In a very elegant paper, Eaton and Grossman (1986) show that the nature of the optimal rent-
shifting policy depends on the type of output rivalry. For example, with Bertrand price rivalry, taxes

                                                     15
 domestic unionization for rent-shifting trade policy. The subsidy case is analyzed first, then tariffs and
quotas are considered.

Sub8ide8


     The subsidy is denoted a, and e let a represent the marginal production cost of firm A given the
subsidy a per unit. Then a = u     — a.
                                          \Ve can then replace w with a in first order condition (6) and the

subsequent comparative statics. Note that the equilibrium values of z and y depend on a rather than
directl\ on w: x = z(a) and y = y(o). It follows from (12) that if w ere held constant, an increase in

the subsidy would cause a decrease in a, and induce an equilibrium expansion in x, the output of the

domestic firm, and a contraction in s, the output of the foreign firm. It is this effect of the subsidy on

the output equilibrium that gives the subsidy its rent-shifting effect.

     \Ve assume, however, that the union can alter the ge after the subsidy has been set. To be clear,

the sequence of decisions is as follows: first the government sets the subsidy, taking into account how

union and firms wifl respond. Next, the union sets the ge, taking the subsidy as given (fixed), but

taking into account the equilibrium response of the two firms. Finally, taking the subsidy and the vage

as given, the firms simultaneously choose output levels. The innovation in this paper is to introduce a

union wage response between subsidy and output selections. This alters the problem significantly. The

first order condition representing the choice of to by the union is (from (13)) given by


                                  (J = ((w) — (c))z'(a) + zØ'(w) = 0                                   (27)


which implies u = to(s). Total differentiation of (27) with respect tow and a, and using a' (s) = w'(s)— 1

yields

                              v'(s) = (z'(o)'(w) -- ((w) — '(c))z"(a))1/U                              (28)

Expression (28) shows how the union wage responds to a change in the subsidy. The denominator must

be negative by the second order condition for the union's maximization problem. Also, since x' ) < 0

rather than subsidies are called for.

                                                     16
(from (12)), ii follows that w'(s) tends to be positive.'3 in other rds, ve could reasonably expect

increases in the subsidy to be taken up at least partly in higher wages. Examination of U. whith

equals (2x'(o )th'(w) -i- ((w)— (c))z"(o))÷ z4"(w), shcms that w'(s) must be less than one, so the subsidy

is not fully absorbed by higher wages. if demand happens to be linear and         ) = w, it follcws from
(12) that   x"(o) = 0. in which case wage increases uld absorb exactly half of subsidy increases.

    The first order condition for maximization of country A's eifare can be obtained from total el1are

differential (19). incorporating the government budget constraint: Y' —       = 0. The folling identities

are useful in simplifying (19).

                                             Edt' = sdx + zds                                           (28)


                                  dirA = (p — w— s)dr— z(dp— dv— ds)                                    (29)


                                         Edw' =   zdw   -- (w —   c)dz                                  (30)


Expression (28) is the total differential of the government budget constraint, (29) is the total differential

of firm A'8 profit: (p—w±s)z, and (30)is the total diffential of labour income: wz—(N—z)c. Substituting

(28). (29), and (30) into (19) yields the following expression.


                                       dW = (z — zA)dp       (p — c)dz                                  (31)


Expression (31) has a clear interpretation. The first term is equal t.o net exports times the thange in

the relative price of good z. This term represents the usual terms of trade effect. if the price of good z

rises, and country A is a net exporter of good z, then country A tends to gain. The second term arises

only in the presence of some distortion, in this case imperfect competition, whith causes price to differ

from marginal cost. in effect, (p — c) is the marginal rent, to the country as a whole, from producing

and selling an extra unit of the imperfectly competitiw good.'4
  13 It is just possible that z"(o) is positive and large enough to more than offset r'(c), while not being
large enough to violate second order conditions. \Ve take this to be an unlikely possibilit.
  14 The standard procedure for deriving the eIfare differential in trade theory is to start with the direct
utility function for a representative consumer, u(z, in), totally differentiate to obtain dii = ud: umdfl,
divide through by Urn to obtain dW = pdz-t- dm, then substitute in the condition for balanced trade to

                                                      17
      To obtain an expression for the optima) subsidy                 make   use of firm A's first order condition.
     = 0, which can be written as
                                                                                                              (32)

Subsitituting (32) in (31) and dividing through by ds yields'

                           dW/'ds =    (x — z4 )p. — (zp'      —   8— (w —   r))z'(a)o'(s)                    (33

where p, = p'(r'(a) — y'(o))o'(s) and o'(s) =     w'(s)   — 1.
                                                                     Substituting p intc (33) and solving for the

optimal subsidy gives rise to the following expression.

                               $   = zp'dy;dx — (u   —
                                                          c)
                                                               —
                                                                   zAp, /(z'(o)o'(s))                         (34)

where dy'dx (=     —r 'i) is the slope of the foreign firm's reaction function in output space, whim
is negative by (9) and (10). It is easy to see that p, < 0: a subsidy lers price. Expression (34)
therefore implies that the optimal subsidy is posith. In the absence of a union, the optimal subsidy

would be given by the same formula as (34) with w — c              = 0. In other wrds, the presence of the union
actually tends to increase the optimal subsidy in this framewrk.'8 The reasoning is 'ry simple. The

union absorbs part of the subsidy in higher vages. For example, with linear demand.                 ) = and
     = 0 (no domestic consumption). in order to get a net subsidy of one dollar through to the domestic
firm the nominal subsidy must be two dollars, one dollar of which "leaks into higher wages. This

leakage is a pure transfer, however, and does not alter the optimal net subsidy. Without a union, (and

with no domestic consumption of z), the optimal subsidy brings the domestic firm to the Sta&elberg

leader position in output space. This target output is unaffected17 F the presence of the union. but
yield (31). The derivation presented in the main text is more general. The reason that the balanced trade
condition does not enter the main text's derivation directly is that it is implied F individual budget

 '
constraints that are implicit in the indirect utility functions and the gernment budget constraint.
This is just an example of Wairas' Law.
      Strictly speaking. this procedure represents an apprdmation as it ignores the effect that changes
in the subsidy change real income and therefore change the demand for good z. Unless the industry in
question is very large compared to the ize of economy, this effect will certainly be negligible.

 '
  18 In
         general, p' and dy/dr are endogenous, so some ambiguity does arise on this point, particularly
IS demand is highly nonlin ear.
     This can be shown by substituting (34) (with zA = 0) into the first order condition for the choice
ofzby firm A. We obtain ir = zp'-t-p— ti± s zp' i- p-. 1r(dy/dz)— c = 0. This coincides with
the first order condition for a nonunion Stackelberg leader choosing its output, x.

                                                     18
reaching this output requires a much higher nominal subsidy with the union because the union in effect

taxes the subsidy process. if there re no domestic consumption in country A, then the third term

of expression (34) would be zero, and the optimal subsidy 'would tend to be lower. The presence of

domestic consumption increases the domestic incentive for subsidization of the production of z because

such subsidies reduce the distortionary dge between the price of good z and its marginal cost of

production. c, moving production of good z toward the efficient level. These results are summarized in

Proposition 3.

Proposition 3: In the presence of imperfectly competitive international markets the optimal subsidy
is positive. The optimality of a subsidy is due to two main effects: the usual incentive to subsidize

any good that is underconsumed due to imperfect competition. and a rent-shifting mothe 'which rks

by credibly committing the domestic to a more aggressive stance in the output market. A union will

take part of any subsidy in higher wages, implying that the optimal subsidy tends to be higher in the

presence of a union.

     An implication of this analysis is that one could expect unions to be strong proponents of export

or output subsidies, since these subsidies are in part a direct transfer from taxp,'ers to union meiib ers.

Tariffs


     We now consider the possibility of using tariffs to extract rent from a foreign firm in competition

with a unionized domestic firm. In order for tariffs to have any significance. it niist be the case that

at least part of the market is in the domestic country. The basic ideas are most easily conveyed in the

extreme case, where the market is located entirely in the domestic country. This is the case examined

here.

     Once again the sequence of decisions is as follows: first the domestic country will set the tariff,

taking into account the wage and output responses that will follow. After the tariff is set, the union

sets the wage, taking the tariff as given but anticipating the output responses. The third stage is one of

simultaneous output choices by the two firms. Let r represent a specific tariff on imports, Analyzing the

                                                   19
third stage first, the profit functions of domestic and foreign firms are giwn by (3) and (4) respecthly,

with c replaced b c —i- r in (4). As before, the output equilibrium is characterized by the simultaneous

solution to first order conditions ir =     0   and        =   0,   yielding output solutions z =   z(w, r)   and
  =   y(w. r). Comparative static effects are easily calculated by total differentiation of these first order

conditions and application of Cramer's Rule. in particular:


                                 zr=—ry/D>0 y,=ir/D<0                                                         (35)


where D is given by expression (10). The effects z,(w. r) and y,(v. r) are as in (12).

      Taking into account the dependence of z and y on ti, the union Sets ti to maximize U as giwn by

(5). This implicitly defines ti = w(r). Total differentiation of w(r) then yields


                               u"(r) = —(z'(w) —'- ((w) — (c))z./U.                                           (37)


This derivative will, under standard conditions, be between 0 and 1, indicating that the effect of the

tariff is to raise wages. For example, with linear demand arid            =, then w'(r) = 1/4.

      The basic reasoning is that the tariff makes the foreign firm less competitiw, imprcving the com-

petitive position of the domestic firm and raising its willingness to hire labour at arv particular price.

The union then has an incentive to raise its wage demand, and product price is higher thar it would

otherwise have been. The tariff raises product price and reduces consumer surplus. The effect of the

union is to cause an even greater reduction in consumer surplus for any giwn tariff.


      The third step in the argument is to consider the optima] tariff for the domestic country. The

maxirnand is, as usual, given by expression (15), with total differential giwn by (19). The analysis differs

from the subsidy case because tariff revenue must be included in the gcliernment budget constraint,

which becomes: !t + ry = 0, with total differential


                                          Edt, rdy + ydr = 0.                                                 (3
                                                      20
Substituting (29). (30). and (38) into (19), and keeping in mind that we have assumed that all consump-

tion is in the domestic market so z =            =r    y, the welfare differential is


                                    dW= —ydp--(p—c)dz-.- rdy—- ydr                                     (39)

The first term represents the terms of trade effect on imports, the second term represerts the increase in

domestic surplus, and the third term and fourth terms are the increase in tariff reen ue. whith translates

into increased consumption of the numeraire good. (Implicitly. trade balance is maintained by exports

of the nurneraire good equal to the revenue of firm B.)

     Dividing (39) by dr and solving for r gives rise to:

                                   = —(y(1   —
                                                 dp/dr) —   (p
                                                                 —
                                                                     c)(dx/dt))/(dy/dt)                (40)


This has the same general form as the rule for the choice of the optimal tariff for Cournot firms in

the absence of a union. (See Brander and Spencer (1984).) To the extent that dpdr is less than one.

the first term in the numerator represents the rent shifted to country A as a result of the fall in the

producer price (net of the tariff). The producer price is p — r, so its rate of change as the tariff changes

is —(1 — dp/dr).   The second term in the numerator reflects the rate of increase in the profit of the

domestic firm as the tariff increases: the "profit shifting' effect.

     This structure differs from the non-union case because the induced ge effect, du1/dr. feeds imo

the comparative static effects dz;dr and dy dr that appear in expression (40).

                             dr/dr = zw'(r) --        z,         dy/dr = y,Lu'(r) — y                   (41)


Also, from (12), (35), and (41),

                             dp/dr = p'(dz/dr - dy/dr)) = (p')2(w'(r) -- 1)/D                           (42)



     The main implications of equatiOns (40), (41) and (42) are expressed in Proposition 4.

Proposition 4: Asymmetric unionization has the follcving effects.
1) The response of both imports and domestic production to tariff thanges tends to be reduced.

                                                           21
ii) Price responses to tariff changes tend to be greater in the presence of a domestic union.

iii) The effect of the domestic union on the size of the optixmm tariff is ambiguous.

    Part (i) follows directly from (41). The increase in the union wage induced by a tariff partially

offsets the competitve advantage conferred by a tariff on the domestic firm, dampening the output

responses to the tariff. Part (ii) then follows directly from (42). The effect of the union on the size of the

optimal tariff is ambiguous (from (40)) because, on one hand, the presence of the union reduces the rate

at which rent is shifted by increases in r. which tends to reduce the optimal tariff, while on the other

hand, the union reduces the rate of decline in imports as r increases, making the tariff more effectiw

as a revenue-raising tool.


Quotas

     Now   suppose that Country A uses a binding quota, , instead of a tariff to restrict imports. The
monopoly union will, in our framework, use this knowledge in setting the wage. As before, the first order

condition for the choice of x by firm A is given by            (z,ji, ti) = 0. This defines the reaction function:

z = f(w,) which has partial derivatives f = 1,i'ir and f, =               —r/ir.      The union's maximization

with respect to w then yields the following first order condition: dW/dw = (ô(w)—th(c))f,(w,i)—r = 0

     To compare the tariff and quota as policy tools imagine that the quota is set at precisely the level

of imports that would occur with a particular tariff level, r. If the wage v,ere the same in both (tariff

and quota) regimes, then prices and outputs would also be the same. The wage. however, will not be

the same in the two regimes because the problem faced by the union is very different under quotas than

under tariffs. Specifically, the union has more power under quotas. Prcwided the quota is binding. a wage

increase does not lead to an increase in imports and therefore has a smaller output and emplq.rnen t

reducing effect,'8 leading to Proposition 5.

Proposition 5: Other things equal, the quota regime will give rise to higher wages, higher prices, and

 is More precisely, the absolute value of f(w,)           is   less than the absolute value of x' (v). This is
seen by noting from (12) that z'(w) =             = 1/(ir —          2/'7r) where            A     > 0. while
f = I/ir < 0. It follows directly that f, < z'(w).
                                                     22
lower domestic welfare than the tariff regime allowing the same import level. '

Asymmetric Labour Commitment

    We now consider how labour commitment by firm B affects the rent-extracting policy in country

A. Taking export subsidies first, abstracting from union power. and looking at the simple case of no

domestic consumption (zA = 0), it can be shcwn using the same methodology as in the union pcw.er

case that the optimal subsidy is given by the following expression.

                                         $   = zp'(dy,/ds)/(dz/d$)                                     (43)


This formula corresponds to expression (34) for the union case with (ti — c)       = 0 and zA = 0.   In this

case, however, the terms dz/ds and dy 4a are different. Firm A has the same reaction function as given

by (24) except that c is replaced by c — s. It is easily seen that ; > 0: a subsidy shifts out the reaction

function of firm A. Firm B is able to take athantage of this reaction function, l virtue of its ability

to precommit, and its maximization gives rise to first order condition (26). Total differentiation of (26)

and some tedious but straightforward algebra then shows that, for most demand conditions, a subsidy

to firm A tends to reduce the output of firm B: an export or production subsidy to the domestic firm

lowers the output of its Stackelberg leader rival. The total effect of s on x is


                                          dz/d8 = zdy/ds --                                             (44)


which will be positive. Expression (43) then implies that the optimal subsidy will be positive also.

     The main point here is that the subsidy, by affecting the reaction of the domestic firm to foreign

commitment levels, does influence the optimal foreign commitment level, and this influence can in

general be used to alter the final equilibrium in favour of the domestic firm and in the domestic interest.

This policy power arises because the domestic gcwernment can act before the foreign firm, offsetting

some of firm B's first mover advantage in the output market.

     In the case of a tariff similar principles operate. Rreign commitment to labour and output does not

alter the form of the optimal tariff rule given by (40). Once again, however, the form of the comparative

                                                      23
static effects that feed into this expression are altered by foreign labour commitment. The sign of dx di-

does remain positive and the sign of dy/dt remains negative, but the magnitudes of the thanges (for

any given levels of the other variables), are different, leading to a different, but nonzero, optimal tariff,

5. Extensions

Unceraoty and Labour Commitment

     imagine one were to explain to a businessman the main point about labour commitment: that

it pays the firm to commit itself to a labour force in order to make rivaLs acquiescent in the face of

the firm's expansion of market share, As pointed out by a referee, the businessman uld probably

argue that such a strategy is much too risky. Demand for the product might fall, and the firm would

wind up overcommitted. As a practical matter this point is too important to ignore. A simple form of

uncertainty can, however, be captured fairly readily in our model of labour commitment,.

    We work with the case of linear demand, and impose a simple but natural form of uncertainty on

the model. Inverse demand for output z    is    assumed to contain an additive random component and can

be written as follows.

                                  p = p(x      '—   —e   = a — b(x - y)   — e
                                                                                                        (45

where p is the expected value of price, given z and i, and e is a random variable with mean 0 and

variance c-2. This price shock can be thought of as arising from a random component in individual

preferences, or in the government's social welfare function or from some other source. Our main focus

here is on the behaviour of firms so we do not elaborate on the standard problem of welfare measure in

the presence of uncertainty, except to assert than a consistent interpretation can be easily dewlop ed.

    The tradeoff between uncertainty and commitment arises because uncertainty is resolved before

output is decided upon, but after the opportunity to precommit to a labor force (and output) ha.s

passed. Thus the committed firm is unable to respond to uncertainty while the uncommitted firm is

able to respond. Our method is to examine the consequences of uncertainty under the assumption that

firm B precommits and firm A does not, then to ask whether it makes sense for firm B to precominit

                                                      24
at Lii. With linear demand, the maximand for firm A is: irA =        (a
                                                                          —
                                                                              b(x   -- LI)-- e)z — cx. Lking the first

order condition for profit maximization and solving for z yields the folling reaction function for z a.s

function of ,   and random shock e.


                                   r=x(y.e)=(a—c--r-e)/2b—y/2                                                     (46)



    Firm B is able to precommit and therefore act as a Stackelberg leader with respect to firm A. but

it must make its output decision before uncertainty is resolved. Firm B is assumed to be risk neutral

and therefore to maximize expected profit. The maximization problem for firm B is giwn 1w:


                            max E(irB) = (a — b(E(z(y, e) — y — E(e))y — cy                                       (47)


where E(r(y. e) = (a — c)/2b — y/2 and E(e) =        0.   Th.king the first order condition and solving for y

then yields:
                                                = (a — c)/2b                                                      (48)

Equation (48) is simply the certainty output of firm B: uncertainty has no effect on the output of firm

B in this simple model. The value of random variable e will, of course, affect the actual profits earned.

The actual profit of firm B is i = (a — c 2e)(a— c)/8b, whith has expected value (a— c/8b. Expected

profit is equal to the profit earned by the firm in the certainty case.

     Uncertainty has an effect because it influences the value of the alternatiw: the simultaneous

Cournot regime, where neither firm precommits and both firms therefore have an opportunity to re-

spond to the realization of demand shock e. The solution for that case is obtained 1j taking equation

(46) and the corresponding reaction function for firm B, then solving the two linear equations for x and

y. Using a superscript c to denote the Cournot regime,           have:


                                        xc =   yC
                                                    = (a — c + e)/Sb                                              (48)


Profit levels are =         = (a — c + e?/9b, which has the expected value giwn in (49).


                                  E(irA)__ E(lrB)— ((a— c)2 +a2)/9b                                               (49)

                                                      25
     Equation (49) has an interesting interpretation. Note that the expected value of profit is increasing

in the variance of demand. This effect exists because firms have the opportunity to take advantage of

randomness in demand. In good states of the world they can increase output and in bad states of the

world they can reduce output. These adjustments allow them, on average, to do better than they could

in the case of pure certainty with demand always at its expected leveL19

     in the pure certainty case, firm B has nothing to lose from commitment. in the case of uncertairc

however, commitment makes the firm give up a va]uable option. Depending on the variance of

precommitment may or may not be worthwhile. The expected profit levels are easily compared. leading

to the conclusion that commitment is preferred if and only if condition (50) is satisfied.


                                                <   (a
                                                         —
                                                             e)2/8                                   (50)



     The meaning of (50) is clarified by relating uncertainty to the price cost margin. Specifically
commitment is preferred to flexibility if a < [2(p' — c) : if the standard deviation of price is less than

     times the expected price cost margin under commitment. If there is rio uncertainty = 0) then

commitment is obviously worthwhile. As uncertainty becomes more important. in the sense that the

variance of demand rises, the net value of precommitment falls, and eventually turns negative.

     This is a simple model which demonstrates an important general point that applies here and in all

other commitment models: the value of precommiment is reduced by uncertainty. We obtain this result

even with a linear demand function and risk neutrality. Risk aversion uld. of course, only increase

the importance of this effect. Nonlinear demand or nonlinear randomness could introduce an±iguities.

and could magnify or diminish the costs of precommitment, but would clearly not undermine the basic

economic point that commitment does have costs in an uncertain world because it forces the firm to

give up flexibility.



 '
Endoge n ou8 Comrnitme ni OpportunitieS

     Because z and can respond to e, the reduced form joint profit function is convex in e. implying
that randomness in demand improves expected profit.

                                                    26
     As indicated by the referee, it would be valuable to have some sense why one firm should have

the opportunity to precommit while the other does not. Our analysis of uncertainty suggests that

if there were firm specific uncertainty (arising perhaps from different policy envirionments, different

technologies, product differentiation, different financial structures, etc.) or if firms had different leeLc

of risk aversion, one firm might choose to precommit. while the other might choose to retain flexibilit

even at the cost of being a Stackelberg follower. Working out a complete model of this sort is beyond

the scope of the present paper, but the idea that firms in different countries might face different lewis

of uncertainty, leading to asymmetric commitment behaviour, seems 'worthy of further attention.

     Vve hasten to add that there are other reasons for asymmetric commitment opportunities. As

mentioned earlier, the reason why precommitrnent through labour is adopted by Japanese firms has

much to do with a variety of economic and social institutions, most of which are not modelled here.

This paper does, however, suggest the relevance of attitudes tard risk.

Labour and Output Conimitment


     In general, the hiring of a work force does not guarantee that everyone is put to work. First of all,

the firm may be able to lay off or fire unwanted employees. Secondly, even if the firm cannot reduce its

labour force, but is committed to keeping all workers on its payroll, this does not, in practice, directly

imply commitment to an output level: hours per worker may be varied, effort may be varied, training

activities may be substituted for production activities, and so on.

    The first point to be emphasised is that when         refer to labour commitment in this paper. e

do not simply mean hiring a labour force. Commitment can only arise if it will subsequertly be in the

firm's interest to use the labour force. As suggested by the referee, it is possible to create a commitment

by introducing large severance or redundancy payments as the penalty for firing workers. A simpler

idea is that the firm is contractually committed to retaining its labour force, either through explicit

contracts, which have the force of law, or through implicit contracts, which are enforced through some

kind of reputation mechanism, lit either case, the commitment is enforced by the costs that the firm

                                                    27
would suffer if it violated the contract. Some legal systems and social institutions are better suited to

enforcing commitments than are others. Perhaps the Japanese social and legal structure is better able

to enforce labour commitments than is the case in other countries.

        Our characterization of commitment is fairly extreme: one firm is simply able to precommit to a

particular output level, before the other. The basic principles of commitmei do appl, hcveer, in

much more general circumstances. Specifically, whenever a firm can shift costs from the %ariable to the

fixed category. it can exploit a strategic commitment effect. If there are two firms, A and B, eath with

marginal costs CA and c, then Nash equilibrium outputs will depend on marginal costs: z = r(cA, cB);

y   =    y(cA, c8), where each firm's output (and profit) is inversely related to its win marginal cost and

positively related to its rivals marginal cost. The essence of precommitment (as argued in Brander and

Spencer (1983)), is to reduce own marginal costs by turning marginal costs into fixed costs, therel

expanding output and profit. The extreme (Stackelberg) version of commitment used here is equivalent

to a case in which the firm lowers its marginal costs to zero for all output le'vels up to the Sta&elberg

level.


        More generally, even if firms have some flexibility in the use of labour when they actually produce

output, as long as marginal costs are lowered slightly, there is a commitment effect. Redundancy

payments fit into this interpretation nicely. If the marginal cost of an extra unit of output (produced

by one worker) is c, but the firm pays severance pay of q, then the effective marginal cost of production

is only r —    q,   since the firm must pay at least q in any case. The q part of production cost ha.s become

a fixed cost. This creates a strategic commitment effect becaus kwered marginal costs commit a firm

to a more aggressive output reaction function, ewri though marginal costs are not reduced all the ay

to zero.


Dz.tortionary Tcze8

        The analysis of this paper assumes that the gcwernment has nondistortionary taxes aailable to it.

The purpose of this assumption is to highlight the economic principles central to our paper without

                                                        28
dwelling on the important but well understood issues related to distortion ary taxes In practice, hcw ever,

tax distortions are so important that distortionary taxes probably deserve some discussion in any paper

dealing with government budget constraints.


    The first point to note is that the connection between distortionary taxes and welfare economics has

been the subject of a large literature. Useful textbooks include 'Thesch (1981) and Atkinson and Stiglitz

(1980). In our model. distortionary taxes could be included in a variety of ways, the most plausible

of which would be to add a third good, leisure, allowing workers to allocate their time between work

and leisure. Government revenue would be raised from taxes on labour income or on consumption (or

both). but leisure would be untaxed. Taxes would therefore distort the choice between leisure and work,

creating a deadweight loss associated with raising government revenue. For small changes in policy,

this marginal deadweight loss could be treated as a constant, say 5. The shadow 'value of a unit of

government revenue would be (1 + 5), implying that policies which lose revenues (like subsidies) should

have their benefits divided by (1 + 6) before being compared with costs. Such policies would clearly

become much less attractive. Furthermore, the labour union effect of extracting part of any strategic

subsidy as higher wages would further reduce the attractiveness of strategic subsidies. Policies which

raise revenue, such as tariffs, would, on the other hand, become more attractive.


6. Concluding SummAry

     In this paper we draw attention to the idea that asymmetries in labour relations may have important

effects on output rivalries between firms. Such asymmetries are particularly striking in cross-country

comparisons and are therefore of greatest interest in international markets. We focus on two particular

asymmetries, using a simple duopoly model. First, one firm is assumed to be unionized while the other

hires labour at its opportunity cost. Secondly, one firm is able to commit itself to hiring (and using) a

labour force of a particular size before its rival sets output. The existence of labour market asymmetries

in the form of unions or commitments to labour significantly affect the strategic postitions of firms in

rivalries with each other. Unionization of one firm confers a very substantial benefit on the rival and has

                                                     29
the effect of transferring rents to union members and reducing profits to the unionized firm. As for the

labour commitment effect,      argue that the committed firm is in a natural Stadcelberg leader position

relative to its uncommitted rival. Precommitment to output using commitment to labour can, hcwewr,

be damaging in a world of uncertainty where flexibility is important. We introduce uncertainty into our

analysis and characterize, in a simple case, the tradeoff between the strategic value of commitment, and

cost of lost flexibility.


     A major objective of the paper is to examine the consequences of these labour marint asymmetries

for trade policy incentives, under the assumption that the two firms are in different countries. The trade

policies considered are tariffs, quotas and subsidies. In this imperfectly competitiw environment, such

policies can be used to the national advantage because they shift rents from the foreign firm to domestic

residents. The principle effect of a wage setting union is to "skim off" rents obtained from rent-shifting

subsidies or tariffs. This changes the optimal subsidy or tariff and suggests caution in the use of such

policies if government revenue cannot be obtained without imposing distortionary taxes. The effect

of union power is particularly strong under (binding) import quotas, because the union recongnizes

that higher wage demands will not have the effect of allowing greater import penetration. Labour

commitment in the foreign country does not change the basic form of profit-shifting policies. It does

alter the actual levels of the optimal policies, because trade policy can be used to partially undo the

first mover advantage obtained by the foreign firm through commitment to its labour force.




                                                   30
                                              References
Atkinson, Anthony B. and Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1980) Lectures on Public Economics London: McGraw-
Hill.

Brander. James A. and Spencer, Barbara J. (1981), Tariffs and the extraction of foreign monopoly reas
under potential entry, Canadian Journal of Economics vol.14 (August), pp. 371-389.
Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer (1983), Strategic commitmert with R&D: the symmetric
case, Bell Journal of Economics vol. 14 (Spring), pp. 225-235.
Brander. James A. and Barbara J. Spencer (1984), Tariff protection and imperfect competition, in Henryk
Kierzkowski (ed.) Monopohstic Competition and International Trade (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer (1985), Export subsidies and international marint share
rivalry. Journal of International Economics vol. 18, (No. 1/2, February), pp.83-100.
Brecher, R.A. (1974), Optimal commercial poliky for a minimum wage economy. Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 139-149.
Crocker, Olga L., Charney, Syril, and Chiu, Johnny S. L. (1986) Quality Circles New York: New
American Library.
Dertouzos, James N. and Pencavel, John H. (1981), Wage and Empk:ment Determination under 'IIade
Unionism: The International Typographical Union, Journal of Political Economy vol. 89 (December),
pp. 1162-1181.
Dixit, Avinash K. (1980). The role of investment in entry deterrence, Economic Journal, \bl. 90, pp.
95-106.

Dixit, Avinash K. (1984), International trade policy for oligopolistic industries, Economic Journal Con-
ference Papers, Vol. 94, pp. 1-16.
Eaton, B. Curtis and Richard E. Lipsey (1980), Exit barriers are entry barriers: the durability of capital
as a barrier to entry, Bell Journal of Economics, Vol. 10, pp. 721-729.
Eaton, Jonathan and Gene Grossman (1986), Optimal trade and industrial policy under oligopoly
Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 101 (May), pp.383-406.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1980), Monopsony distortions in the open economy: a theoretical analysis. Journal
of International Economics, Vol. 10 (May), pp. 213-236.
Freeman, Richard B. and Medoff, James L. (1984), What Do Unions Do, New York: Basic Books.

Grossman, Gene M. (1984), International competition and the unionized sector, Canadian Journal of
Economics,Vol. 17, (August) pp. 541-556.
Hanami, Tadashi (1979), Labour Relations in Japan Today, Tokyo and New York: Kodansha Interna-
tional.
Krugman, Paul (1984), Import protection as export promotion: international competition in the presence
of oligopoly and and economies of scale in Monopolistic Competition and International Trade, ed. Henryk
Kierzkowski, Oxford: Oxford University Press

                                                   31
McDonald. Ian M. and Robert Solow (1981) Wage bargaining and emplment. American Economic
Review. Vol. 71 (December), pp. 896-908.
Oswald, Andrew J. (1982) The Microeconornic theory of the trade union, Economic Journal, Vol. 92
(September). pp.576-595.
Patrick. Hugh and Rosovsky, Henry (1976), Asia 's new giant: How the Japanese economy works, (Wash-
ington D.C.: The Brookings Institution).
Pearce. David G. (1984). Rationalizable strategic behaviour and the problem of perfection, Econome-
rica.Vol. 52 (July). pp. 1029-1050.
Salop. Steven C. and David T. Scheffman (1983). Raising rivals costs, American Economic Retieu
(Paper and Proceedings). Vol. 73 (May). pp. 267-271.
Sampson, Anthony A. (1983) Employment policy in a model with a rational trade union, Economic
Journatvol. 93 (June), pp. 297-311.
Selten, Reinhardt (1975). Reexamination of the perfectness concept for equilibrium pouts in extensis
games. International Journal of Game Theory, VOl. 4, pp. 25-55.
Starrett, David (1979) Second best Ifare economics in the mixed economy. Journal of Public Economics
vol. 12, pp. 329-349.
Tresch, Richard (1980) Public Finance: a Normative Approach Piano, Texas: Business Publications
Incorporated.
Tsurumi, Yoshi (1978), Japanese Business, New York: Praeger.
Varian, Hal (1978), Microeconomic Analysis New York: Norton.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1968), Wage rates as a barrier to entry: t.he Pennington case. Quaterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 85 (February), pp. 85-116.




                                                 32
