NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SKILL GAPS, SKILL SHORTAGES AND SKILL MISMATCHES:
EVIDENCE FOR THE US
Peter Cappelli
Working Paper 20382
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20382

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

Thanks to colleagues at the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council on Employment for
helping me understand developments outside the US, to David Coats for help with the UK literature,
Pascaline Descy and colleagues at CEDEFOP(European Center for the Development of Vocational
Training), Jerry Jacobs, Larry Kahn, Paul Harrington, and Paul Osterman for helpful comments.The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Peter Cappelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Skill Gaps, Skill Shortages and Skill Mismatches:¸˛Evidence for the US
Peter Cappelli
NBER Working Paper No. 20382
August 2014
JEL No. J08,J23,J24
ABSTRACT
Concerns that there are problems with the supply of skills, especially education-related skills, in the
US labor force have exploded in recent years with a series of reports from employer-associated organizations
but also from independent and even government sources making similar claims. These complaints
about skills are driving much of the debate around labor force and education policy, yet they have
not been examined carefully. The discussion below examines the range of these charges as well as
other evidence about skills in the labor force. There is very little evidence consistent with the complaints
about skills and a wide range of evidence suggesting that they are not true. Indeed, a reasonable conclusion
is that over-education remains the persistent and even growing situation of the US labor force with
respect to skills. I consider three possible explanations for the employer complaints as well as the implications
associated with those changes.

Peter Cappelli
The Wharton School
Center for Human Resources
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6358
and NBER
cappelli@wharton.upenn.edu

Skill Gaps, Skill Shortages and Skill Mismatches:
Evidence and Arguments for the US
Peter Cappelli1
Prepared for ILR Review
Abstract:
Concerns that there are problems with the supply of skills, especially education-related skills, in the US
labor force have exploded in recent years with a series of reports from employer-associated organizations
but also from independent and even government sources making similar claims. These complaints about
skills are driving much of the debate around labor force and education policy, yet they have not been
examined carefully. The discussion below examines the range of these charges as well as other evidence
about skills in the labor force. There is very little evidence consistent with the complaints about skills and
a wide range of evidence suggesting that they are not true. Indeed, a reasonable conclusion is that overeducation remains the persistent and even growing situation of the US labor force with respect to skills. I
consider three possible explanations for the employer complaints as well as the implications associated
with those changes.

Introduction:

The assertions that there are wide-spread problems with the supply of skill in the U.S. have been
common in recent years. Stories in the popular press of individual employers who report that
they cannot fill vacancies are frequent,2 but there have also been a large number of detailed
reports by business associations, individual companies, as well as independent organizations
arguing that skill problems are widespread. The rise of these stories is especially surprising as

1

Professor of Management at the Wharton School and Director of the Center for Human Resources and NBER.
This paper was prepared for the ILR Review. Thanks to colleagues at the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda
Council on Employment for helping me understand developments outside the US, to David Coats for help with the
UK literature, Pascaline Descy and colleagues at CEDEFOP(European Center for the Development of Vocational
Training), Jerry Jacobs, Larry Kahn, Paul Harrington, and Paul Osterman for helpful comments.
2
A Google search for the phrase “Skill gap” shows over 330,000 references just in 2013.

1

they appear to have increased since the 2008 Great Recession when the flood of unemployed job
seekers – most of them recently employed - far exceeded available job opportunities (BLS 2014).

The evidence driving the complaints about skills does not necessarily appear where labor market
experts might expect to see it, such as in rising wages. Instead, it comes directly from employers
- typically from surveys – who report difficulties hiring the kind of workers they need. The
assertions explaining their reported difficulties center on the idea that the academic achievement
of high school leavers is inadequate or that there are not enough college graduates in practical
fields like computer science and engineering. The recommendations from these reports include
increased immigration and use of foreign workers as well as efforts to shape the majors that
college students choose.

These reports have had a powerful influence on public debate about the state of the labor market
as well as the performance of high schools and colleges. Virtually all of them are framed in
terms of concerns about the economy as a whole, but it is difficult to escape the fact that the
producers of many of these reports have a material interest in the outcomes of the policies they
are attempting to influence.

The arguments below examine the claims associated with complaints about the supply of skills in
the US. The evidence they present as well as evidence from other sources suggests little merit to
their claims. An important question raised by these reports, however, is who is responsible for
the skill level of job candidates and, ultimately, of employees. Traditional employer human
resource practices, such as assessing the abilities of job applicants, training employees for
current jobs, and developing them internally for future roles saw employers as responsible for
securing the skills they need. The thrust of these reports suggests that the education sector –
2

especially public-funded education – and job candidates themselves should be responsible for
producing the skills that employers want. Such a change would have profound implications for
society and is worth considering seriously.

Framing the Problem: The arguments that there are problems with the supply of skills available
in the labor market take various forms. The most extreme complaint is the idea that there are
widespread shortfalls in the basic skills of future employees. The cause is usually attributed to
the failure of the education system, especially K-12 public education, to provide students with
these basic skills. We refer to that position as a “skills gap,” following its use in policy
discussions.

A second complaint focuses more on job-related skills of the kind associated with particular
occupations, such as the common assertion that the U.S. is short on engineers or information
technology specialists. We refer to this assertion as a “skills shortage.”

The final concern, which is much more commonly articulated outside the U.S., is the more
general idea that at any given time, the supply of skills and the demand for skills could be out of
synch in either direction - oversupply or undersupply. This situation could occur in specific
labor markets, although with respect to educational credentials it is usually considered at the
country level. We refer to it as a “skills mismatch.” A skill shortage is obviously a particular
type of skill mismatch, and a skills gap could be a general form of mismatch. All these
complaints collectively can be referred to as “skill problems.”

The first challenge in assessing the assertions about skills problems is to have a conceptual
framework for understanding the relationship between workers and their skills against employer

3

needs. One approach, traditionally associated with the topic of internal labor markets and the
academic field of human resources and before that personnel, suggests that matching skills to job
requirements is an employer problem. Over time, employers have internalized the supply of
labor, selecting for general abilities at entry-level positions and then training and developing
employees over a working lifetime to meet their specific skill needs (Jacoby 1983). That
approach appears to have eroded substantially in recent years (e.g., Cappelli 1999), an issue we
return to below.

The other approach focuses on the labor market as the mechanism for meeting employer skill
requirements. The idea of job matching between employers and job seekers implies job search,
which typically assumes that employers have job requirements that are generally determined
exogenously, and employers then go searching for job applicants who have those skills. The
search process is realistically described as “two-sided” if both employers and employees are
looking for a match, and a good match is one where the skills of the applicants and the
requirements of the job fit closely: neither a shortfall nor an oversupply of skill relative to those
requirements.

In typical economics models of job search, the process is reasonably passive: Employers make
offers to job applicants who accept the job when the offer matches or beats their reservation
price. Employers raise wages to attract better applicants whose attributes are closer fits for those
job requirements, and they fall if there is an excess supply of such applicants (see Mortenson
1986 for the framework of job search models). The notion of a “shortage” is foreign to this
model and to most all economics-based models. Indeed, shortages in general are typically seen

4

as occurring only in the context of market failure, such as wartime wage freezes or restrictions
on mobility, and temporary until candidates and employer adjust.3

In practice, of course, employers can search more extensively through recruiting activities and
more careful selection, and applicants can search actively by securing better information about
vacancies. We also know that job requirements are not exogenous from the supply of applicants:
A shortfall of applicants that leads to higher wages in turn causes employers to substitute capital
for labor in order to create new jobs with lower skill requirements (see below). Empirical
evidence indicates that employers also lower the skill requirements for given jobs when labor is
relatively scarce and raise them when higher quality applicants are plentiful (Walsh 1977;
Brencic 2010).

What is less clear in typical models is how the supply of skills affects employer decisions on
production systems and, ultimately, productivity. It certainly is true that “better” workers who
are absent less, who shirk less, and who work harder will improve organizational productivity
and performance even if nothing changes about their jobs (e.g., Cascio 2008 for a review). But
whether more skilled applicants per se cause employers to innovate, to adopt more effective
practices, or to change the way that jobs are performed is an open question that is often part of
the skill gap arguments.

The recent assertions about skill problems have quite a different underlying model in mind,
although it is typically unstated, and it does not include a role either for internal labor markets or
for the labor market. Instead, the arguments are akin to input-output models associated with

3

See Mortenson 1986 for a basic framework, Rogerson, Shimer, & Wright (2005) for an overview of job
search models, and Borjas (2010) Chapter 6 for an survey of general labor supply questions.
5

operations research optimization exercises. Perhaps the closest analogy is with supply chain
models where suppliers are trying to produce just the right amount of output to meet the needs of
their clients at the previously agreed price (see, e.g., Cachon and Terwisch 2007). Skills are seen
as coming with the applicant to the job, and job requirements are absolute such that candidates
either have the necessary skills to do a job or not and if not, they cannot do the job. Finally, an
important goal for public education in these arguments, including public colleges and
universities, is seen as providing graduates that employers would like to hire.
Reports of Skill Gap and Skill Shortages:
The Skill Gap Idea: The broadest and perhaps most general complaint about skills has been the
skill gap idea, that there is some systematic shortfall in skills, broadly defined, across entire age
cohorts of the population. Typically the argument is that the decline is associated with the poor
skills of school leavers, and the explanation for that shortfall is usually that schools have failed
so that academic performance of students has declined.
Concerns like this in the U.S. trace their contemporary roots to the Cold War and the 1958
National Defense Education Act, which increased funding for science and engineering education
in an effort to compete with the Soviet Union. The A Nation at Risk (1983) report highlighted
declines in student achievement of all kinds in the 1970s and helped cement in the mind of the
public for decades after that US schools were failing.
An equally attention-getting report by the Carnegie-funded National Center on Education and the
Economy, America’s Choice: High Skills or Low Wages? (1990), argued explicitly that
productivity growth depended on increasing the skill level of the US workforce. Although the
report estimated than only five percent of employers thought they face any skill problems, that
6

low number was attributed to the fact that employers were not introducing new, high
performance work practices that would increase productivity. Among its recommendations was
to establish national educational standards for students based on international standards, the
establishment of skill certifications, and national training boards to organize smooth transitions
between school and work.
A separate report for the US Secretary of Labor represented an extension of the America’s
Choice study. The Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS 1991) also
envisioned a future where employee empowerment had increased, where workplaces had moved
toward high performance work systems that required greater skills, and where employers trained
constantly and saw human resources as investments rather than costs. The recommendations,
which became known as SCANS Skills, were central to the policy debates of the 1990s. They
called for a generic set of skills from high schools that included basic skills (reading, writing,
math, etc.), thinking skills, such as decision making, and personal attributes such as
responsibility. Developed in the Republican Bush administration, the SCANS ideas were
nevertheless embraced by the Democratic Clinton administration and dominated the discussion
of skills throughout the 1990s.
The most important action on skills in the 1990s was arguably the school-to-work movement,
based in part on SCANS arguments, which asserted that the way to improve student skills and to
increase employability was to bring school and employers closer together in an effort to smooth
the transition from school into work. In practice that meant apprenticeships, coop programs,
internships, and other arrangements that would help students see the practical value of classroom
lessons first by using more business and workplace examples in the classroom and second by
seeing how those examples could be applied in at work. The School-to-Work Opportunities Act
7

of 1994 (STWO) provided administrative and financial support to help build those connections.
(See Stull and Sanders 2003 for an overview of the school-to-work movement and public
policy.)
Joyce and Neumark (2001) find that 64 percent of schools had at least one school-to-work
program with employers (the most popular of which was “job shadowing”), and data from the
National Longitudinal Survey of Youth suggests that 38 percent of students participated in
school-to-work programs. Census data from establishments finds 71 percent of for-profit
establishments reporting that they were involved in some school-to-work program with their
local schools (Cappelli 2001). Because establishments represent the location where business
takes place rather than the firm per se, this suggests quite extensive business involvement.
The high water mark of the SCANS effort was the National Skills Standards Act of 1994, which
was designed to create a voluntary system of national standards for job skills, overseen by a
National Skills Standards Board. The initial efforts were organized around industries, but
consensus on standards proved elusive, and interest waned. The Board’s last publication,
seeking comments on an approach for creating standards, was in 2002.
The Labor Shortage Argument: With the sunset of the STWO Act in 1999, a new
Administration less interested in a role for government in affairs related to business, and the
recession of 2001 that cooled off the tight labor market, the debate about skills changed sharply.
Funding for SCANS-related efforts and school-to-work programs ended as did arguments about
the need to push employers toward high performance work systems and to create skill standards.
Most of the skills-related arguments following the 2001 recession came initially from consultants
who asserted that in the near future there would simply not be enough people to meet labor

8

demand. Those arguments were kicked off by McKinsey & Co’s “The War for Talent” study
(Chambers, et al. 1998), which observed the smaller “baby bust” age cohort born in the 1970s
and asserted that it would soon cause a shortfall in middle-aged employee talent, although why
there would be a special need for middle-age talent was not clear. Similar reports followed, such
as The U.S. Chamber of Commerce (2006:13), which assumed that the impending retirement of
the baby boom cohort would lead to an absolute decline in the size of the labor force and a
“severe worker shortage.” (See Public Policy and Aging Report 2004 for a collection of articles
arguing that a labor shortage was coming and Challenger 2003 and Carnevale 2005 for similar
arguments.) 4
These arguments are puzzling in part because the basic claim that the population and potential
labor force is or will be shrinking seems to be a simple misreading of the facts: Only the rate of
increase in the labor force was expected to slow, assuming baby boomers do not delay retirement
(see CBO 2013 for a review of forecasts).5
Several researchers pointed out other problems with these labor shortage arguments, such as the
anticipated slowdown in the rate of increase in the labor force is trivial compared to changes in
the demand for labor associated with the business cycle (Cappelli 2003, Freeman 2006,
4

Concerns that the demographics of the US will cause some shortfall in the supply of labor, affecting business and
the economy, continued to be voiced by The Aspen Institute (2003), Dychtwald et al. (2006), and others. The Great
Recession and unemployment rates at double-digit levels have not stopped these arguments. Venneberg and
Eversole (2010), Bluestone and Melnik (2010), and others assert that the retirement of the baby boomers will lead to
apocalyptic shortages, with as many as 30-40 percent of jobs in sectors like healthcare being vacant.
5

The fact that the labor force participation rate in the US has declined since the Great Recession in 2008 may say
little about the longer-term availability of workers as much of the decline appears to be driven by the lack of job
opportunities. In March of 2014, for example, there were 2.2 million individuals marginally attached to the labor
force who were available for work but not counted as unemployed because they were not actively searching for jobs.
In March of 2008, just before the economic downturn began, the figure was 1.4 million, according to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics Employment Situation News Release for those months. . See MLR 2013 for information on the
labor force participation rates.

9

Neumark, Johnson, and Mejia 2011, and Harrington and Sum forthcoming). Despite the obvious
problems with these labor shortage arguments, the Society of Human Resource Management
(SHRM 2003) reported that large numbers of employers in the early 2000’s were preparing for a
labor shortage predicted to occur by 2010. None of these projections proved to be right.
Skill Gaps and STEM Skills Reports: If the SCANS approach was aspirational (“here’s what
the workforce should have”), the more recent arguments have been grounded in the present,
asserting that there is currently a shortfall in the skills of the workforce. The American Society
of Training and Development (ASTD), whose members hold jobs as trainers, in employee
development, etc., asserted that view in a series of annual reports beginning in 2003. The most
interesting part of their most recent report (ASTD 2012) is that the most important explanations
members saw as causes of the shortfall in skills were management actions internal to the
organization.6 Skills problem were seen as self-inflicted by management.
Other reports argue that there will be a shortage of skills associated with college education. The
President’s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, a business-led council (20 of its 24 members
are from business), claim that the US would have a shortfall of 1.5 million college graduates by
2020, citing McKinsey & Co. as the source (Jobs Council 2012). In perhaps the most alarmist
report, Carnevale, Smith, and Strohl (2010) conclude that the demand for college graduates in
the US will fall short of supply by 3 million individuals by 2018. Harrington and Sum (2010)
pointed out one fundamental problem with projections like these is the assumption that every job
currently held by a college graduate requires the skills associated with that degree. As Levine
The most common response was that their organization had changed “strategy, goals, markets,
or business models” such that the current workforce did not have the skills to meet those new
approaches; in second place was the lack of “bench strength” or possible replacements for the
current leadership; third place was that cuts in training investments and lack of commitment to
development caused a shortfall. A shortfall in the skills of applicants came in fourth place.
6

10

(2013) points out, 60 percent of parking lot attendants in Wisconsin have at least some college
education yet those jobs surely do not require college-level skills.
The focus of skill gap arguments in the 2000s shifted from broad SCANS-type skills to academic
skills associated with Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) education,
particularly four-year college degrees. There have been complaints from the business
community about shortfalls in the supply of such skills before (e.g., Atkinson 1990 predicted a
shortfall of 400,000 scientists), but the intensity of the arguments increased sharply especially
when they were joined to the debate about immigration.
A report from the US Department of Commerce (1997) argued that there was a severe shortage
of IT workers in the US that required increased immigration as well as expanding education.
That claim and the report itself was criticized by a Government Accounting Office report (Joyner
1998) that noted methodological problems with it such as the assumption that only graduates
with IT degrees can do IT-related jobs and reliance on evidence from a tech employer group
(e.g., with a survey response rate of only 14 percent). The National Research Council’s (2001)
report on the IT workforce avoided taking a clear position on whether there was an IT labor
shortage, but its recommendations relied heavily on traditional actions that employers should
take to address their perceived shortages, such as more extensive training.
The attention on skill problems shifted to STEM skills with a joint publication of the National
Academies of Science, Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine called “Rising Above the
Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future”(2007).
The charge given to the Committee was how best to support science and technology in the US,
both in research and in business application. A central argument of the report is that the cost and
availability of skilled labor in science and technology drives multinational companies in their
11

decisions as to where to operate, and increasing the supply of STEM graduates and allowing
more foreign STEM workers and foreign STEM students to enter and stay in the US would
benefit the industry. This view represented a sharp break from the America’s Choice and
SCANS idea that an important goal of policy was to raise wages. Here the notion was the higher
wages were actually a problem for the technology industry and therefore for the advancement of
technology.
Since then, arguments about skill shortages and STEM skills in particular have been
commonplace. The National Academy of Sciences produced six separate reports related to
STEM skill issues just in 2012, many about expanding the supply of skill. The President’s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology was one of many studies asserting a shortfall of
STEM grads, arguing that the US needed an additional one million such graduates to meet
demand (President’s Council 2012). These arguments about a coming labor shortage are very
similar to those made a decade earlier, the difference being the focus on particular skills.
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, which represents engineers, disputed the
claims of a shortfall of engineers in particular, noting a range of evidence about the difficulty
that many engineers have in getting jobs and suggesting that there is actually a surplus of STEM
graduates relative to demand and that a large percentage of “STEM” jobs are not performed by
individuals with degrees in that field: Few computer programmers, for example, have a B.S. in
Computer Science (Charette 2012). Salzman, et al. 2013 also argue against the STEM shortage
idea in a report for the Economic Policy Institute (EPI). The strongest evidence in their study
arguably is that roughly half of recent engineering graduates do not take jobs as engineers and of

12

those who do not, roughly 30 percent say there was no job available for them; another 30 percent
say that the terms and conditions for those jobs were below market levels.7
The Computer and Technology Industry Association (2012) produced an unusually detailed
report, again based on a survey of employers, where 93 percent of employers responding said
that they had a skills gap. Yet 90 percent also responded that they are at least “moderately close”
to “where they want to be” with respect to skills, only 15 percent said that a factor in their skill
problem was insufficient focus on STEM education, and only 20 percent reported that the
problem was a limited pool of skilled IT workers, the essence of the STEM skill shortage
argument. A large part of their perceived skill gaps had to do with “soft skills”- work ethic and
motivation (almost 20 percent said that their concern was only soft skills, and about half reported
that it was equally divided between “hard” and “soft skills”).
Individual employers have also produced reports claiming that there are nationwide skills
problems. For example, the health science company Bayer issued a report (Bayer 2013) based on
a survey of recruiters at Fortune 1000 companies reporting that their companies were creating
more jobs for STEM graduates than for those with any other credentials, a surprising finding
given that the Bureau of Labor Statistic’s Occupational Outlook forecast projects that only two

7

For graduates in IT, perhaps the hottest of the true STEM job markets, only about one-third fail to take IT jobs.
But about 30 percent of those say that the reason was that there was no job for them, while a much larger
percentage, 53 percent, say the terms and conditions for such jobs were below the prospects elsewhere. The
extremes were represented by health care graduates, who are not always counted as STEM graduates, where
almost three-quarters got healthcare jobs, and all other STEM grads (e.g., science and math majors) where only
about 22 percent got jobs in their field. Atkinson and Stewart (2013) published a rebuttal to the Salzman et al.
report for The Information Technology and Innovation Foundation (ITIF). Perhaps the most interesting point in
their report is the observation that the sponsors of the various reports matter: EPI’s goal, they argue, is higher
wages for tech workers, they asserted, while their goal was to promotion economic growth, presumably by making
tech labor easier and cheaper for IT employers to engage. (EPI is sponsored in part by labor unions; ITIF is
sponsored by tech employers.)

13

(registered and licensed nurses) of the top twenty occupations with the most new openings
through 2020 require any post-secondary education, let alone STEM degrees (BLS 2014).8
A related complaint one often hears in STEM arguments is that US college students do not want
to take the hard majors in college like those associated with STEM degrees and instead are
coasting in easier majors and ones that have poor job prospects like liberal arts. In fact, the most
popular majors in four-year colleges seem to be the most vocational: business is by far the most
popular, one-in five students major in it (365,000 per year) and job skills are the focus; the
second most popular major is education (104,000), another vocational field with a very close tie
to jobs. The NCES defines liberal arts rather narrowly, and only 47,000 students choose that
major in contrast to 76,000 in engineering (NCES Table 313). Since 2000-’01 STEM degrees
have increased at a rate equal to or greater than the 32 percent increase in overall bachelor
degrees: Engineering up 31 percent, Physical Sciences up 34 percent, Math/Statistics and
Biology up 42 and 50 percent, respectively (NCES Table 313).9
More recent evidence suggests that entering college students have been responding to the
employer complaints about shortfalls in STEM graduates. Jacobs and Lax (2014) find that
student choices for majors in college have shifted sharply, from 21 percent in STEM fields in
2007 to 28 percent in 2011. The ratio of graduate degrees to bachelor degrees issued also rose
from roughly one-in-three to one-in two from 1971 to 2012, and more than 85 percent of those
degrees are in applied fields (NCES Table 318).

8

Barnow et al’s (2013) investigation of occupation-specific and regional labor shortages is an exception to those
reviewed here in that it places labor market adjustments and better information front and center as the means for
addressing such shortfalls.
9
If we define liberal arts more broadly to include humanities and social sciences, the percentage of such graduates
declined from 40 percent of all bachelor degrees in 1971 to about one-third in 2012. Thanks to Jerry Jacobs for
this figure and for the graduate degree information as well.

14

Consultant Reports: Virtually every major consulting company has also weighed in on either
the skills gap or skill shortage idea. As noted above, Deloitte (2011) on behalf of the
Manufacturing Institute of the National Association of Manufacturing, arguing that there is a
massive shortage of qualified candidates in that industry, McKinsey (2012) argued that there
would be a shortage of tens of millions of educated workers across the developed economies in
coming decades, and PWC (2012) noting that CEOs believe that labor shortages will impact their
company success in the near future.
Two consulting companies produced reports pointing in the opposite direction, however. The
Boston Consulting Group (2013) argued that there was little evidence of tight labor markets for
manufacturing workers because wages were not rising. Accenture (2012) took a very different
approach by surveying workers rather than employers. They found, among other things, that
only one in five workers had learned any new job skills through employer-provided training in
the past five years, and a plurality said that their employer relied only on their formal education
and prior job experience in assigning tasks and jobs, not using any other assessments of their
knowledge, skills, and abilities. As a possible sign of changing norms, 68 percent of respondents
believed strongly that it was their responsibility to keep their skills up-to-date in their current job,
not their employer’s (only nine percent disagreed).
Perhaps the most influential and widely-quoted of the consultant reports on skill problems have
been those published by Manpower, the staffing firm, in large measure because their reports
provide reasonably detailed information from employers across countries on their perceived skill
problems. The limitations of their data are similar to those for virtually all the business-based
reports that gather data from employers: The sampling frame used for the survey is not
identified but the inference is strong that it is not representative of the population of employers
15

from which it is drawn (e.g., the sample is likely clients of Manpower); we do not know the
sample size nor the response rate to the survey, how the questionnaire was structured, who the
respondents were, etc. Many of the results also suggest problems of face validity. For example,
in 2010, 14 percent of US employers reported that they had difficulty filling jobs, but a year later
in the 2011, when the economy and the labor market had barely changed, the figure jumped to 52
percent. Then in 2013, when the economy had begun to show some signs of improvement and
one would expect hiring to become more difficult, the percentage of employers reporting
difficulty actually fell to 39 percent (Manpower 2013: 7). The wording of the question asking
about skill problems is not clear, which makes the validity of the responses impossible to
determine.10
Nevertheless, the reports may be useful in providing some details as to what employers may
mean when they say that they have difficulty hiring. For example, among the respondents’ list of
the 10 most difficult jobs for US employers to fill are laborers, a job with no discernable skill,
drivers and production operators (factory workers), two positions with minimal skill, and
secretaries/administrative assistance, jobs that do not necessarily require more than a high school
education. It is difficult to believe that difficulties in hiring for these jobs represent a real
shortfall of individuals who are able to perform the tasks required in those jobs especially given
the high rate of unemployment in this period. They may well reflect problems with hiring
practices.

10

The tables in the report show the question as “How much difficulty are you having filling jobs due to lack of
available talent?” which is a question about degree. But the results are reported as the percentage of employers
having difficulty filling jobs, which is a binary, yes/no question. Some places in the text of the report refer to the
same results as representing “hard-to-fill jobs.”

16

When asked what the shortfall was in the applicants they see for their jobs, almost 20 percent say
that the job seekers were not willing to accept positions at the rate of pay being offered, yet only
five percent report that they were planning to raise pay in order to deal with difficulties in hiring.
Among causes that reflected directly on attributes of the candidates, 31 percent of employers said
the shortfall was lack of experience, six percent report that the problem was overqualification,
and eight percent say that applicants did not want the jobs because they were contingent or parttime. Only a third of respondents report that a lack of “hard skills,” the category related to skills
that could be learned in school, was a problem they saw (Manpower 2013). These responses are
hard to square with a skills gap view or even the skills shortage argument.
Nothing in the above employer reports indicates that difficulties in hiring refer specifically to
applicants who are recent school leavers, although the conclusion is typically that they are. The
vast majority of the labor force are obviously not recent school leavers: The Bureau of Labor
Statistics calculates that there are about 1.3 million recent school leavers in the labor force in the
age group 16 to 24 (Spreen 2013), less than one percent of the US labor force. The vast majority
of job candidates, therefore, have been out of school for some time, and so the vast majority of
the job applicants should be out of school for some time as well (applicants include those
currently employed looking for better jobs as well as the unemployed).

Perhaps the most relevant employer-based evidence on skill problems comes from other studies
that asked recruiters, rather than higher-level executives, about specific shortfalls that they saw
in new hires, especially those who are recent school leavers. There have been several reports
like these at least since the 1980s, and the conclusions have been similar. The complaints
consistently focus on shortfalls in factors associated with conscientiousness (see Cappelli 1995).
More recent surveys report the same conclusions. For example, a 2009 survey by the Business
17

Roundtable found that the top seven most commonly seen deficits were in those workplace
attitudes. The first shortfall associated with academic skills was oral communication, in 8th
place. 11 A 2011 hiring manager survey finds that of the 15 attributes listed as important for
success in their organizations, only communication skills was related to an academic subject
(Career Advisory Board 2011). Wolf et al (2010) reach the same conclusion for the UK, that
employer complaints about school leavers have been about attitudes rather than skills.

Comparative Evidence: Some insight about the situation in the US might be gained from what
employers elsewhere are reporting about skills. Although the validity and reliability of the data
may be suspect (see below), a survey by the Manpower Group finds US employers fourth out of
41 countries in their complains about hiring the applicants they want, far above countries with
tight labor markets like Singapore and Norway where we might expect a relative shortfall of
applicants.
The economy, legal framework, and business community in the UK is arguably the most similar
to the US among the world’s larger economies, which might make a detailed comparison useful.
The business community there has also been very active in efforts to persuade the general public
and policymakers about the need to improve workforce skills. While some of the arguments
mirror those in the US, others and the evidence behind them are quite different. For example, the
Institute of Director’s (2010) report argues that there is a significant gap between the skills
employers need and those that school leavers have, but the biggest gap they see is in ”soft skills”:
leadership, sales, communication, and customer service skills, in that order, mirroring the data
but not the conclusions from US reports. The Engineering Employers Federation (2013) report
11

See http://businessroundtable.org/studies-and-reports/american-worker-survey-telebriefing/

18

finds that the industries experiencing the biggest skill problems were construction and agriculture
– not high-skill industries – although technical skills were the biggest shortfall in those two
industries. It calls for an expansion of apprenticeship programs as the most important policy
recommendation.
The Federation of Small Businesses (no date) and the British Chambers of Commerce (2011)
also made a strong case that apprenticeships are the key to addressing perceived skill problems.
The latter noted that while 54 percent of employers surveyed said that apprenticeships were not
relevant to their businesses, 30 percent of those who took apprentices did so out of civic
responsibility, something similar to what US employers reported a decade earlier in Census data
(Cappelli 2001). And while almost two-thirds of employers said that they had some engagement
in programs to help students make the transition from school-to-work, 14 percent had no training
budgets at all and presumably did no training. (The figures for Europe as a whole are even lower,
with about one-third of employers reporting that they did not provide training. The main reason
employers across Europe gave for not training was that they tried to hire workers with skills so
that they did not need to train. See CVTS 2013.)

The most influential of the UK business groups is the Confederation of British Industry (CBI),
and their 2013 report on skills follows the model of recent US reports closely. Indeed, it begins
by referencing US complaints about skills, then talking about failing schools as the cause and
declining performance compared to international standards as evidence, and finally focusing on
improved STEM skills, the US term, as the solution to skill problems. The evidence in their
employer survey does not support that conclusion, however, as only 12 percent of employers
reported having difficulty hiring college graduates with STEM skills, and the skills they are most

19

satisfied with are actually the “hard” STEM skills associated with IT. Despite this, respondents
report that their priority for schools and college is to develop more business-relevant coursework.
Contrary to its recommendations, the CBI study also finds that work attitudes and aptitudes are
the first concern from British employers who are hiring followed by the appropriateness of the
candidate’s academic degree for the job. Prior work experience, the number one concern for US
employers, is third on the list of the UK employers. The UK employers responding report much
greater involvement in education than in the US: 81 percent report they have some formal ties to
schools, 70 percent have apprenticeships, 41 percent offer internships, and 61 percent say that
they are willing to do more to help schools. The CBI report implies that employer-provided
training is even rarer than the British Chamber of Commerce (2011) report above asserts. The
CBI says that 59 percent of employers provided training for employees, implying that 41 percent
did not.
Taken as a whole, the evidence from UK employers is different from their US counterparts in
acknowledging that behavioral skills are the main concern, not academic skills, and in seeing
apprenticeships as the preferred solution, something that is rarely mentioned in the US reports.
(Recent practice in the UK has been for the government to pay most of the costs of
apprenticeships, especially for younger school leavers.) More importantly, despite the many
similarities and having essentially the same unemployment rate at the time the survey was done
as the US (8.1 percent in the UK versus 8.2 percent in the US), UK employers ranked 4th from
the bottom out of 41 countries in complaints about skill problems vs. 4th from the top in the US
(Manpower 2012). Whatever is driving the US complaints, it appears to be something not found
in the UK.
Academic Research on Skills:
20

The reports and evidence above were not written by or for an academic audience, nor did they
reflect any of the prior research on questions concerning skills. Contemporary academic
research on skill levels vs. employer needs arguably began with Berg’s (1970) assertion that
much of the investment in skills through training and education was not productive but was
actually driven by hiring requirements that served other needs, such as legitimacy, and by the
interests of students in going to college for reasons other than jobs, a precursor to later arguments
about signaling in labor markets. It took its most important turn with Freeman’s (1976) study of
the sharp decline in the wage premium of college graduates from 1969 to 1974 measured relative
to the wages of high school graduates. While his conclusion did not hold up in later periods
(e.g., Smith and Welch 1978), others made similar arguments about education mismatches,
especially Duncan and Hoffman (1981), who pursued the issue at the level of the individual
worker. They examined the returns to education for individual workers relative to the
requirements of their job and found that they were considerably lower for those who were overeducated as compared to where education levels equaled job requirements.
Their paper kicked off a stream of similar studies that continue today with more recent research
showing the negative effects of being overqualified initially persist for years (e.g., Clark, Joubert,
and Maurel 2014). Outside the US, McGuinness and Sloane (2011) found wage penalties for
education mismatches in the form of more skill independent from education per se for men than
jobs required, and that job satisfaction was significantly worse for those who were overeducated
and overskilled for their positions. Sutherland (2012), using the recent UK Skills and
Employment Survey, argues that overqualification of skills and education is widespread in the
UK and that as a result increasing skills and education further is not sensible policy. Instead,
policies should focus on increasing the demand for skills. Feldstead et al. (2013) use the same

21

data and find that overqualification of workers rose from 1986 to 2006 but then fell from 20062012 during the Great Recession. The decline reflected in part to increases in hiring
requirements, which were the measure used for job requirements, and the fact that training and
learning times were shortened for jobs: applicants were expected to come to jobs with more of
the skills they will need and not to require training.12 Mosca and Wright (2013) use micro data
from UK college grads to find that there are long-term negative effects or “scarring” associated
with starting out over-skilled: if one starts out underemployed, they tend to stay that way (in
contrast to the earlier argument from Sicherman and Galor 1990 that those who are overqualified
for their jobs may advance faster).
Researchers studying other countries find similar results. Ng (2003) finds that the overeducated
earn less in Canada and in general that education-job requirement mismatches are reasonably
common there. Badillo-Amador, Lopez, and Vila 2012 use the European Household Panel
Survey to show that for Spain, skill mismatches have big, negative effects on wages and job
satisfaction. Kostas and McGuiness (2007) report similar results for Australia - a small wage
premium associated with being undereducated and a wage penalty for being overeducated.
Mavromaras et al. (2013) use the new Household Income and Labour Dynamics (HILDA) data
from Australia and conclude that being overeducated and overskilled are not identical but both
have negative effects on wage outcomes. Mavromaras and Wei (2013) also use the HILDA data
and find evidence of long-term scarring: being overskilled leads to long-term, negative effects on
wages. Baert et al. (2013) find similar results for Flemish youth associated with being
12

Gottschalk and Hansen (2003) found almost the reverse relationship in the US, where the probability of being a
graduate employed in a job that did not require a graduate education declined between 1983 and 1996 as the
labor market got tighter. The implication might be that in a down market US employers are more likely to hire
overqualified applicants while in the UK, employers in similar circumstances are inclined to raise job requirements
so that graduates are not overqualified. Gottschalk and Hansen define “graduate” jobs in a very different manner,
however, based on outcomes that makes comparisons difficult: is the job title in fact filled by graduates and is
there a wage premium in it for graduates?

22

overeducated in one’s first job. The exception to the general overskilled story seems to be Italy
where Cainarc and Sgobbi (2012) use face-to-face interviews of respondents about skills and
conclude that there is substantial undereducation there relative to job requirements.
These results suggest that in these countries, skill mismatches are a common problem and also
that overskill is a much more widespread problem than underskill. Employees benefit somewhat
from being underskilled relative to the requirements of the job they are performing in that their
wages are higher there than in jobs that that were a better fit for their skills (i.e., where skill
requirements were lower). The costs to being over-skilled are born by employees in the form of
wages that are lower than they would have earned in jobs that made full use of their skills. In a
context where employees are increasingly asked to pay for their own skills, asking them to be
over-skilled, where they will not be compensated for that excess skill, is a burden.
The literature specific to the US on skill mismatch is sparse. Most of it is in sociology and
focuses on the more general question as to whether skill requirements in the economy are rising.
The consensus view is that overall requirements may be trending upward in recent decades,
albeit very slightly, although sorting out changing requirements within specific jobs is more
difficult than assessing changes in the distribution of workers across jobs. The most important
factor driving changes appears to be the decisions of individual employers as to how they
organize work (see NRC 2005 for an overview). The study most directly on the topic of
mismatches is Vaisey (2006), who compares educational qualifications to the education
requirements of jobs using the US Department of Labor’s O*NET job classification system to
define job requirements. It shows that the average worker in the US is overqualified for their job
and that the amount of that overqualification has been increasing in recent years.

23

Lie and Grusky (2013) use an interesting approach to assess changes in skill requirements across
the workforce. They begin with the jobs of Current Population Survey (CPS) respondents from
the 1970s to the present as representative of the distribution of jobs in the economy. They then
use the U.S. Department of Labor’s O*NET database on job requirements to capture the skills
associated with each job.13 They find increases in skill requirements over the last 40 or so years,
some to do with changes in the distribution of jobs and some to do with changes in skills within
jobs. The increases are modest: “academic skills” (analytic, quantitative, and verbal) up only
four percent, computer skill requirements up eight percent, surprisingly small given the dramatic
increase in the use of computers, and especially relevant for the STEM skills debate, no increase
in science and engineering skill requirements.
Whether employers are hurt by underskilled workers and helped by overskilled is a more
difficult question to answer. Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001) examine country-level data among
less developed countries and find that average skill levels below those deemed necessary for
appropriate technologies used in those countries are associated with significantly lower country
productivity. These skill levels are associated with the most basic skills, such as low-level
literacy. Bennett and McGuiness 2009 survey prior research on skill mismatches and firm
performance and report mixed results: some studies with no effect, others with negative effects.
They find that for electronics firms in Northern Ireland, hiring complaints were mainly in job
searches for experienced candidates. The effects of unfilled vacancies in particular on
performance are negative and substantial but only appear when the analyses control for firm
selection effects. Those effects are attributable largely to high performing firms. Kampelmann

13

The measure used here is to take the government’s official analyses of skills – one third of the Knowledge, Skills,
and Abilities trio of requirements –for each occupation in 1979 and then compare them to more recent
assessments from incumbents.

24

and Ryxc (2012) find positive productivity effects associated with overeducated workforces in
Belgium, however.
The academic work above has many limitations, of course, especially construct validity and
measurement issues. Most of these studies use education as a proxy for the level of skill an
individual has or a job requires. No doubt one reason for this is the roots of the skill argument in
returns to education, but a more practical reason is that education levels are much easier to assess
than are skill levels. A second major problem is the difficulty in assessing the skills that jobs
require. The best studies use objective assessments of the job, which requires an independent job
analysis, but most ask the respondents themselves either what is required to be hired into the job
or the extent to which they believe their own skills are being used.
Structural Change and Vacancy Arguments: A different set of arguments assert that the US
economy or the labor market has changed in ways that have altered the balance between the
supply and demand of skills. Lazear and Spletzer (2012) investigate the idea that job losses
associated with the Great Recession have been in different segments of the economy than where
recent job growth has been. They reject that view, noting that the pattern indicates something
more like a cyclical downturn, where job losses and subsequent gains are following a pattern
similar to what we have seen in previous recessions.
Rothstein (2012) examines a wide range of claims about possible changes in the structure of the
economy and the labor market and rejects them all. In particular, he notes the absence of any
upward pressure on wages that might be associated with a shortfall between the supply and
demand of labor by industry or occupation or even a tight labor market. The best explanation for
perceived difficulties in hiring by employers, he suggests, would be declines in the effort spent
on recruiting. Haltiwanger, Davis, and Faberman (2012) provide evidence that employer efforts
25

to recruit applicants per vacancy have indeed declined during the Great Recession and have not
recovered.
A measure that might well reveal hiring problems is vacancy data. Specifically, if the amount of
time that positions remain vacant increases, it may suggest something about difficulty in hiring
and, in turn, about the supply of qualified applicants. One of the most puzzling claims made by
many of the skill problem advocates is the notion that the presence of vacancies in the labor
force is evidence that jobs cannot be filled. The President’s Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness (Job Council 2012) makes that claim, asserting that vacancies per se reflect the
inability to find qualified applicants rather than the usual view that they reflect only the fact that
time is required to fill vacancies: Post the job advertisement, collect applicants, process them,
hire someone, and then close down the advertisement. Deloitte (2012) on behalf of the National
Association of Manufacturers, claimed that there were 600,000 good jobs in US manufacturing
that cannot be filled for a lack of qualified applicants, an astonishing figure given that the Bureau
of Labor Statistics reports only 220,000 total vacancies in manufacturing during the year the data
for the above report was collected (BLS 2014). Osterman and Weaver (2014) investigate the
labor market context in manufacturing with their own survey and find that two-thirds of
employers report having no vacancies and only 25 percent have had vacancies open long enough
to suggest there was difficulty in filling them. The most common of their self-reported
explanations as to why filling those long-term vacancies has been difficult was that candidates
lacked industry-specific skills (41 percent), and the second most common explanation was that
the wages they were offering were not sufficient to attract candidates (11 percent).
Whether vacancies are taking longer to fill now than in the past is an important question. The
Beveridge Curve gets at that indirectly by capturing the relationship between the unemployment
26

rate and the number of job openings as a proportion of the labor force. Jobs that stay open get
counted again in each time series estimate, so a change in the length of time required to fill jobs
would cause an apparent outward shift in the curve. Developments that cause jobs to be filled
faster would do the opposite and cause an apparent inward shift in the curve.
Barnichon et al. (2012) using the JOLTS data find that the Beveridge Curve did shift for the US
after the Great Recession in 2009 and that the shift was caused by a decline in hires per vacancy
expected at the relevant level of unemployment. Many factors could account for the relative
decline in hiring, such as greater hiring of the currently employed (which keeps the
unemployment rate from declining while creating vacancies elsewhere) and a decline in filling
vacancies from within (which expands the vacancy rate), but this would be the strongest
evidence so far that there may be problems with labor supply that make hiring more difficult.
The authors conclude that a mismatch of skills in the form of unemployed job seekers coming
from different industries than those where vacancies are is not part of the explanation, however,
and the list of possible explanations outside labor supply altogether is extensive (e.g., greater
uncertainty in the economy).
Davis et al (2013) use the same data and also find fewer hires than expected in the period since
recovery from the Great Recession officially began. They also find evidence of considerable
variation across employers in their ability or perhaps inclination to fill vacancies. Among their
strongest findings is that growing firms and those filling many vacancies are more likely to fill a
reported vacancy than are firms with a vacancy that are not growing or filling as many positions.
These results suggest that something about the manner in which firms are recruiting and

27

selecting candidates may be explaining why vacancies last longer, as the Haltiwanger, Davis, and
Faberman (2012) study cited above concluded. 14
Skill-Biased Technological Change: Among the most cited evidence in the academic literature
on skill are findings under the heading of skill-biased technological change (SBTC). In brief, the
argument is traced to Tinbergen’s (1974) idea that new technologies require more skilled
workers and that over time, the continual introduction of new technology therefore leads to a
continual demand for more skills. Societal investments in education increase the supply of
skilled workers and keep wages for workers with higher skills from spiraling upward.
Katz and Murphy (1992) produced compelling evidence consistent with the Tinbergen view by
looking at the college wage premium (relative to the wages of high school grads) over time and
finding that it closely tracked the relative supply of college grads. Deviations from the
prediction are seen as resulting from changes in technology, much as deviations in the orbits of
planets is seen in astronomy as evidence of gravity from unseen heavenly bodies. The fact that
the wage premium for college educations was rising in the 1980s even as the relative supply of
college graduates rose is taken as evidence of a shift in technology biasing demand toward more
skilled/educated workers.
“Technology” per se is not specified or measured directly in typical SBTC studies. It is assumed
to be an attribute of the economy that is ever increasing and is often proxied with a simple time
trend. But computer use of the kind Krueger (1993) and Autor, Katz, and Krueger (1998)
examine is a favorite illustration of such technology, and it is associated with higher wages and
more educated workers. Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003) looked directly at the effect of

14

Another important finding from their study is that 27 percent of hires take place in establishments that do not
report having a vacancy, which suggests that relying on vacancies data to assess hiring may be less than perfect.

28

computer use on skill requirements and found that it increased non-routine, higher-skill tasks
while reducing lower-skill, non-routine tasks, also consistent with a SBTC view. Goldin and
Katz (2008) extend the SBTC argument and use it to explain wage patterns across US history.
Other studies suggest limitations to the SBTC argument, however. Autor, Katz, and Kearney
(2008) looked at changes in the distribution of wages and conclude that increasing employment
in higher skill jobs and decreasing in lower skill jobs in the 1980s explains rising wages in the
former and falling in the latter. But in the 1990s, job and wage growth was only in the high end
of the skill distribution, falling in the middle, while low-skill jobs also increased. Acemoglu and
Autor (2011, 2012) extend that analyses to the present and find that the college wage premium
has remained relatively steady in the 2000s despite a slowdown in the increase in the number of
college grads, which would be consistent with a slowdown in the demand for college skills.
Beudry, Green, and Sand (2013) conclude that the demand for higher-skilled jobs that require
college degrees is actually declining. College grads then take jobs that require only high-school
level skills. In the process, they “bump” the applicants without a college degree, who then end
up with even lower skilled jobs or none at all.
More generally, the notion that technology is an incessant force creating demand for higher skills
is contradicted by research in other fields. In the period after Tinbergen’s work, the dominant
view of technology and skills in sociology was that technology was often designed precisely to
reduce skill requirements. Technology associated with scientific management such as assembly
lines clearly did reduce average skill requirements, increase the supply of labor who could
perform most jobs, and lower wages in the process. It also reduced the control and discretionary effort
that workers could exercise in those jobs (e.g., Braverman 1974). Since then, organization-specific
studies of the introduction of technology such as computer assisted design and manufacturing suggests

29

strongly that employer choices determine whether skill requirements rise or fall for different workers
(e.g., Zicklin 1987, Keefe 1990). Acemoglu (2002) offers an intermediate view, asserting that

while technological change defined broadly in recent years does appear to be biased toward
creating greater demand for skill/education, it does not necessarily have to be that way. The
outcome depends on the relative prices of skilled labor and therefore the incentives for
employers to reduce their use of such skills.

Similarly, the notion that IT technology in particular has an inexorable effect of creating job
losses through increases in productivity in industries and occupations where it is used
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2011) does not appear to hold up in contemporary data. The
relationships between IT use and productivity and with job losses change considerably at
different points in time (Acemoglu et al. 2014; see also (Michel, Shierholz, and Schmitt (2013).

The related fact from these studies that there is a wage premium associated with attending
college has created its own argument for expanding education. The gap between average wages
for high school and for college graduates grew sharply after 1980, driven both by increases in
wages for college grads (in the late 1990s) and the decline of real wages for high school
graduates (in the late 1980s). As Acemoglu and Autor (2012a) note, though, college wages have
been reasonably flat since about 2002, and some studies showing high wages for college
graduates may come from including those with graduate degrees: real wages for those with
graduate degrees continued to rise through the 2000s while those with only a bachelor’s degree
did not.

30

What we conclude from the college wage premium should be considered carefully. The wage
premium at any point in time represents the difference in average wages for all college graduates
vs. all high school graduates, and the average US worker graduated from high school about 20
years ago. That wage premium is not necessarily representative of the experience of new hires,
however, nor necessarily predictive of the future college premium.15 For example, the college
premium declined considerably during the Great Recession, falling from 69 percent to 63 percent
between 2008 and 2011 (NCES Table 438).
We also know that college graduates are different from high school graduates in ways other than
their education, such as their socio-economic status, their abilities and other dispositions, and so
forth, and that those differences also affect their earnings. It would be wrong to assume that a
typical high school graduate is identical to the average college graduate except for their
education and that the former would make the same wage as the latter if they had a college
degree. Yet that assertion is commonly made, typically implicitly.
The college premium has been influenced strongly by factors that have nothing to do with the
demand for college grads. The decline of unions, for example, held down wages
disproportionately for high school grads and, as a result, increased the college premium, casting
doubt on the uncritical use of the college premium as a proxy for the demand for college grads.
Using education as a proxy for the “skill” that employers want should be interpreted with caution
as well given that the extensive literature in job analysis shows that the knowledge, skills, and
abilities that are used in jobs have at best only a partial overlap with what is taught in typical
college courses. As noted elsewhere, there is no evidence that skill requirements in the US have
15

In 1995, for example, the median bachelor degree graduate age 25-34 earned 30 percent more than the median
high school graduate while all bachelor degree grads over age 25 earned 50 percent more than all high school
grades over age 25. In 2011, the equivalent figures were 50 percent and 65 percent, respectively.

31

risen at anywhere near the rate that the college wage premium has increased over the equivalent
periods if at all.
Finally, the education mismatch literature cited above shows that the wage premium from a
college degree comes mainly from getting access to a job that requires college-level skills. A
college graduate in a job that requires only high school skills earns little more than a high school
graduate in that job. That should remind us of the fallacy of composition, which in this context
is equivalent to a general equilibrium problem: It may make perfect sense for an individual to
secure a college degree because it will pay off. Whether it makes sense for society as a whole to
send a higher percentage of high school students onto college expecting that they will all earn
that same premium, in the absence of any evidence of increased demand for college-level skills,
is not obvious.
Student Achievement: Comparative evidence on student achievement gets arguably the most
attention in assertions that there are skill gaps caused by the US education system. Here the
argument is that US students are not learning as much as those elsewhere. New datasets,
especially the Trends in Math and Science Study (TIMSS), which began in 1995, and the
Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), which began in 2000, show that the
US is about in the middle of the rankings of other countries on the various measures of student
achievement.
Loveless (2012) notes that many observers interpret this evidence as showing that US students
score worse than many other countries with higher rankings, but he notes that there is no
statistically significant difference between US scores and those for countries often several
positions higher in the rankings. He also notes that despite claims to the contrary, the US
position has not been declining over time relative to other countries. In the first of the
32

international comparison tests in 1964, for example, the US scored 11th out of 12 countries. US
student performance on subsequent tests has being going up in absolute terms in the both the
TIMSS and the PISA tests (Loveless 2011). Scores in other countries are going up as well,
though, so our position relative to other countries has remained about the same - near the middle.
The fact that Asian countries like Singapore and Korea and the Chinese cities of Hong Kong and
Shanghai have now risen to the top ranks of these studies has received considerable attention, but
what is not clear is how much credit for those high scores should go to their schools. As many as
70 percent of students in those countries also attend after hours tutoring classes, known as juku
in Japan, cram schools in Korea, and generally as the “shadow education system” (Bray and
Lykins 2012). Surely this supplemental set of practices affects student achievement.
The newest and most powerful evidence on skills across countries comes from the OECD’s
Programme for International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC). It is an international
comparison of worker skills – literacy, numeracy, and problem-solving in an IT context – rather
than student skills. It is assessed directly with tests of representative, random samples of the
workforce from each country. On this assessment, the U.S. ranks 17th in literacy, 22nd in
numeracy, and 14th in problem solving out of 24 countries participating, far below average. A
related assessment of the US position comes from a recent study of the wage premiums
associated with the PIAAC skills data. It finds the highest skill premiums are in the US, which
would be consistent with a situation where these skills are in relatively short supply compared to
other countries (Hanushek et al 2013).
Academic preparation in school – which happened decades before for the average respondent –
is not closely related to the poor showing of US workers relative to other countries, however,
despite assertions in the popular press. The PIAAC authors note that the US has a more educated
33

workforce than average, and more important, the relative position of the US in student
achievement is much higher than its position in worker skills. As noted above, US students
come out about average in most international comparisons of academic achievement and also did
so in earlier decades when most of the PIAAC respondents were in school. (Many of the worstperforming countries in this study are not in the PIAAC study, though, which keeps the two from
being strictly comparable.) Together these results suggest that something is happening to the
reading and numeracy skills of US workers after they leave school that is different from what is
happening in other countries.
More puzzling in these data are the differences in scores by age group. Overall, younger workers
perform much better on the PIAAC skills tests than do their older counterparts, suggesting
widespread upgrading of skills over the generations. Except in the US. Younger workers here
score about the same as older workers: a little worse than those age 25-44, a little better than
those older than 44 years. Here again, the relative academic achievement of US school leavers
compared to other countries has remained about the same over time, so that it cannot be the case
that declining academic achievement of US school leavers over time could be the explanation.
The best explanation for these results points to events after leaving school, such as more
upskilling on-the-job (workplace training or education jobs that keep such skills sharp) now for
younger workers in other countries as compared to the US, although some part of the gap may
have to do with immigration practices: immigrants to the US have had lower cognitive skills than
immigrants to other countries (Kahn 2005).
The PIAAC also asked respondents about the hiring criteria associated with qualifications
(academic degrees and similar credentials) in their current job and compared them to the
qualifications of the respondent. Hiring criteria are not identical to job requirements, of course,
34

and we would expect the former to rise when applicants are plentiful, as they have been in recent
years. Nevertheless, the results in Figure 1 show more than 50 percent of workers in OECD
countries believe that their current job could be performed with fewer qualifications (education
and credentials) than are currently required by their employer as compared to those who report
that more qualifications are actually required. The US scores are similar to the OECD average.
Figure 1: Hiring Requirements vs. Performance Requirements

Source: Konstantinos Pouliakas, CEDEFOP analysis of PIAAC data.

A different but related complaint is the idea that the US is declining in the amount of graduates
with college degrees it produces relative to other countries. As with the assertions cited earlier
that the US is facing some labor force shortage, these complaints appear to misread the most
basic evidence. The absolute number of graduates is certainly not declining: As noted above,
Bachelor degrees increased from just under 1.3 million in 2000-’01 to just over 1.7 million in
2010-’11 or a 31 percent rise, and Associate degrees increased by even more, from 580,000 in

35

2000-’01 to 940,000 in 2010-’11 or a 62 percent increase versus population growth of only 11
percent (NCES Tables 312 and 313). It is true that the US does not lead the world in having the
highest percentage of college graduates in the population, but it has not for some time. Russia,
Canada, Japan, and Israel have a higher percentage of graduates. (Strictly speaking, the measure
used for comparison is for post-secondary degrees, not all of which are comparable to bachelor
degrees. OECD 2013; Chart A1.1.)
What is more distinctive is that the US is one of the few countries where the younger cohort age
25-34 does not have more education than does the older cohort. Israel, Finland, Germany, and
Brazil are also in that situation. The shortfall in the US cohort is attributable to men as women in
this age group do have more degrees than does the older cohort. One complication with the
conclusion that the younger cohort in the US is behind those in other countries is that US citizens
are far more likely to earn college degrees later in life than are those in other countries, so the US
position in the rankings should change.16 Whether and how the US position in rankings like
these matters is not obvious, though. We return to this question below.
Where the US does not look good in a comparative sense is our graduation rate from college,
where we are second from the bottom with roughly 60 percent of those who enroll graduating
(OECD Chart A4.1). Again, this low position may reflect the fact that so many US students are
part-time (58 percent) and may eventually graduate after the data were collected. We do lead the
world in spending per degree, however (OECD Chart B1.2). Individuals in the US bear a much
greater share of the costs of post-secondary education than average, but the UK, Korea, and
Chile pay an even higher share (OECD Chart B1.2).

16

For example, 13 percent of full-time, US undergraduate students in four-year colleges are over age 25.
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_csb.asp. Figure 1.

36

Summarizing and Assessing Evidence of Skill Problems:
The contemporary reports arguing that there are skill problems in the workforce offer little in the
way of compelling evidence to support that claim, and the evidence that they present is often
contradictory. Objective evidence from government data and from other sources does not
support any of the claims about skill problems. In fact, the evidence appears to be compelling
that the US is experiencing exactly the opposite problem, a substantial skill mismatches in the
form of individuals with more education than their current jobs requires and a surplus of
educated and skilled workers who cannot find jobs at all, let alone jobs appropriate for their
education and skill level.

Employer-led complaints about skill problems in the US broadly defined are not new. Alchian,
Arrow, and Capron (1958) respond to assertions about perceived shortages of engineers and
scientists in the 1950s, noting among other things that those complaining had a poor
understanding of how labor markets actually work.17 More recently, Mangum (1990) reports on
manufacturing employers complaining that they faced a skill shortage since WWII and
chronicles a history of assertions since suggesting that there would be skill problems, all of
which turned out to be false. Rosenthal (1982) assessed complaints from manufacturers of a
skill shortage coming out of the 1981 recession and finds no evidence of it. His
recommendations, that employers seeing difficulty in hiring should raise their wages, train more
to develop talent internally, or substitute technology for labor to reduce their demand, are
standard, textbook solutions that are largely absent from the current discussions.
17

The framework they use, still useful today, considers many possible definitions of “shortage,” including
nontechnical usage. They describe the idea of a “dynamic shortage,” where employers cannot hire more
candidates at the wage they are currently paying, as among the most common situations causing complaint. In
such cases, time lags and morale complications can ensue while the employer adjusts to higher wages, but they do
not see public policy interventions as helpful.

37

Reports of employer complaints have accelerated dramatically in recent years, though, especially
since the Great Recession with its unprecedented and paradoxical (for the complainers) surfeit of
available talent. Indeed, much of the attention that complaints about skill problems have
received during the recession in the popular press may well have been because of the “man-bitesdog” aspect of the claims: With all these people looking for jobs, why can’t this employer fill
theirs?

What the complaints from employers about skill problems might actually mean remains elusive
because the employer-driven studies are so poorly designed and conducted that it is difficult to
know what real information they contain. It does seem safe to conclude, though, that to the
extent they are real, employer complains probably reflect concerns about hiring experienced
candidates as there are so many more of them than school leavers; that concerns about school
leavers per se focus on maturity, not academic skills; and that many – perhaps most - employer
problems with hiring appear to be self-inflicted, such as inadequate pay and training.
Questions that ask “Are you having difficulty finding the candidates you need to fill your
vacancies?” are maddeningly ambiguous. It could be that simply following the many steps and
issues to consider in textbook descriptions of recruiting and selection processes could constitute
difficult. We also know that self-serving biases should inflate complaints: It is much easier to
assert that there is something wrong with the candidates than to acknowledge that our own
practices are at fault.

One explanation for the large number of employer-based complaints may be that it is just part of
the broader rise in recent years in business lobbying to influence public opinion and policy in
ways that benefit employers (Waterhouse 2014). The employer complaints in the IT sphere, for

38

example, go hand-in-hand with lobbying efforts to increase access to foreign workers on H1B
status. The basic conflicts between labor and management are not far from the surface in many
of these exchanges, with employer groups arguing for more supply and, in turn, lower wages and
greater employer power in the employment relationship, while labor and employee groups (albeit
considerably fewer of these) argue for the opposite. The reports on skill problems from
consulting firms are also consistent with a self-serving explanation: Their business models are
based on helping business clients address perceived problems. Highlighting or even asserting
problems and then offering solutions to them are common practices. The firm HRMarketer.com
(no date), which provides advice on how to sell consulting services to human resource
departments, offers a related explanation. It recommends that vendors produce white papers and
other reports addressing big questions to build credibility with clients, and one of those questions
they note is the shortfall of talent.

A second explanation is that the rise in employer complaints about difficulties in hiring reflects
something real even if it is not caused by any change in the supply of skill in the labor market.
Hiring may well be more difficult now simply because employers have to do much more hiring
these days because of widespread and substantial declines in employee tenure (see Hollister 2011
for a survey), which translates into more frequent vacancies and more hiring to fill them. The
decline of life-time employment practices and the associated rise of lateral hiring have been
underway for some time especially in larger organizations (Cappelli 1999). The fact that the
decline in tenure is disproportionately associated with larger firms where promotion from within
had been more common (Bidwell 2013) may have an even bigger effect on hiring to the extent
that it undermines promotion-from-within systems or is a marker for their decline: when

39

employees who have been promoted from within leave unexpectedly, it may be difficult to fill
their job from within because no internal candidates may be ready for advancement.

A decline in promotion-from-within systems also increases hiring challenges substantially by
expanding the range of jobs through which hiring takes place: from standard “entry-level” jobs,
which require minimal skills, to virtually every position in the organization. The much wider
range of hiring would, in turn, require finding experienced candidates who either are or have
worked elsewhere. Finding such candidates with the precise skills to fill these jobs is much more
challenging than finding inexperienced school leavers for entry-level jobs. Systematic data on
external hires is difficult to obtain, but a proprietary survey from the same pool of employers
over time (CareerXroads 2013) finds that 72 percent of their positions were filled from outside in
2007. Outside hiring dropped sharply during the recession to less than half of all placements but
then rose back up to 58 percent in 2012.
Hiring directly from college – a proxy for entry-level jobs – accounted for only 5.5 percent of all
new employees hired by these firms. Presumably most of the other 94.5 percent were
experienced hires. Another proprietary survey of large employers (12,000 average employees)
reports that only 15 percent of the positions they filled in April 2014 could have been performed
by an applicant just out of high school or college.18 The common assumption that employer
complaints about skill problems necessarily refers to jobs filled by new graduates is hard to
square with these data.

18

There is no evidence of how many recent grads, if any, we hired into those positions. The average position filled
had 74 applicants, and the average hire had nine years of experience. 227 employers responded to the survey
conducted by Recruiting Trends magazine. Thanks to the editors for making the results available.

40

When employers do hire from college, the evidence suggests that academic skills are not their
primary concern. A survey of employers conducted by the Chronicle of Education (2013) in
Figure 2 shows that work experience is the crucial attribute that employers want even for
students who have yet to work full-time and that the relevance of coursework to the job in
question is just not that important:

Figure 2
Employer Preferences for Applicant Attributes

Source: Chronicle of Higher Education, 2012.

Few employer reports of skill problems ask what it is employers are looking for in candidates
that they cannot find, but the evidence in Figure 4 suggests that it is work experience, even for
school leavers. As the European employers above explained about why they do not train, these
employers are seeking to get the skills they need through hiring, and a significant part of those
skills appears to come from work experience. Hiring candidates who already have skills in turn

41

becomes more important once one no longer has training and apprenticeship programs as an
alternative.
Credible evidence on employer-provided training in the US is remarkably hard to come by,
especially recently. The data we do have suggests that in 1979, young workers received on
average about 2.5 weeks of training per year. By 1991, Census data found only 17 percent of all
employees reporting that they received any formal training that year. Several surveys of
employers around 1995 indicate that somewhere between 42 and 90 percent of employers
offered some training (the lower number indicating more programmatic training) with the
amount of training an individual received per year averaging just under 11 hours. The most
common training topic was workplace safety.19 Those figures also include what vendors provide
when they bring in new equipment: "Here's how to work this copier."
The above data are now almost 20 years old, and there is little new from government sources. In
2011, Accenture surveyed US employees and found that only 21 percent had received any
employer-provided formal training in the past five years. To be clear, that means almost 80
percent had no training in five years, and no doubt many of those had no training in the years
before that, either.

The most important source for craft-based skills has been apprenticeship programs. Data on the
extent of US apprentices and programs is not extensive, but the Department of Labor data on
apprentice programs registered with them and that meet certain quality standards shows a sharp
decline from 2002 to 2012 – roughly 33,000 programs to roughly 21,000 – and an even steeper

19

For a review of data on the extent of training, see Lynch and Black, Sandra E.. 1998 and Frazis, Gittleman, and
Joyce. 2000.

42

decline in the number of apprentices – roughly 500,000 in 2003 to approximately 280,000 in
2012.20 The approximately 50,000 annual graduates of these programs is a drop in the bucket of
a labor force of 160 million.

Whether these measures are representative of trends in all apprenticeship programs is not clear as
there certainly are non-registered apprenticeship programs, and the data for those other programs
is not available in any systematic fashion. The Department of Labor has pushed since 2004 to
identify and register more programs (OECD 2012:4), so if the rate of registration has been
increasing, then the decline in actual apprentice programs would be greater than the data here
suggest. Further, the quality of apprenticeship programs is not necessarily constant. Bilginsoy
(2003) notes that in the construction industry, union-management joint apprenticeship programs
have been in decline as the unions running them declined. They are being replaced by employerbased programs where the latter do not perform as well as those in the former, perhaps because
the employers are in more of a hurry to get the trainees into the jobs they need now, and many
more apprentices leave the employer-led programs before they complete them.

One area where employer complaints about shortfalls in the supply of skill have unique
credibility is with skilled trades. Especially for smaller employers, an important source of
workers who had at least basic trade skills was vocational education programs in high schools.
Figure 3 (NCES) illustrates course-taking among students who graduate from public school.
Beginning in 1990, vocational courses declined precipitously especially in comparison to the rise
in other subject areas.
20

Curiously, the number of “program completers” remains unchanged over this period at just over 50,000 even
though the number of programs and the number of apprentices declined sharply. That translates to about two
completers per apprentice program each year. See ETA 2012.

43

FIGURE 3
High School Credits by Subject Area

CTE: Career and Technical Education
Source: NCES Career/Technical Education Statistics.

Within vocational education curricula, “industrial arts,” which includes skilled trades and other
mechanical skills, declined even faster. The average number of credits taken per student in that
subject area fell by half from 2000 to 2005 (BLS Table 2.17) 21 The US already had the least
proportion of vocational education in secondary school education of any of the industrialized
countries (OECD 2010). Employers who relied on vocational education to provide their new

21

Here NCES data suggests slightly different trends using different occupational classifications (CTE Figure 2). The
percentage of students earning credits in the “construction” area fell only slightly, from 1990 to 2009, by 0.7
percent. The percentage in “manufacturing,” which would include machinist skills, fell by 9.5 percent.
Interestingly “business” coursework declined by almost 20 percent while at the undergraduate level it expanded
considerably in the same period. These data only say whether students are taking any courses, in contrast to the
BLS data which indicates how many courses they are taking.

44

hires would indeed find a shrinking pool of candidates. This appears to be the best evidence of
something that has changed in the supply of labor to manufacturing employers.

Different countries have made different choices as to who is responsible for aspects of skills (see
Biavaschi 2012 for an overview). The US is already the outlier in having fewer vocational
education options and generally requiring individuals to get and pay for a larger amount of job
skills themselves after leaving high school. Much has been made of the importance of
community colleges as providers of skills in the US, and the Obama Administration has followed
previous administrations in calling for an increase in their role (White House no date). They are
funded largely at the local level, however, and whether they will have the resources to take on
the training that employers do not want to do is an open question. 22

A final explanation for employer complaints relates to the above, and that is the highly specific
and idiosyncratic nature of contemporary hiring requirements. It is common to assume, for
example, that a job opening for a position such as a machinist is reasonably standard, but that
turns out not to be the case.23 This situation is consistent with Lazear’s (2003) skill weights view,
where the appearance of firm-specific skills can be generated by a unique mix of general skills in job
requirements and different priorities attached to those skills across employers.

22

It is difficult to trace course taking per se at community colleges, and we know that a great many students who go
there to pick up job skills do not intend to pursue a degree. While most Associate degrees from community colleges
are indeed in very applied fields, one-third are in liberal arts (NCES 2013 Table 312), a far greater proportion than
in bachelor degree programs. The explanation appears to be that community colleges also play a role as a feeder
into four-year degree programs, and liberal arts majors represent that pathway.
23

To get a simple sense of job requirements for machinist positions, I investigated the vacancies posted on the
th
Monster.com website for May 13 2014. Machinist openings are subdivided into 13 categories based on
differences in job requirements. Within the “CNC” subcategory, every job required prior experience (one also
required further training through a community college certificate program). Most required experience with
particular brands of CNC machine tools. Every job had at least one requirement that did not appear in any of the
other job openings.

45

If job requirements across employers are highly specific and somewhat unique, then the supply of
available workers is constrained, perhaps sharply so. It creates the possibility of monopsony for
employers, upward sloping supply curves for labor. Monopsonists who pay equivalent workers the same
wage – non-discriminating monopsonists – find wage levels rising quickly when they try to hire more
workers, and they end up hiring fewer and producing less than if labor supply was more elastic (see
Manning 2003). Job applicants might find it very difficult to determine which skills they should acquire
where requirements are specific and varied. In the absence of very good information about jobs and
mobility, they may find themselves skilled but also unemployed or at least under-employed.

An obvious solution to the monopsony problem and indeed to virtually all the skill problems reported by
employers is to increase training and produce the skilled workers they want themselves. Anecdotally,
employers often express the view that they cannot afford to train employees for fear that they will be
hired away at a higher wage by competitors, the text-book problem of providing general skills. Whether
that is simply a rationalization or an opinion based on evidence is important to know. The counter to that
view is the extensive literature starting in the recent period with Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) on how
the provision of general skills can be structured to address that problem.

Conclusions:
Overall, the available evidence does not support the idea that there are serious skill gaps or skill
shortages in the US labor force. The prevailing situation in the US labor market, as in most
developed economies, continues to be skill mismatches where the average worker and job
candidate has more education than their current job requires. Persistent, high levels of
unemployment reflect the fact that job seekers still outnumber available job openings. While it
is certainly true that a bigger supply of cheaper labor would be useful to employers, it is not clear

46

that such a situation would be useful for the country as a whole, and any claims to that effect
should be examined carefully.
It is not clear what the apparent rise in employer complaints about skill problems represents in
part because of the poor quality of information presented as part of the complaints. No doubt
some component of the complaints is simply an effort to secure policy changes that lower labor
costs. It may well be that some component of the complaints represents real problems associated
with changes in employer behavior, such as greater outside hiring and associated increases in
employee turnover and reduced training and internal development. Some of these changes might
be driven by the behavior of other employers. For example, increases in turnover may be driven
by the hiring practices of other employers, and smaller employers who in the past had been able
to meet their skill needs by hiring skilled apprentices away from larger employers may find that
there is no one to hire when those apprenticeship programs are gone. Efforts to hire skills rather
than build them from within would create much more specific and variable job requirements
across employers that would vastly increase not only the difficulty in hiring but also the
experience of having to raise wages above current levels in order to find appropriate candidates.
The implications that follow from the above conclusions are important to consider. The
proposals in the various employer-led reports to increase student academic achievement, reduce
drop-out rates, and generally improve the quality of secondary school education are difficult to
object to, but these goals are already accepted. The challenge has been how to achieve them.
The interest is in having applicants with more accountability, motivation, and maturity is also
hard to argue with, but these attributes are also typically associated with growing up. How
schools can accelerate that process and make 18 year olds act like 28 year olds is not clear.

47

A more important implication of many of the above reports is the underlying shift they represent
in responsibility for the provision of a workforce. The notion that employers are responsible for
recruiting and retaining employees and then training and developing them to meet changing skill
needs, textbook human resource concepts is hard to see in any of these reports even where the
results show that employer practices are driving much of their perceived skill problems.
The view that emerges from these arguments is one where responsibility for developing the skills
that employers want is transferred from the employer onto job seekers and schools. Such a
transfer of responsibility would be profound in its implications. Schools, at least as traditionally
envisioned, are not suited to organize work experience, the key attribute that employers want.
Nor are they necessarily good at teaching work-based skills. Those skills are easiest and
cheapest to learn in the workplace through apprentice-like arrangements that one finds not only
in skilled trades but also in fields like accounting and medicine. Unlike in the classroom,
problems to practice on do not have to be created in the workplace. They exist already, and
solving them creates value for others. Observation and practice is also easiest to do where the
productive work is being done, and employment creates incentives and motivation that typical
classrooms cannot duplicate.
At the post-secondary level, where job skills have traditionally been offered in the US schools,
the shift in the responsibility for skills from employers to students has important implications for
the students and their families. The obvious implication is that because the costs must be paid
up-front, those individuals without the capital to pay the fees lose access to those skills, again in
contrast to earlier periods where employers provided more opportunities for on-the-job learning
and training. That shift in responsibility also pushes risk onto students and their families. The
employers who are calling for more STEM graduates, for example, are not offering to hire the
48

students who are now starting such programs when they graduate. The student and their families
who pursue specific education in hopes of the job at the end are taking a substantial financial risk
should those jobs not be there at the end.
Proposals like those in the state of Florida would push students toward vocational majors by
shifting state funds to college majors where employers say they want to hire (typically STEM
fields) and away from majors where they do not (Anderson 2011). Governments do not have a
particularly good record of forecasting where jobs will be years in advance, however, and
students and their families would bear the costs when those forecasts are wrong.
More generally, if the labor market is not enticing students to pursue particular fields, should
public policy push them to do so? Manufacturers, for example, have long complained about the
shortage of students interested in machinist training programs and assert that the cause has been
that schools and guidance counsellors were not advocating for those programs. But the pay for
such jobs has declined by 20 percent in real terms over the past two decades while the skill
requirements for those jobs have shifted toward computer use, a field with better pay. The
number of machinist jobs has already declined by 20 percent in that period (the total number of
jobs in the economy has increased by 40 percent) and is expected to decline further (Cappelli
2012). The reasons why there has been a decline in the number of students taking vocational
education courses that could prepare them for manufacturing jobs merits further attention, but we
should not assume that it is independent from the attractiveness of the jobs offered at the end of
those programs.
Assuming that the government cannot become the staffing agency for employers, are we faced
with a future where employers are frustrated because they cannot find the specific skills they

49

want to hire at the same time that jobs seekers and especially school leavers cannot get the skills
that employers really want because no one will give them initial work experience?
Some employers may see a market opportunity for getting skills more cheaply by training even if
competitors want to hire away the workers they train. We know that employers can provide
even general skills training if the arrangements are structured appropriately (Acemoglu and
Pischke 1998) as we see in temporary help (Autor 2001), with tuition reimbursement plans
(Cappelli 2004), and in most all professional service firms – consulting, accounting, etc. – where
liberal arts graduates are turned them into consultants and bankers, respectively, through on-thejob training. Traditional apprenticeship programs operate the same way.
Assuming not enough employers figure out how to manage that option, are there alternative
arrangements? The arrangements favored by the school-to-work movement in the 1990s may
still have merit. In them, the boundary between school and work blurred. Employers helped
schools to provide work-based learning content that supplemented academic material and offered
learning opportunities in the workplace that were not necessarily paying jobs. The employer’s
incentive to participate was the ability to identify promising students to hire before the students
ever went on the job market, and the costs of the programs were minimal.
The topic of skill problems in the US represents something reasonable new for labor market and
public policy discussions. It is difficult to think of a labor market issue where academic research
or even research using standard academic techniques has played such a small role, where parties
with a material interest in the outcomes have so dominated the discussion, where the quality of
evidence and discussion has been so poor, and where the stakes are potentially so large. The
perspective and interests of employees and students have been almost completely absent from
these discussions. There has been little testing of the assumptions behind arguments, and the
50

costs and benefits of various proposals have not been considered. The situation described above
seems to be unique to the US.24
One factor in the relative lack of academic research on these topics no doubt has been the lack of
information and data about skills per se. The standard classification of job requirements into
“knowledge, skills, and abilities” reminds us that education, which has served as a proxy for
skills in most discussions, only maps onto part of the “knowledge” category, leaving the other
attributes of job requirements out of the picture. There are many important reasons for being
concerned about education, but seeing it as the equivalent of skill is certainly a mistake. One of
the unfortunate consequences of using education as the proxy for skill has been to see schools,
the providers of education, as the mechanism for dealing with skill problems and leaving training
and on-the-job experiences out of the story.
A final lesson for the US academic research community from the current discussion of skill
problems is that in the absence of clear, objective research findings, it is easy for advocates to
make claims that are simply assertions and claims that even casual acquaintance with real
evidence would indicate are false. Perhaps the many organizations and foundations that have
supported the advocacy-oriented approaches above might be persuaded to help change the debate
by supporting real research on the role of skills in the US economy.

24

For example, the Global Agenda Council of the World Economic Forum on Employment, whose members are
predominately outside the US, saw the notion that there might be skill gaps and skill shortages as irrelevant.
Indeed, an employer representative from outside US asserted that “no one makes such arguments.” See GAC 2014
for a global view.

51

References

Accenture. 2012. “Solving the Skills Paradox: Seven Ways to Solve Your Critical Skills Gap.”
http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-Solving-theSkills-Paradox.pdf.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market.
Journal of Economic Literature. Mar2002, Vol. 40 Issue 1, p7-72.
Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for
Employment and Earnings.” In Handbook of Labor Economics Vol.4a, edited by David Card and
Orley Ashenfelter, 1043-1071. Amsterdam, NL: North Holland Publishing.
Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2012. What Does Human Capital Do? A Review of Goldin and
Katz’s The Race Between Education and Technology. Journal of Economic Literature. Jun2012, Vol. 50
Issue 2, p426-463.

Acemoglu, D. and J. Pischke, 1998, Why do firms train? Theory and evidence, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113(1), 79-119.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2001. "Productivity Differences." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116(2): 563-606.
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2014. Return of
the Solow Paradox? IT, Productivity, and Employment in U.S. Manufacturing. Boston: NBER
Working Paper No. 19837.
Alchian, Armen A., Kenneth Arrow, and William M. Capron. 1958. An Economic Analysis of the
Market for Scientists and Engineers. Rand Corporation.
http://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/research_memoranda/2005/RM2190.pdf.

52

Allen J., and van der Velden R. 2001. “Educational Mismatches Versus Skill Mismatches:
Effects on Wages, Job Satisfaction, and On-the-Job Search.” Oxford Economic Papers 53
(3): 434-452.
Anderson, Zac. 2011. Rick Scott Wants to Shift University Funding Away From Some Degrees.
Herald-Tribune, October 10. http://politics.heraldtribune.com/2011/10/10/rick-scottwants-to-shift-university-funding-away-from-some-majors/.
Aspen Institute. 2003. “Grow Faster Together Or Grow Slowly Apart.” Domestic Strategy
Group.
ASTD. 2012. “Bridging the Skills Gap: Help Wanted, Skills Lacking. Why the Mismatch in
Today's Economy?” American Society for Training and Development.
http://nist.gov/mep/upload/Bridging-the-Skills-Gap_2012.pdf.
Atkinson, Robert D. and Luke A. Stewart. 2013. The Real Story on Guestworkers in the
Highskill U.S. Labor Market. Washington, D.C.: The Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation. http://www2.itif.org/2013-guestworkers-high-skill-labormarket.pdf.
Autor, D.H., 2001, Why do temporary help firms provide free general skills training? Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 116, 1409-1448.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. "Trends in US Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2):
300-323.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F., Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. 1998. "Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?." Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4): 11691213.

53

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. "The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(4): 1279-1333.
Badillo Amador, Lourdes, Ángel López Nicolás, and Luis E. Vila. 2012. "The Consequences on
Job Satisfaction of Job–Worker Educational and Skill Mismatches in the Spanish Labour
Market: A Panel Analysis." Applied Economics Letters 19(4): 319-324.
Baert, Stijn, Bart Cockx, and Dieter Verhaest. 2013. "Overeducation at the Start of the Career:
Stepping Stone or Trap?" Labour Economics 25: 123-140.
Barnichon, Regis, Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Ayșegül Șahin. 2012. “Which Industries are
Shifting the Beveridge Curve?” Monthly Labor Review.
http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2012/06/art2full.pdf.
Barnow, Burt S., John Trutko, and Jaclyn Schede Piatak. 2013. Occupational Labor Shortages:
Concepts, Causes, Consequences, and Cures. Upjohn Institute: Kalamazoo, MI.
Bayer. 2013. “Is There a STEM Workforce Shortage?” October 22.
http://www.bayerus.com/News%5CNewsDetail.aspx?ID=DCF6FA59-C9B5-2F14A7AB69927FB04B0B.
Beaudry, Paul, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. 2013. The Great Reversal in the
Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks. NBER working paper 18901.
Bennett, Jessica, and Seamus McGuinness. 2009. "Assessing the Impact of Skill Shortages on
the Productivity Performance of High-Tech Firms in Northern Ireland." Applied
Economics 41(6): 727-737.
Berg, Ivar. 1970. Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Bidwell, Matthew J. 2013. "What Happened to Long-Term Employment? The Role of Worker

54

Power and Environmental Turbulence in Explaining Declines in Worker Tenure."
Organization Science 24(4):1061-1082.
Bilginsoy, Cihan. 2003. "The Hazards of Training: Attrition and Retention in Construction
Industry Apprenticeship Programs." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57(1): 54-67.
Bluestone, Barry, and Mark Melnik. 2010. "After the Recovery: Help Needed." Civic
Ventures. Available at http://www.encore.org/files/research/JobsBluestonePaper3-510.pdf.
Kahn, Lawrence M. 2005. Immigration, Skills, and the Labor Market: International Evidence.
Journal of Population Economics. 17(3): 501-534.
BLS (Bureau of Labor Statistics). 2014 Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey Highlights
March 2014, Chart 1. Number of Unemployed Persons Per Job Opening.
http://www.bls.gov/web/jolts/jlt_labstatgraphs.pdf
Borjas, George. 2010. Labor Economics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Boston Consulting Group. 2013. “The U.S. Skills Gap: Could it Threaten the U.S.
Manufacturing Renaissance?”
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/lean_manufacturing_us_skills_gap_co
uld_threaten_manufacturing_renaissance/.
Braverman, Harry. 1974. Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the
Twentieth Century. New York: NYU Press.
Bray, Mark and Chad Lykins. 2012. Shadow Education: Private Supplementary Tutoring and Its
Implications for Policy Makers in Asia. Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian
Development Bank.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee. 2011. Race Against the Machine. Lexington, MA:

55

Digital Frontier Press.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 2014. Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey.
http://data.bls.gov/timeseries/JTU30000000JOL?data_tool=XGtable.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) 2014. Occupational Outlook Handbook – Most New Jobs.
http://www.bls.gov/ooh/most-new-jobs.htm.
Cachon, Gerard and Christian Terwiesch. 2006. Matching Supply with Demand. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Cainarca, Gian Carlo, and Francesca Sgobbi. 2012. "The Return to Education and Skills in
Italy." International Journal of Manpower 33(2): 187-205.
Cappelli, Peter. 1995. “Rethinking the ‘Skills Gap'.” California Management Review 37(4): 108124.
Cappelli, Peter. 1999. The New Deal at Work: Managing the Market-Driven Workplace.
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Cappelli, Peter. 2001. Employer Participation in School-to-Work Activities and Involvement with
Schools. The National Center for Postsecondary Improvement Palo Alto, CA: Stanford
University.
Cappelli, Peter. 2003 "Will There Really Be a Labor Shortage?."Organizational Dynamic 32(3):
221-233.
Cappelli, Peter. 2012. That Pesky Skill Shortage in Manufacturing. HR Executive.
http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/view/story.jhtml?id=534354686.
Career Advisory Board. 2011. “Research Report: Career Advisory Board Job Preparedness
Indicator.” Presented by DeVry University, and Harris Interactive Interviewing.

56

http://careeradvisoryboard.com/public/uploads/2011/11/Job-Preparedness-IndicatorResearch-Report.pdf.
Career Xroads. 2013. “Sources of Hire 2013: Perception is Reality.”
http://www.careerxroads.com/news/SourcesOfHire2013.pdf.
Carnevale, Tony. 2005. "The Coming Labor and Skills Shortage." Training & Development
59(1): 37-41.
Carnevale, Anthony P., Nicole Smith, and Jeff Strohl (2010). Help Wanted: Projections of Jobs and
Education Requirements through 2018. Washington, D.C: Center on Education and the
Workforce, Georgetown University. http://cew.georgetown.edu/jobs2018/.
Cascio, Wayne F. 2008. "To Prosper, Organizational Psychology Should… Bridge Application
and Scholarship." Journal of Organizational Behavior 29(4): 455-468.
CBO. 2011. “CBO's Labor Force Projections Through 2021.” Congressional Budget Office.
http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/120xx/doc12052/03-22laborforceprojections.pdf.
CVTS 2013. Continuing Vocational Training Statistics. Brussels: European
Commission.
Http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Continuing_vocational_tr
aining_statistics
Challenger, John A. 2003. "The Coming Labor Shortage." Futurist 37(5): 24-28.
Chambers, Elizabeth G., Mark Foulon, Helen Handfield-Jones, Steven M. Hankin, and Edward
G. Michaels. 1998. "The War for Talent." McKinsey Quarterly: 44-57.
Christian, Michael S. 2007. Liquidity constraints and the cyclicality of college enrollment in the
United States. Oxford Economic Papers. 59(1): 141-169.

57

Chronicle of Higher Education. 2012. The Role of Higher Education in Career Development:
Employer Perceptions.
Clark, Brian, Clement Joubert, and Arnaud Maurel. 2014. The Career Prospects of
Overeducated Americans. NBEW Working Paper 20167.
Computer and Technology Industry Association. 2012. “State of the IT Skills Gap.”
http://www.wired.com/wiredenterprise/wp-content/uploads//2012/03/Report__CompTIA_IT_Skills_Gap_study_-_Full_Report.sflb_.pdf.
Costanza Biavaschi, Werner Eichhorst, Corrado Giulietti, Michael J. Kendzia, Alexander Muravyev,
Janneke Pieters, Nuría Rodríguez-Planas, Ricarda Schmidl, and Klaus F. Zimmermann Youth
Unemployment and Vocational Training. IZA DP No. 6890 Discussion Paper Series. October
2012.
Davis, Steven J., R. Jason Faberman, and John C. Haltiwanger. 2013. "The Establishment-level
Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 581-622.
Deloitte. 2011. “Boiling Point? The Skills Gap in U.S. Manufacturing.” Manufacturing Institute.
http://www.themanufacturinginstitute.org/~/media/A07730B2A798437D98501E798C2E
13AA.ashx.
Duncan, G. and Hoffman, S. 1981. “The Incidence and Wage Effects of Overeducation.”
Economics of Education Review, 1(1):75–86.
Dychtwald, Ken, Tamara J. Erickson, and Robert Morrison. 2006. "Workforce Crisis: How to
Beat the Coming of Skills and Talent." Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Edwards, Richard C. 1979. Contested Terrain: The Transformation of the Workplace in the
Twentieth Century. New York: Basic Books.
Feldstead, A., Gallie, D., Green., F. and Inanc, H. 2013. Work Intensification in Britain: First

58

Findings from the Skills and Employment Survey 2012. London: Centre for Learning and
Life Chances in Knowledge Economies and Societies.

Frazis, Harley, Maury Gittleman, and Mary Joyce. 2000. Correlates of Training: An
Analysis Using both Employer and Employee Characteristics. Industrial & Labor
Relations Review. 53(3): 443-462.
Freeman, Richard B. 1976. The Overeducated American. New York: Academic Press.
Freeman, Richard B. 2006. “Is a Great Labor Shortage Coming? Replacement Demand in the
Global Economy.” NBER Working Paper No. 12541.
Gottschalk, Peter and Morton Hansen. 2003. Is the Proportion of College Workers in
Non-College Jobs Increasing? Journal of Labor Economics. 21: 449-471.
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race Between Education and Technology.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Haltiwanger, J, Davis, S, and Faberman, J (2012). Recruiting intensity during and after the great
recession: National and industry evidence. American Economic Review.
Harrington, Paul E. and Andrew M. Sum. 2010. College Labor Shortages in 2018? New England Journal
of Higher Education, November 8th. http://www.nebhe.org/thejournal/college-labor-shortages-in2018/.
Harrington, Paul E., and Andrew M. Sum. Forthcoming. “Recent Projections of Labor Shortages
Through 2018: From Great Recession to Labor Shortages? A Critical Look at the
Evidence.” Monthly Labor Review.
Hollister, Matissa. 2011. "Employment Stability in the US Labor Market: Rhetoric Versus
Reality." Annual Review of Sociology 37: 305-324.

59

Jacobs, Jerry A. and Linda Sax. April 2014. STEM Majors, the Liberal Arts and the Great
Recession. American Educational Research Association Annual Meeting, Meetings April 5,
2014.
Jacoby, Sanford. 1983. Employing Bureaucracy: Managers, Unions, and the Transformation of
Work in the 20th Century. New York: Columbia University Press.

Jobs Council. 2012a. Prepare the American Workforce to Compete in the Global Economy.
http://www.jobs-council.com/recommendations/prepare-the-american-workforce-to-compete-inthe-global-economy/. Jobs Council 2012b. http://www.jobscouncil.com/recommendations/ensure-that-americans-have-the-right-skills-fortoday%E2%80%99s-jobs/.
Joyce, Mary, and David Neumark. 2001. "School-to-Work Programs: Information from Two
Surveys." Monthly Labor Review 124: 38-50.

Kampelmann, Stephan and Fraicois Rycx. 2012. The impact of educational mismatch on firm
productivity: Evidence from linked panel data Economics of Education Review. 6: 918-931

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963–1987:
Supply and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 35-78.
Keefe, Jeffrey H. 1990. Numerically controlled machine tools and worker skills. Industrial and
Labor Relations Review. 44(3): 503.
Lazear. Edward P. 2003. Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skills-Weighted Approach. NBER
Working Paper 9679.
Lazear, Edward P. and James R. Spletzer. 2012. The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or
A New Normal? NBER Working Paper No. 18386.
Levine, Marc V. 2013. The Skills Gap and Unemployment in Wisconsin: Separating Fact from Fiction.
University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, Center for Economic Development.
60

Liu, Yujia and David B. Grusky. 2013. The Payoff to Skill in the Third Industrial Revolution.
American Journal of Sociology, 118: 1330-1374.
Loveless, Tom. 2011. How Well are American Students Learning? Brown Center on Educational
Policy. Washington: The Brookings Institute.
Loveless, Tom. 2012. How Well are American Students Learning? Brown Center on Educational
Policy. Washington: The Brookings Institute.
Lynch and Black, Sandra E.. 1998. Beyond the Incidence of Employer-Provided Training.
Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 52(1): 64-81.
Magnum, Stephen. 1990. Impending Skill Shortages: Where Is the Crisis? Challenge.
September/October, 46-52.
Manacorda, Marco, and Barbara Petrongolo. 1999. "Skill Mismatch and Unemployment in
OECD Countries." Economica 66(262): 181-207.
Manning, Alan. 2006. A Generalised Model of Monopsony. Economic Journal.
116(508): 84-100.
Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Manpower 2012. The Talent Shortage Survey. http://www.manpowergroup.us/campaigns/talentshortage-2012/pdf/2012_Talent_Shortage_Survey_Results_US_FINALFINAL.pdf
Mavromaras, Kostas, and Seamus McGuinness, 2007. "Education and Skill Mismatches in the
Labour Market: Editor's Introduction." Australian Economic Review 40(3): 279-285.
Mavromaras, Kostas, Seamus McGuinness, Nigel O'Leary, Peter Sloane, Zhang Wei. 2013. “Job
Mismatches and Labour Market Outcomes: Panel Evidence on University Graduates.”
Economic Record 89(286): 382-395.

61

McGuinness S., Sloane P.J. 2011. “Labour Market Mismatch among UK Graduates: An Analysis
using REFLEX data.” Economics of Education Review 30: 130-145.
McKinsey. 2012. “The World at Work: Jobs, Pay and Skills for 3.5 Billion People.” McKinsey
Global Institute.
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/employment_and_growth/the_world_at_work.
Mishel, Lawrence, Heidi Shierholz, and John Schmitt. 2013. Don’t Blame the Robots: Assessing
the Job Polarization Explanation of Growing Wage Inequality. Washington, D.C.:
Economic Policy Institute November 9th.
MLR 2013. Labor Force Projections to 2022: The Labor Force Participation Rate Continues to
Fall. Monthly Labor Review. http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2013/article/labor-forceprojections-to-2022-the-labor-force-participation-rate-continues-to-fall-1.htm
Mortensen, Dale T. 1986. "Job Search and Labor Market Analysis." Handbook of Labor
Economics 2: 849-919.
Mosca, I. and Wright, R.E. 2013, “Is Graduate Under-Employment Persistent? Evidence from
the United Kingdom.” IZA DP. 6177.
National Academies of Science, Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. 1997. “Rising Above
the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic
Future.” http://www.nsf.gov/attachments/105652/public/NAS-Gathering-Storm11463.pdf.
National Center on Education and the Economy. 1990. “America's Choice: High Skills or Low
Wages! The Report of the Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce.”
Rochester, NY.
National Commission on Excellence in Education. 1983. “A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for

62

Educational Reform.” April.
http://datacenter.spps.org/uploads/SOTW_A_Nation_at_Risk_1983.pdf.
NCES. Career/Technical/Education Statistics. Figure 1
http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/ctes/figures/fig_01.asp
Neumark, David, Hans Johnson, and Marisol Cuellar Mejia. 2011. “Future Skills Shortage in the
U.S. Economy?” NBER Working Paper No. 17213.
Ng, Ying Chu. 2003. "Earnings and “Skill” Allocation in the Canadian Labor Market."
International Journal of Manpower 24(8): 964-980.
Osterman, Paul and Andrew Weaver. 2014. Richard Locke and Rachel Wellhausen (eds).
Production In the Innovation Economy, MIT Press, 2014. Skills and Skill Gaps in
Manufacturing.
Pouliakas, Konstantinos. 2014. Matching skills and labour market needs in Europe Challenging the usual
suspects. CEDEFOP (European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training. analysis of PIAAC
data.

President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology. 2012.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-engage-to-excel-final_2-2512.pdf.
President’s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness. 2012. Roadmap to Renewal. http://www.jobscouncil.com/recommendations/summary-of-road-map-to-renewal-report/.
PWC. 2012. “Facing the Talent Challenge: Global CEO Survey.”
http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceosurvey/2012/key-findings/hr-talent-strategies.jhtml.
Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., & Wright, R. 2005. Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor Market:
A Survey. Journal of Economic Literature, 43: 959-988.

63

Rosenthal, Neal H. 1982. Shortages of Machinists” An Evaluation of the Information. Monthly
Labor Review, July. 31-36.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2012. The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural
Explanations. Industrial & Labor Relations Review (65:3) 467-500.
Salzman, Hal, Daniel Kuehn, and B. Lindsay Lowell. 2013. “Guestworkers in the High-Skill US
Labor Market.” Washington, D.C.: EPI Briefing Paper No. 359, April 24th.
SCANS. 1991. “What Work Requires of Schools.” Secretary's Commission on Achieving
Necessary Skills, U.S. Department of Labor.
http://wdr.doleta.gov/SCANS/whatwork/whatwork.pdf.
Sicherman, Nachum, and Oded Galor. 1990. "A Theory of Career Mobility." Journal of Political
Economy 98(1): 169-192.
Smith, James P, and Finis Welch. 1978. “The Overeducated American? A Review Article.”
Technical report, Rand Corporation.
Spleen, Thomas Luke. 2013. Recent College Graduates in the US Labor Force: Data from the
Current Population Survey. Monthly Labor Report. February: 3-13.
Stull, William J. and Nicholas M. Sanders (eds.). 2003. The School-to-Work Movement: Origins
and Destinations. New York: Praeger.
Sutherland, John. 2012. "Qualifications Mismatch and Skills Mismatch." Education and
Training 54(7): 619-632.
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 2006. “The State of American Business 2006.” Washington D.C.
Venneberg, Donald L., and Barbara W. Eversole. 2010. The Boomer Retirement Time Bomb:
How Companies Can Avoid the Fallout from the Coming Skills Shortage. Santa Barbara,
CA: Praeger, 2010.

64

Vaisey, Stephen. 2006. "Education and Its Discontents: Overqualification in America, 1972–
2002." Social Forces 85(2): 835-864.
Walsh, William D. 1977. “The Short-Run Behavior of Skilled Wage Differentials.” Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 30(3): 302-313.
Waterhouse. Benjamin C. 2014. Lobbying America: The Politics of Lobbying from Nixon to
NAFTA. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Werneke, Diane, and Robin Broadfield. 1977. "Needs-Oriented Approach to Manpower Policy
in Developed Market Economies, A." International Labor Review 116: 171.
White House. Building American Skills Through Community Colleges.
http://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/education/higher-education/building-american-skillsthrough-community-colleges.
Wolf, Alison, Liam Aspin, Edmund Waite, and Katerina Ananiadou. 2010. “The Rise and Fall of
Workplace Basic Skills Programmes: Lessons for Policy and Practice.” Oxford Review of
Education 36(4): 385–405.
World Economic Forum’ s Global Agenda Council on Employment (2014): “Matching Skills
and Labour Market Needs: Building Social Partnerships for better Skills and Better
Jobs”, World Economic Forum, Geneva, Switzerland.
Zicklin, Gilbert. 1987. Numerical Control Machining and the Issue of Deskilling: An Empirical
View. Work and Occupations 14:3 (452-466).

65

