NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DAMMING THE COMMONS:
AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AND CONFLICT IN DAM LOCATION
Sheila M. Olmstead
Hilary Sigman
Working Paper 20389
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20389
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We are grateful to Georgia Bush, Ju Young Park, and Sergey Reid for research assistance and to seminar
participants at the AERE Summer Conference, Fordham University, Oregon State University, the University
of Texas at Austin, the Property Environment Research Center, and the University of Wisconsin, Madison
for comments. This research was partially supported by a grant from the World Bank’s Knowledge
for Change Program. The views expressed in the paper are the authors’ alone and should not be attributed
to the World Bank or its member countries. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Sheila M. Olmstead and Hilary Sigman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Damming the Commons: An Empirical Analysis of International Cooperation and Conflict
in Dam Location
Sheila M. Olmstead and Hilary Sigman
NBER Working Paper No. 20389
August 2014, Revised August 2015
JEL No. F53,Q25
ABSTRACT
This paper examines whether countries consider the welfare of other nations when they make water
development decisions. We estimate econometric models of the location of major dams around the
world as a function of the degree of international sharing of rivers. We find that dams are more prevalent
in areas of river basins some distance upstream of foreign countries, supporting the view that countries
free ride in exploiting water resources. We find some evidence that international institutions, in particular
multinational financing and international water management treaties, may mitigate this free riding.
Sheila M. Olmstead
LBJ School of Public Affairs
The University of Texas at Austin
P.O. Box Y, mail stop E2700
Austin, TX 78713
sheila.olmstead@austin.utexas.edu
Hilary Sigman
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1248
and NBER
hsigman@rutgers.edu

1.

Introduction
Large water development projects are a hallmark of modern and industrializing

economies. Nearly one-half of the world’s rivers have at least one large dam (World
Commission on Dams 2000) and dam construction proceeds at a rapid rate.1 Large dams have
complex welfare implications. Dams provide valuable services to their beneficiaries, including
hydropower, irrigation, urban water supply, navigation, and flood control. However, for at least
50 years, economists and others have worried that the benefit-cost analysis methods employed to
assess the welfare impacts of dams have overstated benefits and understated costs (Eckstein
1965; Ansar et al. 2014).2 This concern has grown with rising attention to (and willingness to
pay for) the environmental amenities of free-flowing rivers in industrialized countries and the
social disruption that follows forced resettlement of populations in a new dam’s catchment area
in developing countries. Previous research has emphasized the limited systematic empirical
evidence for the effects of large dams on social welfare within a country and has started to fill
this gap (Duflo and Pande 2007; Holland and Moore 2003; Strzepek et al. 2008; Strobl and
Strobl 2011).
As the main mechanism for diverting water from rivers, dams also pose an important
common property problem that has not been addressed in the empirical literature. Even if
countries make efficient decisions about dam construction on domestic rivers, countries sharing a
river may over-develop the river if they are able to pass some of the costs imposed by dams to
other countries. The resulting spillovers (or “spill-unders” if the problem is excessive water
diversion) may create the potential for conflict across borders of countries sharing a river.
Sharing of water resources is common: the watersheds of the world’s 276 international
rivers cover more than 45 percent of the Earth’s surface (Wolf et al. 1999; TFDD 2014). Current
1

A “large dam” is 15 or more meters tall, or between 5 and 15 meters with a water storage capacity of at least 3
million m3 (Scudder 2006). The United States has more than 6,000 large dams, many of the largest (Hoover, Grand
Coulee, Glen Canyon) constructed between 1935 and 1965 (Collier et al. 2000). Before 1949, China had fewer than
100 large dams; in 2006, it had 22,000, about one-half of the world’s total (Scudder 2006). In the Amazon Basin
alone, 140 dams are in the planning stages in Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru (International Rivers
2010).
2

For example, an analysis of the Central Arizona Project, which was completed in 1987 and provides water to the
City of Phoenix, suggests that the project was built 86 years too early, with a deadweight loss of more than $2.6
billion, and that exploiting groundwater sources to delay its construction would have been more efficient (Holland
and Moore 2003).

3

high-profile conflicts regarding dams in international river basins include a dispute between
Ethiopia and Egypt over an Ethiopian dam that will reduce the flow of the Nile River as it flows
downstream into Egypt, one between China, Myanmar and Thailand over China’s plans to dam
the upstream reaches of the Nu River, and one between three Central Asian states over current
and planned dams on regional rivers.3 Disputes over allocation of shared rivers may escalate
with population growth and global climate change, which may increase aridity in some regions
and increase the variability of renewable water supply in many others (Postel and Wolf 2001).
This paper examines whether countries consider the welfare of other nations that share
water resources when they make water development decisions. We estimate econometric models
that allow the number of major dams in river basins around the world to be a function of the
degree of international sharing of rivers, controlling for other factors including country and riverbasin fixed effects. Our basic model tests the hypothesis that countries are more likely to build
dams when downstream countries bear some of the costs. We also investigate the role of
international watershed management institutions in mitigating this effect.
We find evidence that dams are more prevalent in areas of river basins upstream of
foreign countries, supporting the view that countries put lower weight on downstream countries’
costs than their own costs in deciding whether to build dams. In some equations, the effect is
weaker when the area is immediately upstream of the border; near the border, some of the
benefits of the dam may accrue to the downstream country, which reduces the extent to which
the spillover improves the cost-benefit calculus for the upstream country. We find some
suggestive evidence that multilateral financing and international treaties might reduce the extent
of free riding.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the previous literature
that considers dam placement and transboundary spillovers in rivers, as well as the potential
mitigating impacts of international agreements. Section 3 introduces the basic econometric
model. Section 4 describes the sources of our data and the GIS analysis conducted to generate
our variables of interest. Section 5 presents the results of our main equations and robustness

3

On the Ethiopia/Egypt conflict over the Nile, see: Witte, Griff. 2013. Egypt frets, fumes over Ethiopia’s Nile plan.
Washington Post, 12 June. On China’s plans for Nu River dams, see: Jacobs, Andrew. 2013. Plans to harness
Chinese river’s power threaten a region. New York Times, 4 May. On Central Asia, see Nurshayeva, Raushan. 2012.
Uzbek leader sounds warning over Central Asia water disputs. Reuters Business and Financial News, 7 September.

4

checks. Section 6 considers several extensions, including analyses that break down results by
type of dam and consider the role of international water management institutions. Section 7
concludes.
2.

Previous Literature
Substantial anecdotal evidence suggests that political jurisdictions free-ride in the

allocation of shared water resources (Gleick 1993). Much of the economic literature on this topic
develops the theory of common pool resources, using game theory and drawing upon specific
case studies of shared rivers (Rogers 1969; Frisvold and Caswell 2000). Prior studies suggest
that the incentive to free-ride in international surface water allocation can sometimes be
overcome. Becker and Easter (1999) consider the U.S. states and Canadian provinces sharing
the Great Lakes and show that a relatively small coalition can provide a stable cooperative
outcome, given the distribution of gains and losses in the region from cooperating over water
diversions.
Studies that examine shared rivers empirically have mostly focused on water pollution.
Empirical analyses of water pollution spillovers in transboundary settings have found that
countries, and even states and counties, free-ride in water quality. Water pollution levels are
higher near international borders (Sigman 2002; Bernauer and Kuhn 2010) as well as near
subnational borders within countries (Sigman 2005; Lipscomb and Mobarak 2013; Cai et al.
forthcoming; Kahn et al. forthcoming). Similarly, water pollution emissions by U.S. pulp and
paper plants appear to be higher when out-of-state residents receive a greater share of pollution
control benefits (Gray and Shadbegian 2004).
Our analysis in this paper extends this empirical approach to water impoundment and
withdrawal. 4 Many types of dams impose significant downstream costs. Dams that impound
water for consumptive urban water supply reduce the quantity of water available downstream.
Irrigation dams increase water diversion for agriculture, which consumes some water, and the
quality of irrigation return flows is often degraded; thus, they also impose costs downstream.
Hydroelectric dams are only minimally consumptive but impose significant downstream costs by

4

One advantage of our method over the empirical approaches used to study water resources is our ability to include
all locations in major watersheds: research on in-stream water quality must consider the locations where countries
choose to locate pollution monitors. That research design raises the possibility of strategic, or at least
unrepresentative, positioning of monitors, whereas we are able to work with a universe of locations.

5

altering a river’s hydrological cycle: they change the magnitude and timing of seasonal flows,
alter water temperature, block the movement of fish and other species, and modify the rate and
quality of sediment deposition (Richter et al. 2010; Harpman 1999; Stone 2011). Thus, when
countries consider the perceived benefits and costs of constructing a dam in a given location,
they are more likely to find the project desirable where an international border makes some of
these downstream costs less salient. We do not argue that countries seek locations that export
costs, but rather that they are more likely to go ahead with projects where apparent costs are
reduced by being partially borne by downstream countries.
Some types of dams can also generate positive downstream externalities. For example,
flood control dams may have positive impacts on flood risk mitigation that extend to a
downstream country. If countries fail to internalize all such externalities, then these types of
dams might be under-provided in upstream areas of international basins.
Although the economics literature contains no empirical research on free riding in water
withdrawal, water quantity has been a much greater source for international conflict than water
quality. Water availability is a central concern at all levels of development, and once water is
diverted for consumptive use, it is no longer available for downstream countries. In contrast,
water pollution tends to receive greater attention in higher income countries, and water can be
treated by downstream countries if quality is impaired. Therefore, the common property
problem may be more severe for water quantity than water quality, but it may also receive more
attention and thus be better controlled by institutions.
Our analysis also considers whether free-riding in international water allocation is
mitigated by treaties. Given frequent disputes over shared rivers, the degree of cooperation
facilitated by global water treaties may be very high (Wolf 1998). On the other hand, previous
research on air pollution provides reason for skepticism about the extent to which international
environmental treaties constrain behavior (Murdoch et al. 1997; Beron et al. 2003). A growing
body of research examines conditions for adoption of international water management
institutions (Espey and Towfique 2004; Song and Whittington 2004; Dinar 2008; Dinar et al.
2010). Since treaties may be endogenous, we will draw upon this literature in modeling the
impact of treaties on dam construction.

3.

Basic Model
6

We model the count and presence of dams in an area as a function of the sharing of a
water resource and other characteristics that may affect the benefits and costs of dams in a
location. We must define observations at the level of a geographic area (rather than at the dam
level, for example) because we do not observe potential dam sites, only the geographic
distribution of those sites chosen for construction.
Observations are defined at the level of a subbasin-country area: the intersection between
a hydrologically-defined “subbasin” of a major river system and a country. A subbasin is the
drainage area for a portion of the main stem of a river or for a tributary of the main river.
The subbasin is a natural choice for the unit of area for our analysis because our main
variables depend on which areas are downstream of the observation and thus are uniform within
a subbasin. When a subbasin spans multiple countries, we divide the areas into separate
observations by country to focus on a single country’s decisions about dam placement.
The basic econometric model is equation (1):

log (

) =  +  +  +  + 

(1)

in which Damsij is the count of dams in the portion of country i that lies within river subbasin j,
Cij is one or more measures of international resource-sharing, Xij is a vector of other
characteristics of a country-subbasin, αi is a country fixed effect, uk is a river basin fixed effect,
and εij is the standard econometric error term. A log-log relationship was chosen for the
relationship to allow proportionality between the number of dams and the major variables,
especially area.5 We also consider two alternative dependent variables – the total size of
impounded reservoirs, and total dam height. Robustness checks and extensions are discussed in
Sections 5 and 6.
Inclusion of the river basin effects, uk, means that the resource-sharing coefficient, β, is
identified only by variation within a major river basin; it does not compare international and

5

To allow areas with no dams to remain in the analysis, 0.1 was added to all dam counts before taking logs. In Table
5, we present Poisson estimates without this transformation and, in Table 4, probit and conditional-on-positive
regressions do not depend upon it. These alternative specifications suggest that results are not sensitive to this
transformation.

7

domestic basins. The country effects, αi, substitute for many of the socioeconomic variables that
might otherwise be included in such an equation.
Standard errors, εij, are clustered at the river basin level to address concerns about spatial
heterogeneity. By allowing correlation within basins, this clustering makes the equations robust
to the possibility that the density of dams upstream in a watershed may affect dam density
downstream.
4.

Data
We use Geographic Information System (GIS) software to create the dependent variables,

measures of resource sharing, and other explanatory variables. The HYDRO1k dataset from the
US Geological Survey (USGS) defines subbasins of each river basin, using global elevation data
(USGS 2012). HYDRO1k codes subbasins with the Pfafstetter system (Verdin and Verdin
1999), which provides a hierarchical coding of river basins and their subdivisions into several
possible levels of subbasins. The finest subbasin classification has 6 digits. We rely on the 3digit subbasin level as our basic unit of observation for tractability. 6 These subbasins vary in
size depending on the local structure of river systems, but have a median area of 15,400 square
kilometers in our data.
The Pfafstetter system codes basins in a way that makes it possible to identify whether
each subbasin lies upstream of the others and thus is the basis of our count of downstream
countries. To facilitate determination, we restrict the area studied to the 405 major river basins of
the world identified by the Global Runoff Data Centre (GRDC 2007).7 Almost all international
river basins are included among these major river basins, so this restriction does not much affect
the identification of the impact of water-resource sharing.8

6

This choice facilitates the analysis but does mean that our coding misses upstream-downstream relationships in
about 60 small coastal basins where the entire major river basin is only one 3-digit subbasin in HYDRO1k.
7

This restriction was necessary because not all the areas coded with the same first digit by the Pfafstetter identifier
share a river mouth. Given the system’s need to identify only 10 first-digit basins within a continent, a coastal area
with many smaller rivers all draining to the sea can have many subbasins with the same first digit. In our analysis,
the shared first digit initially gave a false impression of upstream-downstream relationships between some subbasins
that are actually in different river basins. By adding the GRDC information, we were able to separate basins based
on unique mouths.
8

We can only use 383 of the 405 GRDC basins because HYDRO1k data are not available for the 22 basins on the
Australian mainland (although one GRDC basin in Tasmania has HYDRO1k data and is included). In addition, we
drop the subbasin-country areas in the Lake Chad basin because this basin has multiple inland mouths, making the

8

Our unit of observation intersects the river subbasins defined by HYDRO1k with
international borders. Most subbasins are within a single country. A number of subbasins,
however, are split by country borders; these subbasin-country areas are treated in the database as
two or more separate observations. The first three rows in Table 1 describe the distribution of
subbasin-country areas, subbasins, and major river basins across continents in 2005.9
To construct the dependent variables, we placed dams in subbasin-country areas using the
Global Reservoir and Dams (GRanD) dataset, which provides geocoding for 6,862 of the world’s
largest dams and reservoirs (Lehner et al. 2011). GRanD includes all dams with reservoirs that
have storage capacity greater than 0.1 km3 and a number of dams with smaller reservoirs. We
use a total of 4,594 (just over two-thirds) of the dams described in the GRanD data because we
restrict our analysis to dams in major river basins. GRanD provides some information on the
characteristics of the dams that we use in our analysis. For example, GRanD classifies dams by
use and reports total reservoir capacity and dam height. Table 2 reports the main use category
for all the dams in GRanD. The most frequent use is irrigation, followed by hydroelectricity;
unfortunately, the data lack information on use for 23 percent of dams. The second panel of
columns in Table 2 describes the distribution of dam types, considering only the dams included
in our analysis. Although the fraction of dams missing information on use is smaller, the overall
distribution of types is similar to the full GRanD data set. Our data set has a slightly higher share
of irrigation dams and small differences in the share of dams used mainly for water supply, flood
control, and recreation.
The lower panel of Table 1 reports some additional information on the dams used in our
analysis. First, it reports the counts of dams by continent, showing that North America has the
highest number. Because GRanD provides the universe only of dams with reservoirs greater
than 0.1km 3 and a potentially non-random selection of dams on smaller reservoirs, we also
report some analyses that include only the dams with large reservoirs; 2,034 dams have these
large reservoirs, 44% of the 4,594 used in the analysis. To focus on dams with the most

Pfafstetter system inadequate to the task of defining upstream-downstream relationships. One more basin is dropped
for lack of flow accumulation and downstream distance data (because flow accumulation is too low to appear in the
HYDRO1k Streamlines files), leaving 381 major river basins in our analysis.
9

The country borders are those in effect in 2005 according to CShapes (Weidmann et al. 2010), which provides
spatial data on country borders over time.

9

significant downstream costs, some of our analysis is also restricted to dams that list water
supply, irrigation, or hydroelectric power generation as the main or a major use. As Table 1
reports, this subset includes 2,871 dams (or 62% of the total). One extension considers funding
by the World Bank; Table 1 shows that a small number of the dams across all continents (except
in Australia and the South Pacific) received this funding.
Our key explanatory variables are the presence and number of countries downstream of
each subbasin-country area.10 We use the upstream-downstream relationships embedded in the
Pfafstetter coding to identify the subbasins that are downstream from each subbasin-country area
and check whether any of these downstream subbasins are in a different country. 11 Figures 1, 2,
and 3 are maps that illustrate the subbasin-country areas that are our units of observation, the
downstream country counts for each of these areas, the location of geo-coded dams, and major
river basin boundaries for Europe, Asia, and Africa, respectively.
Table 3 reports summary statistics for the variables over the observations we are able to
include in our analysis. It also divides observations by our principal explanatory variable, the
presence of at least one foreign country downstream of the subbasin. As Table 3 reports, areas
upstream of an international border have fewer dams, less total reservoir capacity, and lower dam
height than other areas. The raw means differ in the opposite of the direction expected with free
riding, but, as discussed below, the areas upstream of a border differ systematically in other ways
as well.

10

The country borders (and thus the measures of resource-sharing) are based on 2005 data. Although borders may
change over time, most of the dams in our data (71%) were built in the post-World War II period, during which
borders have been stable (and many of the earlier dams are in North America where borders have been even more
stable). Further, 66% of the dams in Africa and 75% of the dams in South America were built after 1960. Using the
CShapes data, we examined the effects of changes in borders since 1960 on our downstream country count variable;
during this time, the only changes resulted from the breakup of the Soviet Union and the separation of Namibia from
South Africa. No dams were built in any of the areas that experienced a change in downstream country count.
Thus, the use of the modern borders does not greatly affect the analysis. In addition, we unfortunately cannot
exploit time-series variation to estimate the effects of interest with these data.
11

Research on transboundary spillovers in water pollution has usually used distance to the border as the measure of
resource sharing. We do not use this metric for several reasons. First, our unit of observation is the entire area, not
a specific pollution monitoring station; we would have to use an average distance for all areas in the basin which
might poorly represent the true distance from any of the dams in an area. Second, it is technically difficult to
calculate these distances. Finally, for the costs associated with water diversion, a major aspect of potential freeriding, it will not matter whether the diversion occurs far upstream or closer to the downstream country: in either
case, the downstream country is deprived of that water.

10

Table 3 also reports our principal resource-sharing variables. The basic variable, the
presence of some downstream foreign country, is positive for 36% of the observations. For those
observations, the average number of downstream countries is less than 2.
In addition, Table 3 shows a variable that reflects proximity to the downstream country; it
is a dummy variable that equals one if the subbasin is immediately upstream of a subbasin in a
different country. Far upstream of a border, the upstream country receives all the benefits of the
dam, but experiences only a share of the costs, with the remainder of the costs borne by the
downstream country. Near the border, however, the upstream country may receive only a share
of the benefits. Thus, the incentive to place dams just upstream of the border is weaker than
elsewhere upstream. Most of the upstream observations (58%) are immediately upstream of the
downstream country.
Turning to the additional covariates, we include several variables to capture the location
of the subbasin-country area in the river system. If dams are simply more likely to be located
either upstream or downstream in a major river basin, such a tendency might otherwise confound
the indicator we use for shared resources. The first variable we include to deal with this potential
issue is the number of downstream subbasins, regardless of whether they are in the same country
or a different one. To create our principal resource sharing variable, we search this set of
subbasins to see if any of them are in a different country The number of downstream subbasins
is associated with the likelihood of finding a different downstream country. As Table 3 reports,
areas with a downstream country have on average twice as many downstream subbasins as other
areas. However, this difference in means overstates the difference between the two distributions.
For areas with a small number of downstream subbasins (which are the most common in the
data), the representation of observations with some downstream country is similar to the sample
as a whole; for example, 43% of observations with one downstream subbasin and 42% of
observations with two downstream subbasins have a different country downstream. Thus,
observations with downstream countries are well-represented in the lower reaches of rivers.
In addition to the count of downstream subbasins, we include two other measures to
control for the location of the subbasin-country area within the river system. One measure is the
“flow accumulation,” which measures the catchment area that is upstream of a given point
(measured in thousands of square kilometers). The variable included in our equations is the
maximum flow accumulation in the subbasin-country area because points on the main stem of
11

the river are the most likely locations for dams; flow accumulation along many smaller streams
in the area is unlikely to be relevant. A second location measure is the downstream distance to
the ocean or other (internal) sink calculated along the river’s path. We use the average
downstream distance within the subbasin-country area. Both of these variables are calculated for
each subbasin-country area from HYDRO1k’s Streamlines files. The difference in means
reported in Table 3 again indicates that areas upstream of an international border are typically
further upstream in the river basin, with lower flow accumulation and higher downstream flow
distance to the mouth.
We also include several measures of the physical suitability and need for dams in a
subbasin-country area. The size of each subbasin-country area (in km2) addresses the likelihood
that larger areas will contain more dams. We control for slope, since areas with higher slope
present better opportunities for dam construction (especially for hydroelectric dams). The
Compound Topographic Index (CTI), a function of the slope and the upstream area contributing
to flow, is a time-invariant wetness index that is highly correlated with soil moisture and might
measure demand for irrigation water.12 Both slope and the wetness index are available from
HYDRO1k; the variables used in the analysis are the averages over the 6-digit subbasins in each
of the 3-digit Pfafstetter subbasins.13 As another measure of demand for dam services, we
calculated population within each subbasin-country area, using the spatial data from the Gridded
Population of the World version 3 (GPWv3), which provides estimates of population density in
2000 (CIESIN 2005).

5.

Results

5.1 Main results

12

Specifically, CTI=ln (flow accumulation / tan(slope)). If the slope is equal to zero, the formula uses slope = .001.
In our data, the index ranges from a minimum of about 3, to a maximum of about 11.
13

In previous versions of the equations, we also included historical precipitation in the subbasin-country area,
calculated from gridded data on precipitation from 1950 through 2000 (Fekete et al. 2002). The estimated
coefficients on local historical precipitation were small and statistically insignificant in all equations and are not
currently shown in the tables. Dams thus do not appear to be either a substitute or complement for rainfall, once we
control for basin and country effects and other covariates.

12

Column 1 of Table 4 reports OLS estimates of the coefficients in equation (1). The
coefficient on the presence of a different country downstream is positive and statistically
significant. The point estimate of this coefficient, .242, suggests 27 percent more dams in
subbasins where water is shared with another country than in those where it is not.14 In Column 2
of Table 4, the measure of resource sharing is broadened: in addition to the presence of a
downstream country, the equation in column 2 includes the log of the number of downstream
countries. Coasean bargaining between upstream and downstream countries may resolve the
spillover more readily when a smaller number of countries bear the downstream costs. The
coefficient on the presence of a downstream country is relatively unchanged, but the downstream
country count has a small, negative, statistically insignificant coefficient. This pattern is
consistent with a lack of successful bargaining over the spillover: all that matters is the
downstream shifting of costs.15
Column 3 of Table 4 adds another covariate, a dummy variable that equals 1 for areas
upstream of an international border and for which the next downstream subbasin is at least
partially across the closest country border. As noted earlier, this variable may help control for
potential nonlinearity in the relationship between dam placement and resource sharing. In
locations near the border, the downstream country may experience some of the benefits, as well
as the costs, of the dam; this sharing of benefits might offset the discounting of the downstream
country’s costs and make dams less likely very near the downstream border than further

14

Estimates of the percentage change in response to the dummy explanatory variable here and below use the
formula, 100(exp(β*-.5vβ*)-1) , where β* is the estimated coefficient and vβ* is its estimated variance, from
Kennedy (1981).
15

Some dams lie on the border between two countries and thus the two countries must coordinate to exploit the
resource. With our coding system, areas where rivers form the border will almost always be coded as having a
different country downstream. If free riding is less likely on border rivers because of the need for cooperation in
dam construction, the presence of dams on border rivers will introduce a conservative bias into our estimates of the
extent of free riding.
Our method does not allow us to isolate border rivers because our observations are watersheds, including not only
the river, but also surrounding areas and tributaries; if the river is the border, the subbasin will straddle it. However,
by excluding all subbasins that lie in multiple countries, we can exclude border rivers (along with a number of other
types of subbasins). This exclusion reduces the number of subbasins by about 30% and results in estimates of the
coefficient on downstream countries that are positive, somewhat smaller than the values in Table 4, and not
statistically significant. However, these estimates are not especially informative given the need to exclude many
relevant areas from the analysis.

13

upstream. The coefficient on the main resource sharing variable in this model increases slightly
relative to columns 1 and 2. The coefficient on the variable indicating direct hydrologic
proximity to a foreign subbasin is small, negative and insignificant. The net effect is the sum of
the two coefficients, so the results in column 3 continue to suggest free riding in all upstream
regions, with no statistically significant difference near the border. In later models, this measure
of border proximity does appear to have interesting implications, thus we retain it for now.
Unless indicated, results are qualitatively robust to its exclusion.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 4 consider alternative functional forms for the relationship
between dam counts and the presence of a downstream country. Column 4 contains a probit for
the presence of at least one dam in the subbasin-country area, whereas Column 5 reports an OLS
model that is conditional on the presence of at least one dam.16 The coefficient on the presence
of a foreign country downstream is positive in both these equations, statistically significant at 5%
in the probit equation, but not statistically significant (p=0.13) in the conditional-on-positive
OLS. The point estimate in column 5 suggests that the count of dams conditional on the
presence of dams may be similarly sensitive to resource sharing as the unconditional count (.274
versus .242). The probit marginal effect suggests a 7.5 percent increase in the likelihood of at
least one dam upstream of international borders. In this model, direct proximity to the
downstream country reduces, but does not eliminate, the incentive to dam shared rivers; dams are
still statistically significantly more prevalent directly upstream of the border than in domestic
subbasins, but their prevalence is lower than further upstream in the basins.
In addition to the coefficients of the variables reflecting resource sharing, several other
variables enter the equations with statistically significant coefficients. Not surprisingly, the size
of an area has a positive, statistically significant relationship with the number of dams. In all of
the estimated equations, however, we can reject the hypothesis that the number of dams increases
proportionally to the area (a coefficient of 1), suggesting that the benefit from additional dams
may diminish once the first dam is in place.
We do not find much evidence to support the hypothesis that dams are typically placed
either upstream or downstream in the river system. The number of downstream subbasins

16

In the conditional-on-positive model in column 5, dam counts revert to their true value (in logs), rather than
adding 0.1, as is done before taking logs in the other models.

14

generally has a negative coefficient, but the coefficient is not statistically significant in any
equation. 17 The maximum flow accumulation in the subbasin has mostly positive point estimates
as expected, but is only statistically significant in the probit equation. The downstream distance
from the subbasin-country area is similarly insignificant. Taken together, these estimates suggest
a weak tendency for dams to be in the lower reaches of river basins, all else equal; such a
tendency, if not fully controlled in our equations, would produce a conservative bias in our
estimates of the extent of free riding (because free riding occurs upstream). But the estimates do
not suggest that this effect is strong enough to be a major concern.
The slope of the basin has a statistically significant and positive effect in all models
except the conditional model in column 5; the pattern indicates an effect on the presence of
dams, rather than the number once dams are present. The coefficients on population density
suggest that more people increase the likelihood of dams, as well as their number, conditional on
the presence of any dam (although the conditional effect may be smaller). The wetness index
has surprising opposite effects in the probit and conditional on positive equations that are both
statistically significant.

5.2 Additional specifications
Table 5 considers several variants on the equations in Table 4, reporting only the main
coefficients of interest. First, we consider two alternative measures of intensity of dam building
activity: the total reservoir capacity and the total height of dams in the subbasin country area.18
The estimated coefficients with these new dependent variables are similar to those for the counts
of dams: the presence of a different downstream country in the basin raises the intensity of
damming activity, with the coefficient on the downstream country variable positive and

17

To allow nonlinearity in the relationship, we also estimated the equations with a series of dummy variables for the
number (and ranges, for higher values) of downstream subbasin count. Although the coefficients on the dummies
were negative and jointly significantly different than the excluded category (no downstream subbasins), the
coefficient on the downstream country variable is the same as in column 1 of Table 4, and no particular pattern
appears in the coefficients of the dummies.
18

Both measures are sums of the respective values across all dams in the subbasin-country area. The GRanD
project calculated reservoir capacity, so these data are available for all but a handful of dams. By contrast, the dam
heights are missing for 7% of the dams. These missing heights are treated as zero as a conservative assumption.
Reservoir capacity has a very dramatic upper tail, so a few observations may be very influential in these equations.

15

significant at .05 in both regressions. The estimates in column 1 suggest that the total capacity of
dammed reservoirs nearly doubles (increases by 96 percent) when an area is upstream of an
international border, though this effect is reduced (to a 36 percent increase) when the border
crosses the very next downstream subbasin. The column 2 estimates suggest that total dam
height increases by about 59 percent in areas upstream of other countries; there is no significant
mitigating effect on dam height of direct hydrological proximity to the downstream country,
although the estimated coefficient is negative. As in the probit model in Table 4, these results
suggest that free riding occurs, but may be somewhat less pronounced when the downstream
neighbor is very close and both domestic costs and benefits are reduced by transboundary
spillovers.
Column 3 of Table 5 considers only dams with reservoir capacity greater than .1 km3. As
mentioned earlier, the GRanD project geocoded all dams with reservoirs of this size and
provided information on some dams with smaller reservoirs, when information was available.
Column 3 includes only the larger dams (44 percent of the dams in the sample) to address
potential concern about non-random selection of smaller dams. The coefficient on the presence
of a downstream country falls slightly (.209 vs. .265 in Table 4) when only large-reservoir dams
are considered and is only weakly significant. This may be due to non-random selection of the
smaller dams into the GRanD database that is correlated with our main variable. For example,
these dams may be more likely to be included by researchers if they are in international basins,
which may receive more attention than domestic basins. However, the point estimate might also
be smaller because the location of very large dams is more constrained by physical geography
and thus less sensitive to common pool problems.
Column 4 of Table 5 returns to using the count of all dams, but excludes areas with no
downstream subbasins. The excluded areas are on a coast or an inland sink. The reason for
excluding these areas is that our main measures of resource-sharing can never be positive for
these areas: our variables are formed by looking at all subbasins downstream from the current
basin and indicating if any of these subbasins are in a different country. Given that these areas
are not “at risk” for having a downstream country, column 4 provides an alternative definition of
the comparison group. The point estimate on the presence of a downstream country remains
about the same as in the basic equations in Table 4 and is weakly statistically significant, even
though the sample size shrinks considerably. These results lend support to the view that our
16

results are not driven by the position of the subbasin in the river system, but rather by
transboundary spillovers.
Column 5 of Table 5 reports estimates from a Poisson regression, as an alternative to the
main OLS models.19 Poisson regression provides a theoretically-consistent approach to the zeros
in the dependent variable. The sample size in column 5 is smaller than in the main OLS
equations in Table 4 because the Poisson model drops observations from GRDC basins with few
observations (about 23% of the full sample) to allow it to converge. The coefficient on the
presence of a downstream country in the Poisson model is positive, significant at 1%, and much
larger than those from the OLS models. The Poisson coefficients suggest that resource-sharing
more than doubles the number of dams constructed upstream of international borders, but
increases it by a smaller 83 percent when the area is immediately upstream of a foreign
subbasin.20
The results of these robustness checks generally support the main results in Table 4.
Dam counts, reservoir size, and dam height all increase when an area is upstream of an
international border, all else equal. Neither restricting the analysis to the universe of large dams
nor considering only upstream areas appreciably affects the main results. The Poisson results
suggest a larger impact of resource-sharing on damming activity. To be conservative, and to
preserve the appealing robustness properties of OLS, we move to extensions, keeping equation
(1) as the main model.

6.

Extensions
This section presents several extensions to the main models. First, we differentiate

among dams by use. Second, we address the role of institutions in possibly mitigating free
riding, by examining dams funded by a multilateral institution (the World Bank) and by
controlling for the presence of transboundary water management treaties.

19

The dam counts in our data range from 0 to 83, so the density may not truly be Poisson. But the Poisson estimator
is still the pseudo- or quasi-maximum likelihood estimator. To address convergence issues, we use the pseudomaximum likelihood technique by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2010), implemented as ppml in Stata.
20

The Poisson IRR is calculated as: 100 ∗ [ − 1]. If we estimate the basic OLS model from Table 4 on the
Poisson sample, results change little in comparison to column 1 of Table 4. Thus, the increase in the estimated effect
cannot be attributed to different samples.

17

6.1 Categories of use
Table 6 conducts the analyses for different types of dams because they may differ in their
downstream costs. First, in column 1, the dependent variable is the sum of irrigation,
hydroelectric, and water supply dams only. These dam types may all impose obvious negative
externalities on downstream areas. In contrast, dams constructed primarily for flood control
could potentially be managed to the benefit of downstream areas. The parameter estimates in
column 1 are almost identical to the results for all dams in Table 4. These uses account for 62
percent of all dams in our analysis (see Table 1) and 75 percent of the sample dams for which
any use is reported. Thus, it may not be surprising that this dependent variable produces similar
estimates to the count of all dams.
The remaining columns of Table 6 repeat the basic equation separately for the four most
common categories of main or major use: irrigation, hydroelectricity, water supply, and flood
control. We expect all but the last to impose significant burdens on downstream areas, all else
equal. In each of these models, data limitations are concern: when the analysis is restricted to
one type of dam (and all dams with missing use category data are thrown out), many major river
basins have zero dams and thus do not contribute to the identification of the resource-sharing
effect in equations that include basin fixed effects. To indicate the identification issues, the final
row in Table 6 reports of the share of international basins that have some dams: for some rare
categories of dams, especially flood control dams, identification rests on few major river basins
and thus the results are noisy and not definitive.
The results vary across the different dam types. For irrigation dams, neither coefficient
of interest is statistically significant. The downstream country coefficient is statistically
significant at 10% for hydroelectric dams.
Water supply dam counts increase by about 15 percent in areas just above a foreign
subbasin. This pattern differs from the pattern observed in the probit results for all dams in
Table 4, where areas just upstream of the border were less likely to have dams. Urban water
supply may not follow this pattern because it is the most consumptive dam use in our analysis
and it does not require gravitational flow through downstream canals (unlike irrigation). As a
result, an upstream country may capture all the benefits of a water supply dam that is very close
to the border.
18

The results for flood control dams are similar to the results for water supply dams: about
9% more flood control dams are constructed in areas for which the next downstream subbasin is
at least partially in another country. This result is surprising because flood control benefits
accrue exclusively downstream. The results in column 5 could indicate cooperative water
development.21 Alternatively, they may result from the fact that even dams with flood control
indicated as a principal or major use of the dam also have other uses with downstream costs.
Finally, only a few international river basins have variation in the number of flood control dams
(because most basins have zero flood control dams), so the surprising result may just be due to
data limitations.

6.2 Dams funded by multilateral institutions
When agencies external to riparian countries — such as multilateral financial institutions
— fund dam construction, these agencies may take regional impacts into account and thus be less
susceptible to common property problems. To address this possibility, we re-estimate the basic
model, counting only dams that received funding from the World Bank between 1948 and 1999
in the dependent variable. Information on the World Bank funding of dams comes from the nongovernmental organization International Rivers; we matched their lists of dams that received
World Bank funding from 1948 through 1999 to the GRanD data by the name of the dam. 22
Column 1 of Table 7 reports results from this analysis.23 The effect of resource-sharing
on the count of dams indicates that resource-sharing increases damming activity by about 10.7

21

If we drop the 45% of observations in river basins in which a treaty explicitly addresses water allocation, the
water supply dam estimates more closely resemble the results for all dams (the coefficient on the presence of a
downstream country is positive and significant, and that on the variable indicating direct hydrologic proximity to a
neighboring country is not significantly different from zero). If we do the same for the flood control dam equation,
neither coefficient is significant. We formally address the possibility of treaties’ influence on free-riding in Section
6.3.
22

International Rivers produced a hardcopy list of dams receiving funding from the World Bank between 1948 and
1994 (Sklar and McCully 1994) and provided us with an Excel file for dams funded between 1994 and 1999. We
thank Aviva Imhof at International Rivers for her assistance in obtaining these data. Dams constructed with World
Bank funds between 1999 and 2005 are not identified in our dataset, but we expect the effect of this omission to be
small.
23

As an alternative, we have also estimated a model in which we remove the 156 World Bank-funded dams from the
dam counts, but not surprisingly, removing a small number of dams from the sample does not result in estimates that
differ significantly from those reported for all dams in columns 1 and 3 of Table 4.

19

percent, which is a smaller effect than in the comparable model for all dams in Table 4
(coefficient estimate of .102 vs. .265). Interestingly, for World Bank-funded dams, this effect is
reduced to a 4 percent increase in areas directly upstream of the first subbasin in another country.
Taken together, these results suggest that dams with multilateral funding may be less subject to
common property problems than those funded using exclusively domestic resources. It is not
clear, however, whether the World Bank actually reduces free riding or whether it selects dam
projects that cause low international conflict from among many possible projects.

6.3 International water resource management institutions
Countries aim to use international water resource management institutions, such as
treaties, to replace regimes of resource conflict with cooperation. In this subsection, we provide
some evidence on the success of these institutions. In particular, we examine whether the
presence of a water treaty pertaining to a given international river basin limits the degree of free
riding.
The Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database (TFDD) project at Oregon State
University has compiled more than 400 international, freshwater-related agreements, dating from
1820 to 2007 (TFDD, 2014).24 We matched TFDD’s river basin codes to the GRDC river basin
codes to associate treaties with our observations at the river basin level.
We interact the presence of the treaty with the presence of a downstream country to see if
the presence of agreements reduces free riding. The estimated equation is equation (2):

log (

) = #  + $  % +  +  +  + 

(2)

in which Mk is a binary variable indicating whether an international water management treaty is
in effect in the GRDC basin in which the area is located and the interaction term is CijMk. We
cannot identify a separate effect of the treaty on dam counts because any such effect is absorbed
by the river basin effect, uk.
Column 2 of Table 7 reports OLS estimates for equation (2). The coefficients of interest
in these equations are not statistically significant. The coefficient on the treaty interaction has an
24

See: http://www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu.

20

unexpected positive sign: rather than reducing the tendency to find more dams in areas upstream
of borders, the point estimate would suggest an increase in dams upstream of other countries in
the presence of a treaty.
One possible explanation of the counterintuitive point estimates in column 2 is that water
management treaties are endogenous. They may be more likely to emerge in watersheds that are
valuable to more than one country (especially where resources are scarce); dams may also be
more likely in such watersheds. Alternatively, institutions may arise specifically to support dam
construction, or after dams have been constructed and conflict has developed between countries
sharing a watershed. Any of these sources of endogeneity would bias the coefficients in
equation (2).
We address the possibility of endogenous water management institutions using
instrumental variables (IV) in columns 3-6 of Table 7. We use two different treaty variables in
the IV models: (1) a dummy variable indicating the presence of any water management treaties
in the river basin, as we used in the OLS model in column 2 of Table 7, and (2) a more restrictive
dummy indicating the presence of any water management treaties that specifically mention water
allocation. The dependent variable in the first stage is the interaction of the endogenous treaty
variable with the dummy for the presence of a downstream country. In the first stage, this
interaction is regressed on the instruments and the exogenous variables from the main equation.
Because the first stage equations also include the country and basin effects, country-level or
basin-level instruments are interacted with the downstream country dummy.
The IV models employ five instruments. First instrument, a Herfindahl-like index of
population within a GRDC basin represents the degree of population concentration among
countries within a basin (equal to one for single-country basins). Prior research suggests that the
more control any single country has over a basin, the less likely it is to participate in a basin
management treaty (Espey and Towfique 2004); distribution of power within a basin also
appears to be an important driver of treaty formation (Zawahri and Mitchell 2011). Two
additional instruments describe a country’s membership in conventional international
organizations because strong trade ties and other such links are correlated with treaty formation

21

(Espey and Towfique 2004; Zawahri and Mitchell 2011).25 The instruments are counts of the
number of global organizations and of multiregional organizations in which the country was a
member during the period 1952-97. The Center for Systemic Peace (Marshall et al. 1999)
classifies the organizations and provides data on membership. A final pair of instruments
describes historical forms of governance and political participation. We use country-level
historical averages (1940-2013) of the weighted autocracy index and the weighted democracy
index from the Polity IV database of the Center for Systemic Peace (Marshall et al. 2013).26
Although these characteristics may drive treaty formation, we do not have strong priors on the
direction of this correlation: democratic regimes may be more likely to cooperate, as is often
posited, but autocratic regimes may find it easier to conclude agreements without popular
support.
The first-stage results for the IV model using the broader treaty definition (any water
management treaty), and those for the model using the more restrictive treaty variable (counting
only treaties specifically focused on water allocation) are reported in columns 4 and 6,
respectively. The first stage results support the findings from the literature reported earlier.
Consistent with Espey and Towfique (2004), population concentration has a negative and
significant effect on treaty formation. We also see the expected positive association between
water treaties and membership in multiregional organizations, but a surprising negative
association with membership in global organizations. A higher autocracy index is weakly
negatively associated with treaty formation in a basin in column 4.
Columns 3 and 5 report second-stage results for the IV models using the five instruments,
In both the “any treaty” and “any water allocation treaty” models, the resource-sharing
coefficient is positive and the interaction of sharing with presence of a river basin treaty is
negative. The magnitudes of the estimates are approximately the same in both models,
suggesting that countries tend to free ride, but that this incentive may be just about

25

If water treaties and membership in other international agreements both formalize an underlying propensity to
cooperate, however, the exclusion restriction might be problematic for our equations.
26

Both indices capture competitiveness of political participation, openness/competitiveness of recruitment of the
chief executive, and constraints on the chief executive. The autocracy index also captures regulation of political
participation. Because distinct elements of autocratic and democratic authority may co-exist in a single regime, the
two indices enter our model as separate instruments (Marshall et al. 2013).

22

counterbalanced by treaty constraints. However, the coefficients are statistically significant only
at 10%, the treaty interaction is insignificant in the “any water allocation treaty” model, and the
cluster-robust first-stage F-statistics for the excluded instruments are small, which suggests that
the instruments are weak; thus, these results are only suggestive.27 In sum, the point estimates
suggest that the presence of a downstream country increases the number of dams, but a treaty
may almost offset this effect.
The 2SLS models provide suggestive, but somewhat equivocal, results about the
influence of treaties. Indeed, econometric analysis may not be able to provide definitive
evidence about the effects of treaties because of the fundamentally small sample of international
river basins. Of the 381 major river basins in our analyses, we code 115 as international and thus
eligible for a treaty. Eighty basins have at least one international river management treaty, and
48 basins have at least one such treaty that explicitly addresses water allocation. 28 We exploit all
available global data in the analysis, but the amount of identifying variation is necessarily small.
Thus, even stronger instruments might not produce more precise results.

7. Conclusion
This paper investigates whether countries consider the welfare of other nations that share
water resources when they make water development decisions. The results suggest that countries
engage in more intensive dam construction in areas that are some distance upstream of
international borders than other areas, all else equal. Thus, the ability to export some costs of
dams may create incentives for their construction in upstream areas of international river basins.
The increase in damming activity in these basins appears when looking at dam counts, as well as
at the size of impounded reservoirs and the total height of dams.

27

Because of the concern about weak instruments, we re-estimated the models in column 3 and 5 using limitedinformation maximum likelihood (LIML) estimation instead of 2SLS; LIML may perform better than 2SLS in the
presence of weak instruments (Hahn et al. 2004). The LIML estimates were nearly identical in terms of the point
estimates and their precision to those presented in the table.
28

Of the 80 basins with treaties, 8 are not coded as international by our methods. Visual inspection suggests that 7
of these basins are not international, so the functions of these treaties are unclear. For the remaining basin, the
geographic extent of the GRDC-defined basin and TFDD-defined basin differ. These 8 treaties do not influence our
results because the treaty variable only appears interacted with the “some downstream country” dummy.

23

Our evidence on the role of international institutions in mitigating these incentives is less
conclusive. We do find that dams funded by the World Bank may be less subject to the common
property problems in international basins, though we cannot separate a causal impact of World
Bank funding from a selection effect. The estimates also provide weak support for a mitigating
effect of river basin treaties. The inconclusive results regarding the impacts of treaties may
partly reflect difficulties in finding exogenous sources of variation to use as instrumental
variables. But it may also stem from fundamental limitations of the data: only the few
international river basins around the globe are candidates for treaties, limiting the possible
identification to differences across fairly small groups.
The evidence that countries do typically take advantage of opportunities to free ride in
water development decisions has several implications. First, it suggests sub-optimality in dam
locations that should be considered by economists and policy-makers who evaluate these
projects. Second, the finding that free riding occurs on average in the data suggests that Coasean
bargaining cannot always be relied upon to resolve problems from such international spillovers
in practice. Water in rivers should present a relatively straightforward coordination problem,
with a small number of countries sharing a well-defined resource and a natural default allocation
of property rights to the upstream country. Our results do not support optimism about the
likelihood of cooperation over more complex or global resources.

24

References

Ansar, Atif, Bent Flyvbjerg, Alexander Budzier, and Daniel Lunn. 2014. Should we build more
large dams? The actual costs of hydropower megaproject development. Energy Policy 69:
43-56.
Baum, C. F., M. E. Schaffer, and S. Stillman. 2007. Ivreg2: Stata module for extended
instrumental variables/2SLS, GMM and AC/HAC, LIML, and k-class regression. Boston
College Department of Economics, Statistical Software Components S425401.
Downloadable from http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s425401.html.
Becker, Nir, and K. William Easter. 1999. Conflict and cooperation in managing international
water resources such as the Great Lakes. Land Economics 75: 233-245.
Bernauer, Thomas, and Patrick M. Kuhn. 2010. Is there an environmental version of the Kantian
Peace? Insights from water pollution in Europe. European Journal of International
Relations 16 (1): 77-102.
Beron, Kurt J., James C. Murdoch, and Wim P. M. Vijverberg. 2003. Why cooperate? Public
goods, economic power, and the Montreal Protocol. Review of Economics and Statistics
85 (2): 286-297.
Cai, H.B., Y. Chen, and G. Qing. Forthcoming. Polluting thy neighbor: The case of river
pollution in China. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Centro Internacional de
Agricultura Tropical (CIAT). 2005. Gridded Population of the World, Version 3
(GPWv3) Data Collection. Palisades, NY: Columbia University.
http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/index.jsp
Collier, Michael, Robert H. Webb, and John C. Schmidt. 2000. Dams and Rivers: A Primer on
the Downstream Effects of Dams. United States Geological Survey Circular 1126.
Denver, CO: U.S. Geological Survey.
Dinar, Shlomi. 2008. International water treaties: Negotiation and cooperation along
transboundary rivers. London: Routledge.
Dinar, Ariel, Brian Blankespoor, Shlomi Dinar, and Pradeep Kurukulasuriya. 2010. Does
precipitation and runoff variability affect treaty cooperation between states sharing
international bilateral rivers? Ecological Economics 69: 2568–2581.
Duflo, Esther, and Rohini Pande. 2007. Dams. Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2): 601646.
25

Eckstein, Otto. 1965. Water resource development: The economics of project evaluation.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Espey, Molly, and Basman Towfique. 2004. International bilateral water treaty formation. Water
Resources Research 40, W05S05, doi:10.1029/2003WR002534.
Fekete, Balázs M., Charles J. Vörösmarty, and Wolfgang Grabs. 2002. High resolution fields of
global runoff combining observed river discharge and simulated water balances. Global
Biogeochemical Cycles 16 (3): 15-1-15-10.
Frisvold, George B., and Margriet F. Caswell. 2000. Transboundary water management: gametheoretic lessons for projects on the US-Mexico border. Agricultural Economics 24: 101111.
Gleick, Peter H. 1993. Water and conflict: Fresh water resources and international security.
International Security 18 (1): 79-112.
Gray, Wayne, and Ronald J. Shadbegian. 2004. ‘Optimal’ pollution abatement: Whose benefits
matter, and how much? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 47: 510–
534.
Global Runoff Data Centre. 2007. Major River Basins of the World. GRDC in the Bundesanstalt
fuer Gewaesserkunde, 56068 Koblenz, Germany. Available at: http://grdc.bafg.de.
Hahn, J., J. Hausman, and G. Kuersteiner. 2004. Estimation with weak instruments: accuracy of
higher-order bias and MSE approximations. Econometrics Journal 7: 272-306.
Harpman, David A. 1999. Assessing the short-run economic cost of environmental constraints on
hydropower operations at Glen Canyon Dam. Land Economics 75 (3): 390-401.
Holland, Stephen P., and Michael R. Moore. 2003. Cadillac Desert revisited: Property rights,
public policy and water-resource depletion. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 46: 131-155.
International Rivers. 2010. New online map plots 140 large dams planned for the Amazon. Press
release. 18 August. Available at: http://www.internationalrivers.org/2010-8-17/newonline-map-plots-140-large-dams-planned-amazon.
Kahn, Matthew E., Pei Li, and Daxuan Zhao. Forthcoming. Water pollution progress at borders:
The role of changes in China’s political promotion incentives. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy.

26

Kennedy, Paul E. 1981. Estimation with correctly interpreted dummy variables in semilogarithmic
equations. American Economic Review 71: 801.

Lipscomb, Molly, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. 2013. Decentralization and the political
economy of water pollution: Evidence from the re-drawing of county borders in Brazil.
Unpublished manuscript, Batten School of Public Policy, University of Virginia.
Lehner, B., C. Reidy Liermann, C. Revenga, C. Vorosmarty, B. Fekete, P. Crouzet, P. Doll, M.
Endejan, K. Frenken, J. Magome, C. Nilsson, J.C. Robertson, R. Rodel, N. Sindorf, and
D. Wisser. 2011. Global Reservoir and Dam Database, Version 1 (GRanDv1): Dams,
Revision 01. Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center
(SEDAC). Available at: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/grand-v1-dams-rev01.
Marshall, Monty G., Donna F. Ramsey Marshall, and Sherry Marie Young. 1999. Memberships
in Conventional Intergovernmental Organizations, 1952-1997. Vienna, VA: Center for
Systemic Peace.
Marshall, Monty G., Ted Robert Gurr, and Keith Jaggers. 2013. Polity IV Project: Political
regime characteristics and transitions, 1800-2013. Dataset users manual. Vienna, VA:
Center for Systemic Peace.
Murdoch, James C., Todd Sandler, and Keith Sargent. 1997. A tale of two collectives: Sulphur
versus nitrogen oxides emission reduction in Europe. Economica 64: 281-301.
Postel, Sandra L., and Aaron T. Wolf. 2001. Dehydrating conflict. Foreign Policy
September/October: 60-67.
Richter, Brian D., Sandra Postel, Carmen Revenga, Thayer Scudder, Bernhard Lehner, Allegra
Churchill, and Morgan Chow. 2010. Lost in development’s shadow: The downstream
human consequences of dams. Water Alternatives 3 (2): 14-42.
Rogers, Peter. 1969. A game theory approach to the problems of international river basins. Water
Resources Research 5: 749-760.
Santos Silva, J. M. C., and S. Tenreyro. 2010. On the existence of the maximum likelihood
estimates in Poisson regression. Economics Letters 107: 310-312.
Scudder, Thayer. 2006. The future of large dams: Dealing with social, environmental,
institutional and political costs. London: Earthscan.
Sigman, Hilary. 2002. International spillovers and water quality in rivers: Do countries free ride?
American Economic Review 92: 1152-1159.
Sigman, Hilary. 2005. Transboundary spillovers and decentralization of environmental policies,
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 50: 82–101.
27

Sklar, Leonard, and Patrick McCully. 1994. Damming the rivers: The World Bank’s lending for
large dams. International Rivers Network Working Paper No. 5, Berkeley, CA.
Song, Jennifer, and Dale Whittington. 2004. Why have some countries on international rivers
been successful negotiating treaties? A global perspective. Water Resources Research 40,
W05S06, doi:10.1029/2003WR002536.
Stone, R. 2011. Hydropower: The legacy of the Three Gorges Dam. Science 333: 817.
Strobl, Eric, and Robert O. Strobl. 2011. The distributional impact of large dams: evidence from
cropland productivity in Africa. Journal of Development Economics 96: 432-450.
Strzepek, Kenneth M., Gary W. Yohe, Richard S. J. Tol, and Mark W. Rosegrant. 2008. The
value of the high Aswan Dam to the Egyptian economy. Ecological Economics 66: 117126.
Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database (TFDD), Department of Geosciences, Oregon State
University. http://www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu (Last accessed: March 1, 2014).
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 2012. HYDRO1k Elevation Derivative Database. Available at:
http://eros.usgs.gov/.
Verdin, K.L, and J. P. Verdin. 1999. A topological system for delineation and codification of the
Earth’s river basins. Journal of Hydrology 218: 1–12.
Weidmann, N. B., D. Kuse, and K. S. Gleditsch. 2010. The geography of the international
system: The CShapes dataset. International Interactions 36 (1).
Wolf, Aaron. 1998. Conflict and cooperation along international waterways. Water Policy 1 (2):
251–265.
Wolf, Aaron T., Jeffrey A. Natharius, Jeffrey J. Danielson, Brian S. Ward, and Jan K. Pender.
1999. International river basins of the world. International Journal of Water Resources
Development 15 (4): 387-427.
World Commission on Dams. 2000. Dams and development: A new framework for decisionmaking. London: Earthscan.
Zawahri, Neda A., and Sara McLaughlin Mitchell. 2011. Fragmented governance of international
rivers: Negotiating bilateral versus multilateral treaties. International Studies Quarterly
55: 835-858.

28

Table 1. Areas and dams by continent

Africa

Asia

Total
Austral- Europe North
South
Asia
America America

Subbasincountry areas

600

624

54

467

581

399

2725

Pfafstetter
level 3
subbasins

427

500

50

310

526

350

2163

GRDC river
basins

53

73

18

72

107

59

381

All dams in
analysis

525

1208

34

792

1808

227

4594

Large-reservoir
dams

122

573

7

334

813

185

2034

Irrigation,
water supply,
hydroelectric
dams

397

670

25

648

1043

88

2871

World Bank
funded dams

27

45

0

28

13

43

156

Areas

Dams

29

Table 2: Main uses of dams

Irrigation
Missing
Hydroelectricity
Water supply
Flood control
Recreation
Other
Navigation
Fisheries
Total

All GRanD Dams
Number
Share
1,781
25.95
23.02
1,580
1,541
22.46
847
12.34
547
7.97
293
4.27
206
3.00
56
0.82
14
0.20
6,862
100.00

Dams used in analysis
Number
Share
1320
28.73
787
17.13
1,040
22.64
504
10.97
469
10.21
252
5.49
161
3.50
51
1.11
10
0.22
4,594
100.00

Notes: This table indicates the “main use.” A few dams also have major or secondary uses indicated, but most do
not. Use category “other” includes dams with main uses of livestock watering and water pollution control, in
addition to those labeled in GRanD as “other”.

30

Table 3: Summary statistics, by presence of downstream countries
No downstream
country
1.980
(6.748)

Some downstream
country
1.176**
(3.875)

1.686
(5.875)

Some dam present

0.272
(0.445)

0.250
(0.433)

0.264
(0.441)

Number of large dams

0.936
(3.129)

0.418**
(1.324)

0.746
(2.629)

Number of irrigation, water supply, or
hydroelectric dams

1.184
(4.383)

0.826*
(2.896)

1.054
(3.909)

2317.7
(11665.8)

1457.6+
(10239.7)

2003.3
(11171.5)

83.02
(300.7)

44.16**
(158.3)

68.82
(258.6)

Some downstream country

0
(0)

1
(0)

0.366
(0.482)

Number of downstream countries

0
(0)

1.809
(1.184)

0.661
(1.128)

Next downstream subbasin in different
country

0
(0)

.577
(.494)

.211
(.408)

3.870
(4.976)

7.997**
(5.700)

5.379
(5.615)

Max flow accumulation in area (1000
km2)

156153
(473963)

62793**
(168778)

122030
(393612)

Mean downstream flow length in area
(km)

799.0
(813.0)

1733.0**
(1112.9)

1140.4
(1036.4)

Subbasin-country area (km2)

30494
(62476)

27828
(51002)

29519
(58548)

Mean wetness index in subbasin

6.243
(1.169)

6.492**
(1.259)

6.334
(1.208)

Mean slope in subbasin

1.424
(1.540)

1.362
(1.757)

1.401
(1.623)

Population density/km2 (2000) in area

46.21
(160.0)
1729

48.42
(94.48)
996

47.02
(139.6)
2725

Number of dams

Total reservoir capacity
Total dam height

Number of downstream subbasins

Observations (subbasin-country areas)

Total

Notes: Means, with standard deviations in parentheses for observations used in regression analysis. Asterisks in
column two indicate significant difference in means between the two groups, according to t-test for difference in
means (** p<0.01, * p<.05, + p<.10).

31

Table 4: OLS and Probit estimates for number and presence of dams

Some downstream country

(1)
OLS
All dams

(2)
OLS
All dams

(3)
OLS
All dams

(4)
Probit

(5)
OLS
Dams>0

0.242*
(0.111)

0.249*
(0.111)

0.265*
(0.121)

0.455*
(0.217)

0.274
(0.182)

-0.0354
(0.0690)

-0.381**
(0.103)

0.0611
(0.117)

Next downstream subbasin in
different country
Log(num. of downstream
countries)

-0.0856
(0.105)

Log(subbasin area)

0.391**
(0.0703)

0.391**
(0.0703)

0.390**
(0.0706)

0.647**
(0.0595)

0.578**
(0.0622)

Log(num. of downstream
subbasins)

-0.0336
(0.0276)

-0.0316
(0.0280)

-0.0337
(0.0276)

-0.0590
(0.0558)

0.0102
(0.0549)

Log(flow accumulation)

0.0136
(0.0196)

0.0138
(0.0195)

0.0136
(0.0197)

0.0820*
(0.0365)

-0.0292
(0.0205)

Log(downstream distance)

0.0192
(0.0319)

0.0194
(0.0320)

0.0187
(0.0321)

0.0712
(0.0626)

-0.0619
(0.0512)

Log(average slope)

0.186**
(0.0716)

0.187**
(0.0717)

0.188**
(0.0711)

0.588**
(0.134)

-0.0828
(0.0739)

Log(wetness index)

0.429
(0.420)

0.433
(0.420)

0.440
(0.419)

1.461*
(0.725)

-1.355**
(0.441)

Log(population density)

0.172**
(0.0367)

0.171**
(0.0367)

0.172**
(0.0366)

0.280**
(0.0792)

0.125*
(0.0626)

Country effects
River basin effects
R2
Number of river basins
Observations

Yes
Yes
0.334
381
2725

Yes
Yes
0.334
381
2725

Yes
Yes
0.334
381
2725

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
0.573
237
719

105
2025

Standard errors in parentheses clustered by river basin. Except in column (4), all dependent variables are counts of
dams in logs.
+
p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01

32

Table 5: Alternative dependent variables and other robustness issues

Some downstream country

Next downstream subbasin in
different country
R2
Number of river basins
Observations

(1)
Total
reservoir
capacity
0.731*
(0.344)

(2)
Total
dam
height
0.494*
(0.241)

(3)
Only
large
dams
0.209+
(0.109)

(4)
Only
upstream
areas
0.238+
(0.132)

(5)
Poisson

-0.374+
(0.209)

-0.153
(0.138)

-0.0503
(0.0784)

-.0215
(0.074)

-0.388*
(0.192)

0.259
381
2725

0.290
381
2725

0.270
381
2725

0.589
118
2099

0.835
238
2112

0.834**
(0.210)

Models include country and river basin effects, as well as all additional covariates in Table 4 main models (natural
logs of: subbasin area, number of downstream subbasins, flow accumulation, downstream distance, average slope,
wetness index, and population density). Standard errors in parentheses clustered by river basin. All dependent
variables in logs, except Poisson model in column 4.
+
p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01

Table 6: OLS estimates, by dam type

Some downstream country
Next downstream subbasin in
different country
R2
Percentage of international
basins with some dams

(1)
Irrigsupplyhydro
0.246*
(0.123)

(2)
Irrigation

(3)
Water
supply

(4)
Hydroelectric

(5)
Flood
control

0.136
(0.113)

-0.0095
(0.0632)

0.171+
(0.0989)

0.0754
(0.0676)

-0.0482
(0.0829)

-0.0683
(0.0693)

0.145*
(0.0612)

0.0172
(0.0665)

0.0900*
(0.0401)

0.294
74%

0.237
38%

0.201
33%

0.193
64%

0.157
17%

All equations have 381 rivers basins and 2725 observations. Models include country and river basin effects, as well
as all additional covariates in Table 4 main models (natural logs of: subbasin area, number of downstream subbasins,
flow accumulation, downstream distance, average slope, wetness index, and population density). Standard errors in
parentheses clustered by river basin. All dependent variables are counts of dams in logs.
+
p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01

33

Table 7: Estimates accounting for World Bank funding and river basin treaties
(1)
WB
dams

(2)
All
dams

(3)
All
dams

(4)
All
treaties

(5)
All
dams

Some downstream country

OLS
0.102**
(0.0354)

OLS
-0.006
(0.217)

2SLS
1.301+
(0.692)

First stage
1.703**
(0.241)

2SLS
0.642+
(0.352)

Next downstream subbasin in
different country

-0.0649+
(0.0380)
0.316
(0.229)

-1.338+
(0.770)

Some downstream country *
Some treaty (endogenous var)
Some downstream country * Water
allocation treaty (endogenous var)

(6)
Water
quant
treaties
First stage
1.562**
(0.294)

-0.584
(0.455)

Some downstream country *
HHI population

-0.540*
(0.232)

-0.575*
(0.276)

Some downstream country *
Global agreements

-0.0312*
(0.0158)

-0.0379*
(0.0151)

Some downstream country *
Multiregion agreements

0.0514*
(0.0254)

0.0619**
(0.0237)

Some downstream country *
Autocracy index

-0.0591+
(0.0355)

-0.0596
(0.0372)

Some downstream country *
-0.0465
-0.0242
(0.0308)
(0.0347)
Democracy index
R2
0.160
0.334
0.207
0.883
0.220
0.838
Number of subbasins
381
381
373
373
373
373
Observations
2725
2725
2702
2702
2702
2702
First-stage cluster-robust F2.99
5.29
statistic for excluded instruments
(p=0.012)
(p=0.000)
(5, 372)
All equations also include country and river basin effects, as well as all additional covariates in Table 4 main models
(natural logs of: subbasin area, number of downstream subbasins, flow accumulation, downstream distance, average
slope, wetness index, and population density). Counts of dams are in logs. The first stages in columns 3 and 5
predict the interaction of the treaty variable and the downstream country dummy. Standard errors in parentheses are
clustered by river basin.
+
p < .10, * p < .05, ** p < .01

34

Figure 1. Dams, downstream country counts, and major river basins:
Europe (2005)

35

Figure 2. Dams, downstream country counts, and major river basins:
Asia (2005)

36

Figure 3. Dams, downstream country counts, and major river basins:
Africa (2005)

37

