                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      MANUFACTURING GROWTH AND THE LIVES OF BANGLADESHI WOMEN

                                            Rachel Heath
                                         A. Mushfiq Mobarak

                                         Working Paper 20383
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20383


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




We are grateful for funding from the National Science Foundation Grant SES-0527751. We thank
Treb Allen, David Atkin, Priyanka Anand, Mark Klee, Richard Manseld, Emily Oster, Owen Ozier,
Peter Schott, Gil Shapira, Manisha Shah and seminar participants from the University of Connecticut,
University of Washington (Jackson School), Yale University, International Growth Centre, and the
Northeast Universities Development Consortium Conference for comments. The findings, interpretations
and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the governments of the countries they represent.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Rachel Heath and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Manufacturing Growth and the Lives of Bangladeshi Women
Rachel Heath and A. Mushfiq Mobarak
NBER Working Paper No. 20383
August 2014
JEL No. F16,I25,J12,J23,O12

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the effects of explosive growth in the Bangladeshi ready-made garments industry on the
lives on Bangladeshi women. We compare the marriage, childbearing, school enrollment and employment
decisions of women who gain greater access to garment sector jobs to women living further away
from factories, to years before the factories arrive close to some villages, and to the marriage and enrollment
decisions of their male siblings. Girls exposed to the garment sector delay marriage and childbirth.
This stems from (a) young girls becoming more likely to be enrolled in school after garment jobs (which
reward literacy and numeracy) arrive, and (b) older girls becoming more likely to be employed outside
the home in garment-proximate villages. The demand for education generated through manufacturing
growth appears to have a much larger effect on female educational attainment compared to a large-scale
government conditional cash transfer program to encourage female schooling.


Rachel Heath
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Box 353330
Seattle, WA 98103
rmheath@uw.edu

A. Mushfiq Mobarak
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu
1. Introduction
       This paper documents the effects of the remarkable and rapid growth of the ready-made

garment sector in Bangladesh on the lives of Bangladeshi women. The sector was virtually non-

existent in 1980 (Mostafa and Klepper 2009), but has grown an average of 17% per year since

inception, and now accounts for over 75% of Bangladesh's export earnings (Bangladesh Export

Processing Bureau 2009). The industry currently employs almost 4 million workers in Bangladesh

(BGMEA 2013), and was the first to provide employment opportunities to women in large-scale in a

country where women traditionally have not worked outside the home. In addition to raising the

opportunity cost of being married and having children, attractive manufacturing jobs require basic

literacy and numeracy (Amin et al. 1998; Zohir 2001; Paul-Majumder and Begum 2006), and the

arrival of garment factories therefore has potentially affected enrollment, employment, marriage and

childbearing decisions for Bangladeshi women.

       The remarkable growth in this export-oriented sector in Bangladesh is emblematic of the

large expansion in low-skill manufacturing jobs around the developing world over the last fifty years

(Mammen and Paxson 2000). Manufacturing expansion has often been associated with increases in

female labor force participation (Atkin 2009). There is very little rigorous analysis of the welfare

effects of access to factory jobs for women, and the ‘evidence’ is dominated by anecdotes from anti-

sweatshop activists about the negative effects of hazardous working conditions. The evidence gap is

especially pertinent for policymaking in Bangladesh, where well-publicized garment factory collapses

and fires and their attendant death tolls recently captured the world’s attention (New York Times

2013). Both individual large buyers as well as the U.S. government subsequently made moves to

restrict or boycott garment exports from Bangladesh (PRI/BBC 2013). It has therefore become

imperative to rigorously evaluate the full range of welfare effects of garment factory jobs in

                                                                                                   1
Bangladesh. Export restrictions and boycotts have the potential to hurt the same workers that they

are designed to protect.

         Our study fits within the literature on the effects of an export-oriented manufacturing sector

on development outcomes (Verhoogen 2008; Atkin 2012; Brambilla et al. 2012). The literature on

the causes and consequences of early marriage and childbearing (Jensen and Thornton 2003;

Mobarak et al. 2013) is also closely related. Since garment sector jobs reward cognitive skills and

thus increase the returns to education, our results also contribute to the role of demand for

schooling in determining educational investments.                   The literature on education in developing

countries is heavily tilted in favor of supply-side approaches such as building schools, providing

schooling inputs, improving school quality or supplying conditional cash transfers for school

attendance.1 Understanding the role of demand is important for policy, since it could imply that

promoting export-led manufacturing and increasing returns to skill is the more effective path to

human capital accumulation (Federman and Levine 2005; Helper et al. 2006; Le Brun et al. 2011).

         Our results suggest that the rise of the garment industry can help explain the declining

fertility, increasing age at marriage, and rapid increase in girls' educational attainment during this

period, both in absolute terms and relative to boys (see Figure 1).2 Approximately 80 percent of

garment factory workers in Bangladesh are female (Khatun et al. 2007) and extrapolation from our

data and national surveys suggest that around fifteen percent of women nationwide between the



1 See, for instance, Burde & Linden (2013) on building schools, Duflo et al. (2011) on decreasing class size and tracking,
Duflo et al. (2012) on rewarding teachers for attendance, Glewwe et al. (2009) on providing textbooks, Banerjee et al.
(2007) on remedial education programs, Muralidharan & Sundararaman (2011) on teacher incentive pay, or Glewwe et al.
(2004) on flipcharts. Kremer & Holla (2009) reviews several evaluations of education sector projects in developing
countries.
2
  We stop the enrollment graph in 2000, since the last year that a nationally representative survey allowed us to construct
yearly enrollment was 2005, and the last couple years are noisy. However, the World Development indicators
(http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators) collected by the World Bank in most (but not
all) years from 2005 to present confirm that girls’ enrollment has remained slightly higher than boys’ enrollment.

                                                                                                                         2
ages of 16 and 30 work in the garment industry.3 The education results are particularly policy-

relevant, as Bangladesh has surpassed the third Millennium Development Goal of gender equity in

enrollments, a goal with which many other countries in Western Asia and sub-Saharan Africa

continue to struggle. Our research design permits a study of investments in girls relative to boys,

which is of considerable policy (Levine et al. 2009; Chaaban and Cunningham 2011; Gibbs 2011;

Girl Up 2011; World Bank 2011a; World Bank 2011b) and also academic interest, given the

comparative advantage girls possess in skilled tasks (Pitt et al. 2012). Our results provide one

hitherto unexplored explanation for the accelerated gender equity in education in Bangladesh, thus

generating important policy implications for other developing countries interested in emulating

Bangladesh's success.

         In theory, access to factory jobs can alter women’s school, work, marriage and childbearing

decisions through a few different mechanisms. As documented for maquiladora jobs in Mexico,

older children may be induced to drop out of school to access the factory jobs (Atkin 2012).

Conversely, younger children (who are still too young for the factory jobs and do not face the

temptation to drop out and begin earning immediately) may respond by investing in education if the

availability of relatively well-paid manufacturing jobs increase the returns to education. Educational

attainment might also increase through a wealth effect, if parents can now better afford to send their

children to school. Both the increased enrollment channel and the direct factory employment

effects would result in girls delaying marriage and childbirth.


3
 Specifically, there are 4 million garment workers nationwide, an estimated 80 percent of whom are female (Khatun et al
2007; BGMEA 2013). We assume that 90 percent of these female workers are between the ages of 16 and 30, which is
consistent with the age distribution in our sampled female workers, yielding an estimate of 2.88 million female garment
workers nationwide between the ages of 16 and 30. According to the nationally representative 2005 Household Income
and Expenditure survey, 25 percent of females nationwide are between ages 16 and 30. So based on the UN’s estimate
of 155 million total population in 2012, there are 18.5 million women between the ages of 16 and 30, and 2.88/18.5 ≈ 15
percent of them work in the garment industry.

                                                                                                                     3
      We begin by examining the effects of access to factory jobs on girls’ marriage and childbearing

decisions, given the clearest predictions on these outcomes, and their immediate and close link to

women’s welfare. We identify the effects of the garment sector on marriage and childbirth using

retrospective data on these outcomes from 1395 households in 60 Bangladeshi villages that vary

with respect to whether the villages are within commuting distance of garment factories, and the

date on which the first factories were opened close to each village. We estimate discrete time hazard

models for the age at marriage and age at first birth for girls with greater lifetime exposure to factory

jobs, controlling for both persistent differences between garment-proximate and control villages,

and differential time trends in garment-proximate villages. We document that the hazard of marriage

and childbirth at early ages (12-18) drops sharply for girls when they gained exposure to the ready-

made garment sector. This is important because other research has documented large negative

welfare implications of early marriage and early childbirth (Geronimus and Korenman 1992; Ribar

1994; Jensen and Thornton 2003; Hotz et al. 2005; Fletcher and Wolfe 2009; Ashcraft et al. 2013).

      Next we explore the mechanisms by which these delays in marriage and childbirth occur. Did

girls increase their educational attainment in order to obtain well-paying garment jobs which require

numeracy and literacy, which then led to a postponement of marriage due to greater educational

attainment? We assess the effect of cumulative years of exposure to garment factory jobs on the

total years of educational attainment (for those with completed schooling histories), adding an

additional comparison to the girls’ male siblings, given that garment production is has been a much

larger innovation in the labor market for girls than for boys (Amin et al. 1998; Kabeer and Mahmud

2004). We find that girls gain an extra 1.5 years of education relative to their brothers in the median

garment-proximate village. This represents a 50% increase in girls’ educational attainment over

control villages that do not have a garment factory nearby. We observe the increase in female


                                                                                                       4
education (relative to their male siblings) even in families where the mother or older sister never

worked in a factory, which suggests that increased demand for skills in factories that offer job

opportunities for women is a likely channel through which the enrollment gains are realized, in

addition to any family wealth effect or changes in intra-household time allocation from other

household members working in garment factories.

      We next use retrospective data on the entire history of annual school enrollment decisions for

each girl to test whether the effects of the garment industry on schooling are strongest for younger

girls. We find that young girls (aged 5-9) are more likely to stay enrolled in school when factories

open close to their village compared to girls in comparison villages in the same sub-district that are

not located within commuting distance of factories, relative to earlier years (before the factory

opens), and relative to male siblings of the same age.

        These education results contribute to the recent literature on education demand in

developing countries which studies the effects of changing the perceptions of the returns to education

through informational interventions.4 Other studies have examined schooling decisions after the

returns to specific types of skills improved in India, such as farmer comprehension of new

agricultural technologies (Foster and Rosenzweig 1996; Badiani 2009), or English language skills that

improve access to IT service jobs (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006; Shastry 2011; Oster and Steinberg

2013). We complement this literature by providing estimates in a different country where the returns

to education improved because manufacturing growth led to a greater demand for basic, generalist

skills like literacy and numeracy.

      Our data also indicate that the delays in marriage and childbirth we estimate likely also stem

from girls in garments-proximate villages choosing to work in factories when they are about 17-23

4 Jensen (2010), Jensen (2012), Nguyen (2008), and Dinkelman and Martinez (2014) conduct randomized controlled
trials aimed at changing parents' and children's perceptions of the returns to schooling.

                                                                                                                 5
years old, instead of getting married (or staying in school). Factory job access has a small negative

effect on school enrollment of 17-18 year olds (unlike the positive effect for younger girls). More

importantly, girls who are exposed to factory jobs when they are between 10 and 23 years old (which

is the critical age group at risk for early marriage in Bangladesh) are 17 percentage points more likely

to have done wage work outside the home, and this is a 79% increase over the control group.

         In summary, access to factory jobs significantly lowers the risk of early marriage and

childbirth for girls in Bangladesh, and this is due to both the girls postponing marriage to work in

factories, and the girls staying in school at earlier ages. We benchmark the magnitude of the effects

of the garment industry against the effects of a large-scale (US$15 million per year) conditional cash

transfer for schooling intervention run by the Bangladesh government with multilateral donor

support. The program has paid for 2 million girls to remain in school, conditional on remaining

unmarried. The dramatic improvement in girls' outcomes in Bangladesh in the past 30 years has

frequently but casually been attributed to the FSP,5 but our estimates suggest that the rapid

expansion of the garment sector has been a much more important reason for the decreases in earlier

marriages and fertility and the closing of the gender enrollment gap in Bangladesh.

         The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on the garment

industry's relationship with girls’ schooling, work and marriage decisions. In section 3 we describe

our empirical strategy. Section 4 gives results, and section 5 concludes.


2. Background on the Garment Industry

5 For instance, the International Development Association (International Development Association 2009) posted a
write-up on its website entitled “Stipends Triple Girls Access to School”, in which all of the increase in girls' enrollment
between 1991 and 2005 was attributed to the stipend. Since it did not have the data to estimate the counterfactual rise in
girls' enrollment absent the program, it was not able to substantiate the claimed effect size. A World Bank internal report
writes “There is no systematic evaluation that shows the causal effect of the program on increased enrolment of girls in
schools, yet nothing else can explain the exponential increase in gender parity.” See also Raynor and Wesson (2006) for
a review of other potential effects attributed to the FSP .

                                                                                                                           6
        As shown in Figure 2, the Bangladeshi garment industry has experienced explosive growth in

the past 30 years. In 1983 there were 40,000 people employed in the industry; since then an average

yearly growth rate of 17 percent has resulted in a current employment of about 4 million (BGMEA

2013). In fiscal year 2008-09, it accounted for 79% of exports and 14% of Bangladeshi GDP

(Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics 2010). Moreover, according to expert projections, this growth is

expected to continue in the near future. Based on surveys of a large number of chief purchasing

officers (CPOs) of European and US apparel buyers, McKinsey & Company (2011) report that

CPOs plan to shift apparel sourcing away from China in the coming years due to increasing wage

bills and labor shortages, and Bangladesh is cited as the next biggest sourcing hot-spot. The report

projects that Bangladesh’s apparel exports will double by 2015, and triple by 2021, leading to a labor

demand of 3.5 million additional workers by 2020.

        Recent high-profile factory disasters, such as the tragic building collapse in April 2013 that

killed 1127 workers, raises important questions about both worker safety and the risk to growth in

this sector. The disasters were well covered by the international media, and captured the world’s

attention (New York Times 2013). The coverage led to calls for boycotts or other restrictions on

Bangladeshi exports. A rigorous evaluation of the welfare effects of factory jobs for Bangladeshi

women is necessary to understand the potential economic implications of such actions. If access to

factory jobs allows women to delay marriage and childbirth, and to invest in education, then there

may be adverse unintended consequences of boycotts or restrictions on the very population that

these policies are intended to help.

        There are several channels through which the arrival of garment jobs could change young

women’s lives. Firstly, the garment industry overwhelmingly hires young women, who would

otherwise be beginning marriage and childbirth or finishing their education. Figure 3 shows the age


                                                                                                    7
distribution of the female garment workers in our 2009 survey. The middle 50 percent are between

the ages of 19 and 28. Moreover, the fact that 20 percent of female workers are age 18 or younger

suggests that teenagers do choose between beginning garment work, finishing their education, and

early marriage and childbearing.              While being married or having a child does not automatically

disqualify a woman from garment employment, the long hours and frequent overtime of garment

factories are difficult to combine with or home or child care responsibilities.6

            The garment industry could also affect school enrollment decisions; better jobs within

factories reward education. Figure 3 also displays the distribution of educational attainment of

female garment workers. While twenty percent of workers have no education, more than half (62

percent) have five or more years of education. Table 1 compares these garment workers to others in

the sampled villages (broken down by garment-proximate villages and non-garment villages), and

confirms that garment workers have on average have more education (6.0 years) than others in the

same villages (4.1 years) or in non-garment villages (3.2 years); each group was approximately the

same average age.

            Both qualitative evidence and results from our data suggest that garments workers indeed are

rewarded for these higher levels of education. While strict threshold requirements for education or

other qualifications are rare, managers prefer educated workers who are better at tasks like keeping

records or learning new work from a pattern (rather than from watching it be done) which allows

them to fill in for absent workers. Indeed, some factories administer English or arithmetic tests to

job applicants (Amin et al. 1998). Furthermore, education is even more important in the best

garment jobs, including supervisory roles (Paul-Majumder and Begum 2006) and factories in the

Export Processing Zone (Zohir 2001), which tend to be highly desirable garment sector jobs with


6   While a few factories with progressive reputations provide day care centers, these factories are the minority.

                                                                                                                     8
good working conditions and some benefits such as health care. In all positions, production takes

place in teams (Heath 2011), and therefore requires effective communication and coordination

across individuals.

        Since education is rewarded in garment factories, when a new job arrives, if parents assume

it will persist, they may choose to keep their pre-working age children in school with the hopes that

their daughters will later be able to secure a better garment factory job. Afsar (1998) argues that

nationwide parents – particularly of girls – respond to the returns to education in the garment

industry: “both urban and rural poor educate their girl children with an intention to engage them in

the garment industry.” (cited in Paul-Majumder and Begum 2006, p. 7). At a descriptive level, our

data on garment workers does show a positive correlation between education and wages: In a simple

Mincer wage regression controlling for age and experience, wages are 3.7% higher for each extra

year of education. This does not necessarily imply a causal effect of education given standard

identification concerns, but parents may respond to this observed correlation in their educational

investment choices. Moreover, consistent with reports of factories administering literacy tests to

potential workers (Amin et al. 1998), education appears to affect potential workers’ ability to secure

a garment job: controlling for age, an additional year of education is associated with a 2.1% increase

in the probability that a worker works in the garment industry.



3. Empirical Strategy
3.1 Data

      The data in the survey come from a survey of 1395 households conducted by the authors in

sixty villages in four sub-districts of Bangladesh: Savar and Dhamrai in Dhaka District; Gazipur

Sadar and Kaliakur in Gazipur district. These villages are in a peri-urban area outside of Dhaka city;

                                                                                                    9
they are cohesive villages with well-defined borders but have influenced by the spread of the

garment industry and widening borders of Dhaka. Further details on the sampling and survey can

be found in the appendix and in Heath (2011).

      In August and September 2009, we gathered information about each member of the sampled

households, as well as the schooling, marriage, and childbearing histories of all offspring of the

household head and spouse. We collected information regardless of whether the offspring was still

in the household, allowing us to avoid concerns about selective out-migration. Specifically, we know

the age that the offspring began schooling, timing and length of any interruptions in schooling, and

eventual years of completed education. These data allow us to construct a binary variable for

whether a child was enrolled in school in a given year, from ages 5 to 18. We also obtained the labor

force participation rates of female offspring.

        At the time of the 2009 survey, a garment manufacturer’s association official categorized 44

of our villages as within commuting distance of a garment factory (we call these garment-proximate

villages) and 16 as not within commuting distance (we call these non-garment villages). This

classification was confirmed with the household survey data: 39% of women ages 16 to 30 in

garment-proximate villages work in garment factories, versus 2% of women of the same age in our

sample of control villages. Since garment factories are not placed randomly, it is important to

acknowledge the pre-treatment differences between garment-proximate villages and non-garment

villages. Table 2 provides summary statistics of some differences between garment-proximate and

non-garment villages before the takeoff of the garment industry in the early 1980’s. The garment-

proximate villages are on average 1.8 km away from Dhaka, versus an average distance of 6.8 km for

non-garment villages. There are also differences in educational attainment of adults over 50 (who

would have finished school before the garment industry began), though they are stronger for males.


                                                                                                  10
Specifically, males over 50 in garment-proximate villages have an average of 3.48 years of schooling

(vs. 1.94 in non-garment villages), while females in garment-proximate villages have an average of

0.82 years of schooling (vs. 0.54 in non-garment villages).

       Table 1 illustrates a compositional difference between the factories near the villages in our

survey area and the nationwide garment industry. There are a greater number of woven factories in

our survey than the garment industry nationwide, which has a greater relative percentage of knitwear

factories. Woven factories have greater relative demand for male labor than knitwear factories,

because physical strength is required to operate looms. Indeed, 55% of the garment workers in our

sample are female, compared to national estimates that the garment industry is 80% female

(BGMEA 2013). However, woven factories still hire female seamstresses to work on the operating

lines, and these jobs are very similar to the jobs in knitwear factories. Accordingly, we argue that

girls in our study villages have been affected by the garment industry in a very similar way to girls

nationwide. And while it is theoretically possible that we could see effects on boys who anticipate

working in woven factories, the garment industry was still a bigger innovation in the labor market

for girls than for boys. For instance, 41 percent of males in garment-proximate villages who work

outside the home do so in garment factories, compared to 82 percent of females.

       To allow for more precise knowledge of a surveyed individual’s exposure to the garment

industry, we revisited each village in the survey in March 2014 to collect supplemental data on the

dates on which garment factories opened in proximity to our sample villages. In each village in the

sample, we identified a local person knowledgeable about the history of the village and the timing of

the expansion of the garment industry. We asked him/her the first year that people from the village

began working in the garment industry, regardless of whether the factory is currently still operating

(i.e., including factories that may have already closed down at the time of our survey). We use these


                                                                                                      11
reports, rather than the inception dates of the factories still in operation, in order to avoid any

selection biases associated with factories that have closed down. We combine this survey with the

household-level retrospective data to construct measures of an individual’s lifetime years of

exposure to the garment industry, as well as a binary variable that captures whether there was a

garment factory within commuting distance of an individual in any given year.


3.2 Overview of Identification Strategy

        We use these time-varying measures of an individual’s exposure to the garment industry to

estimate effects of the garment industry on women’s lives. Since garment-proximate villages are

different from non-garment villages (as seen in table 2 and discussed in table 3), and the effects of

these disparities may vary by gender, we allow both for gender-specific time-invariant differences

between garment-proximate villages and non-garment villages and for gender-specific time trends

within garment-proximate villages. We can thus be confident that our results are not driven by

selection of garment factories into villages based on time-invariant characteristics, or the fact that

garment-proximate villages are changing over time relative to non-garment villages.                  For our

education results, we use boys as a further control group for girls, so that we have three sources of

identifying variation: (a) girls in villages in the same sub-districts that are further away from factories,

(b) earlier years (before any factory arrives close to that village), and (c) the girls’ male siblings.

        Our measures of access to garment sector jobs assume that exposure to the sector is

localized: that effects of the garment industry are concentrated on girls growing up in villages within

commuting distance of garment factories. The assumption is reasonable in Bangladesh, where social

convention dictates that a girl remain in her parents’ house until marriage. Girls and their parents

therefore feel much more comfortable if the girl remains at home while working in the garment

factory. Some female garment workers do leave their parents’ home and live in dormitories or with
                                                                                                          12
relatives in order to work in a factory far from home, but this is relatively rare and carries a much

larger social cost. Garment exposure is also likely localized because girls living in villages where no

one works in the garment industry may not know much about the existence of or the requirements

for these jobs. Oster and Steinberg (2013) found evidence of such limited spread of information in

the context of call center jobs in India.

        After controlling for overall and garment-village specific trends in girls’ outcomes, two

remaining identification concerns are reverse causality and a potential omitted variable correlated

with both the dependent variables (girls’ schooling or marriage and childbearing decisions) and the

arrival of garment jobs. Interviews we conducted with factory owners suggest that reverse causality

is unlikely to be a major concern. They reported that the two most common reasons for choosing a

location are proximity to roads and infrastructure, and the convenience of using buildings already

owned by the factory owner or his family members. Imperfections in land and property markets in

Bangladesh due to a weak institutional environment illustrate the economic rationale behind these

considerations. There is clear agglomeration in factory locations over time, and initial location

choices for the first set of factories are therefore potentially important. We include indicators for a

garment-proximate village and its interaction with a female dummy in our estimating equations to

control for such baseline differences. Furthermore, we will show below that the (pre-) trends in our

main outcome variables are parallel across garment-proximate and non-garment villages.

        A remaining concern is the presence of omitted variables correlated with the arrival of

garment factories, such as new roads built in the areas closer to Dhaka where garment factories are

located. We argue that several facets of our results make it unlikely that such as omitted factor could

be explaining them, as a whole. For one, we only see effects on girls’ marriage and childbearing

outcomes, and not boys. This makes it unlikely that the results are driven any investments in those

                                                                                                    13
factory-proximate locations that would have changed the marriage market as a whole, or changed

the cost of having children. Similarly, we see much stronger effects on girls’ schooling than boys, so

any infrastructure investment complementary to garment factories would need to be gender-specific.

The fact that we see the largest results in younger girls also argues against such a story, since children

in Bangladesh typically have to travel further for secondary school than primary school. While

individually, each result could be related to a specific omitted variable, it is more difficult to imagine

an omitted variable that can explain the entire sets of results on girls and boys.

3.3 Marriage and Childbearing

         We use data on the timing of marriage and first birth to use discrete time hazard models to

estimate the probability that a girl enters marriage or first gives birth in a year as a function of her

years of exposure to garment jobs.                 Our independent variable of interest, GarmentVillagev x

YearsExposureivt, is equal to the girl’s total years of exposure over her life, from birth to the year of

each observation (t).7 Our choice of a cumulative measure of exposure captures the overall effects of

the garment industry through both the labor force participation channel (where contemporaneous

access matters) and the education channel (where exposure over the whole life matters).8 We allow

for changing marriage and childbearing rates over time with year fixed effects, and for gender-

specific linear enrollment trends in garment-proximate villages. So for girl i in village v in year t:

         1(Married)ivt = δ GarmentVillagev x YearsExposureivt + γ1 GarmentVillagev + γ2 GarmentVillagev x
         Year + β Ageivt + λt + εivt

7
  YearsExposureivt is zero by construction for individuals in non-garment villages, so we cannot include a separate term for
its main effect. We write our independent variable as the interaction of exposure with GarmentVillagev to emphasize that
within garment-proximate villages, there is variation in exposure to garment jobs based on the village-specific timing of
the expansion of the garment industry.

8 Furthermore, the garment sector provides high wage returns to experience (Heath 2011). The history of exposure
affects current salary, and therefore the current opportunity cost of marriage and childbearing. This is yet another
reason why lifetime exposure to the sector is the correct RHS variable of interest.

                                                                                                                         14
where 1(Married)ivt is an indicator for girl i in village v being married by year t.9 We also replace the

indicator for marriage with an indicator for the girl bearing her first child: 1(FirstBirth)ivt and estimate

the same regression. The coefficient δ gives the effects of an additional year of exposure to

garments job on the probability that a girl gets married or begins childbearing in a given year. We

also estimate the same equation using the sample of boys, both to compare to the effects we

estimate for girls, and because boys may be indirectly affected through the marriage market choices

made by girls in response to the expansion of factories.


3.4 Educational Attainment

            We examine the impact of the garment industry on girls’ educational attainment by

considering the effects of the same measure of garment exposure, GarmentVillagev x YearsExposureivf,

on the years of education completed by boys and girls. We allow for increasing educational

attainment over time (and the national closing of the gender education gap pictured in Figure 1) with

quadratic gender-specific year of birth trends, and again allow for differential trends by year of birth

in garment villages, by gender. Sibling fixed effects alleviate any potential concerns over changing

compositions of parents in garment villages over time. For child i in family f in village v:


            Educationivf= δ1 GarmentVillagev x YearsExposureivf,.+ δ2 GarmentVillagev x YearsExposureivf x
            Femaleivf + γ1 GarmentVillageivf x Femaleivf + γ2 GarmentVillageivf x YearofBirth ivf + γ3
            GarmentVillageivf x YearofBirth ivf x Female ivf + λ1 YearofBirthivf + λ2 YearofBirthivf 2 + λ3 Femaleivf x
            YearofBirth ivf + λ4 Femaleivf x YearofBirth ivf 2 + θf + εivf

The estimated δ2 gives the effects of the garment industry on girls in garment-proximate villages

relative to their brothers, and the sum of δ1 and δ2 compares girls in garment-proximate village to

girls in non-garment villages.



9
    Divorce is very rare in this context, which makes marriage in year t, and marriage by year t virtually identical.

                                                                                                                          15
3.5 Enrollment

        To estimate whether the effects of access to garment sector jobs on schooling decisions vary

across age groups, we use retrospective schooling histories to estimate the relationship between

garment jobs and the probability that a girl between the ages of 5 and 18 is enrolled in school in a

particular year. Specifically, we test whether enrollment is higher overall for girls relative to boys, in

villages proximate to garment factories after the factories opened, using the interaction

GarmentVillagev x PostGarmentsivft.. The variable PostGarmentsivft is a binary variable equal to one in years

after garment factories started operations within commuting distance of that child’s village. We

allow enrollment rates to change over time in a flexible way, using gender-specific year fixed effects.

We again include gender-specific linear enrollment trends in garment-proximate villages, and sibling

fixed effects. We estimate for girl i in family f in village v in year t:


        Enrollivft = δ1 GarmentVillagev x PostGarmentsivft + δ2 GarmentVillagev x PostGarmentsivft x Femaleivft +
        δ3 GarmentVillagev x PostGarmentsivft x Ageivft + δ4 GarmentVillagev x PostGarmentsivft x Femaleivft x
        Ageivft + γ1 GarmentVillageivf x Femaleivft + γ2 GarmentVillageivf x Year + γ3 GarmentVillageivf x Year
        x Femaleivft+β1 Ageivft + β2 Ageivft x Femaleivft+ λt + λt x Femaleivft + θf + εivft

δ2 provides an estimate of the effect of factory presence on a young girl’s enrollment decision

relative to her brother’s. The sum of δ1 and δ2 compares enrollment of young girls in garment-

proximate villages to girls in non-garment villages. We further add interactions with age so that δ4,

and (δ3 + δ4), respectively, provide estimates for how these two enrollment effects (relative to

brothers, and relative to girls in non-garment villages) vary with age.


3.6 Female Labor Force Participation

Finally, we estimate whether exposure to garment jobs indeed induced more girls to work outside of

the home. We estimate difference-in-difference equations that test whether labor force participation

is differentially higher among girls in garment-proximate villages who were exposed to garment jobs

                                                                                                               16
when they were at critical ages associated with the highest risk for either joining the labor force or

getting married. We denote those critical periods with subscript (t0-t1) and estimate for girl i in

village v:


         1(Ever Worked)iv= δ GarmentVillagev x GarmentExposureiv(t0-t1) + γ GarmentVillagev + εivft

The coefficient δ gives the additional probability of working that a girl exposed to an additional year

of garment jobs has, compared to a girl in a garment-proximate village with less exposure.10




4. Results
4.1 Effects of Garment Jobs on Marriage and Childbearing Decisions

         Table 3 reports the results of discrete time hazard models that examine the effects of years

of exposure to garment factories (up to a certain year) on the hazard of a girl getting married by that

year, or the hazard of the girl bearing her first child by that year. We use this analysis to explore

whether access to factory jobs prompt Bangladeshi women to delay marriage and childbearing,

which are important indicators of welfare for females in developing countries (Field and Ambrus

2008). Exposure is defined as the number of years a girl has lived in a village within commuting

distance of garment factories since the first factory opened near that village. Only the coefficients of

interest are shown in the table; coefficients on all control variables (e.g. the garment-proximate

village indicator and year of birth trends) are omitted.

         The first column indicates that girls living in garment-proximate villages where factories have

been operating for 6.4 years (which is the average exposure in the garment-proximate villages across


10We did not collect data on labor force participation for boys, and therefore cannot use boys as a control group, unlike
the educational attainment and enrollment regressions.

                                                                                                                       17
all units of observation in the regression) have a (6.4 x 0.00048) = 0.3 percentage point lower

probability of getting married by that year relative to girls living in control villages in the same

district that are not within commuting distance to garment factories. The probability that a girl in

our sample is married during the average sample year is 1.1%, and the 0.3 percentage point decrease

therefore represents a 28% decrease in the hazard of getting married. Exposure to the garment

sector therefore has a quantitatively large effect on marriage postponement.

         The second column explores whether this marriage postponement effect varies by age by

adding interaction terms between the measure of garment exposure by a given year, and the girl’s age

in that year. Figure 4 plots the marginal effects from this estimated regression, and identifies that

precise ages at which the marriage postponement occurs. The figure shows that garment sector

exposure has large, statistically significant effects on marriage postponement when girls are aged 12-

18. The effect size is largest at the youngest ages, where early marriage is likely to be the most

harmful to girls’ development. Given the pre-existing results from the literature on the detrimental

effects of early marriage, this result suggests that the rapid expansion of the garment sector in

Bangladesh resulted in large welfare gains for women. The fact that the effects are large at the

youngest ages provides a hint that the marriage postponement may be related to girls staying

enrolled in school, rather than a direct effect of those girls staying unmarried to work in factories.

Girls as young as 12-14 typically do not work in factories in Bangladesh,11 given the large profit risks

faced by American and European retailers who are accused of procuring from factories that employ

child labor.

         Next we turn our attention from the hazard of early marriage to the hazard of early


11
  The official minimum age of employment in garment factories is 14. While factories cannot typically verify
employees’ ages – so that there’s no discrete jump in employment at exactly age 14 -- much of the bad publicity of
employing child labor comes from unofficial reports or pictures. The risk of these events is decreasing in the child’s age.

                                                                                                                        18
childbearing. Column 3 shows that girls living in garment-proximate villages with 6.4 years of

factory exposure are (6.4 x 0.00036) = 0.23 percentage points less likely to have given birth by that

year compared to girls living in control villages in the same district that are not within commuting

distance to garment factories. The probability that a girl in our sample has her first child during the

average sample year is 0.8%, and the 0.23 percentage point decrease therefore represents a 29%

decrease in the hazard of childbirth. Exposure to the garment sector therefore also results in a

quantitatively large effect on postponing childbirth. The fourth column explores the variation in this

effect across age groups using interactions between garment exposure and age and age-squared, but

the associated plot of marginal effects in Figure 4 does not uncover any clear age patterns. The large

standard errors suggest that we are under-powered to detect the age distribution of the garment

sector effect on childbirth timing.

        The last two columns of Table 3 show that the garment sector had no effect on the marriage

or first-birth timing for boys. The estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero, and the

coefficient estimates are 4-5 times smaller in magnitude compared to the girl sample.

        We identify the effects of the garment sector on marriage and childbearing using variation

between girls living in garment-proximate villages to girls living in control villages in the same sub-

districts that are not within commuting distance of any factory. In Table 2 we showed that garment-

proximate villages are systematically different from the control villages in a couple of dimensions.

This raises a concern that the marriage trends for girls in control villages are not a good

counterfactual for the marriage trends in garment-proximate villages. Given our identification

strategy that exploits variation in the date of factory arrival, it is important to determine whether the

pre-trends in marriage, childbearing and other relevant outcomes (such as school enrollment) before

the factories arrive, are parallel across the control and garment-proximate villages. Table 4 estimates


                                                                                                      19
these pre-trends, and fails to reject that there is no difference in the trends in marriage, childbirth

and enrollment before factories arrive across the two sets of villages.          Not only is there no

statistically significant difference in trend, but the estimated difference in marriage and childbirth

trends are an order of magnitude smaller that the effect of garment expansion on

marriage/childbirth decisions that we estimate in Table 3. These results suggest that the parallel

trends assumption that is crucial for proper statistical inference holds in our context.

        In summary, we find that access to factory jobs allows young girls in Bangladesh to delay

both marriage and childbearing in statistically and quantitatively significant way. These results could

be explained by families choosing to postpone their daughter’s marriage and childbirth so that either

(a) she can to work in factories, or (b) she can invest in schooling at an early age to have a better

shot at high-paid garment sector work later in life, or (c) because the adults in the household now

have better paid factory jobs, and the family is wealthier and can afford to invest in child quality, and

keep young girls in school rather than marry them off. We will explore these potential mechanisms

in the next few sub-sections by studying the effects of garment sector expansion on school

enrollment, educational attainment and factory work.         The marriage postponement effects we

estimate above are largest among the youngest girls (aged 12-15), which provides a strong hint that

the delay might be related to educational investments, in addition to any direct effect of girls

working in factories. We therefore study the enrollment and education effects first.

4.2 The Effects of Garment Jobs on Education Attainment and School Enrollment

        Table 5 provides estimates of the effects of exposure to garment jobs on educational

attainment. An additional year of exposure to garment jobs leads to a statistically significant increase




                                                                                                      20
of 0.26 years of education for boys and an additional 0.22 years effect on girls.12 At the average

value of years of garment exposure in this regression (6.8 years),13 this estimate implies the gender

gap in educational attainment closes by 1.5 years due to the presence of garment factories. Garment

workers have 2.8 years more education on average than residents of non-garment villages (see table

1), and so the magnitude of the regression estimate appears plausible.

         These results are generated using the whole sample of offspring of the household head,

which may include some children who are still in school and for whom we do not observe a

completed education history. In the next two columns we re-assess the effects of garment jobs on

educational attainment, but concentrate on the sample of older offspring who are likely to have

completed their schooling. Specifically, we re-estimate the equation for the subsample of children

born in 1990 or before (aged 19 or older in 2009), and those born in 1995 or before (aged 14 or

older in 2009). We still see positive effects of the garment industry on girls in this sample, relative to

their brothers, although the effects are smaller in magnitude: for instance, the estimate in the second

column suggests that at the mean value for years of garment exposure for the older sample (5.4

years), the gender gap in educational attainment closed by 0.92 years among children born 1995 or

before. As we will see in table 6, the school enrollment effects are largest among the youngest

children, and omitting them from the sample is the likely cause of the decrease in magnitude.

         The increase in girls’ educational attainment may stem from garment factories enhancing the

12
  The sum of the two coefficients signifies that each year of garment exposure leads to an additional 0.48 years of
completed education for girls in garment-proximate villages relative to control villages within the same sub-district.
However, this summed result should be interpreted with greater caution, because our identification strategy provides a
more credible estimate for the gender gap in educational attainment, not the absolute value of attainment for girls.
13
  This figure is slightly larger than the average exposure (6.4 years) in the marriage and childbearing regressions since the
educational attainment regressions have one observation per child. By contrast, in the hazard models for marriage and
childbearing, an older unmarried individual will contribute more observations than a younger, unmarried individual. The
marriage and childbearing regressions thus yield a sample that is on average slightly older and thus less exposed than the
educational attainment regressions.

                                                                                                                          21
perceived and actual market returns to skill, thereby creating greater demand for schooling. It could

also stem from a wealth effect, whereby mothers or older sisters gained employment at higher wages

in garment factories and could now afford to send children to school. Garment jobs may have also

increased female bargaining power within households, either for women who took the jobs (Atkin

2009) or for all women given their expanded opportunity set (Majlesi 2014).              The increased

bargaining power could result in more schooling for girls, if women have a stronger preference for

educating their daughters than men do. Finally, a mother or older sister taking a garment job could

cause a reallocation of the time use of all household members. These effects could either increase

girls’ schooling, if families enroll younger children in school as a form of “day care” while mothers

or older sisters work, or decrease girls’ schooling, if families pull girls out of school to do household

chores formerly conducted by the new garment worker.

        While it is difficult to identify precisely the exact channels through which the garment

industry increases girls’ schooling, we provide suggestive evidence that the results are unlikely to be

driven entirely by wealth or time allocation effects.       We do this by estimating the education

attainment equations separately for families where mothers or older sisters worked outside the home

(and whose children are therefore more likely to have benefited from the wealth effect or been

affected by a reallocation of home duties), and families where mothers or older sisters were not

working outside the home. While these families may still enjoy income effects of the garment sector

if male members gained jobs or additional income, these effects are still likely smaller than those in

families who gained an entirely new wage earner as a result of the garment industry expansion. Since

families where mothers or sisters worked outside the home may differ in other unobservable ways

from families where mothers or sisters did not, these results should not be interpreted as

heterogeneous effects of the garment industry based on exogenous variation in mother’s or sister’s


                                                                                                      22
labor force participation. Instead, our goal is only to identify a subsample unlikely to be driven by

wealth or time allocation effects.

         Table 6 provides these results. The effects of the garment industry are actually larger in

households where the mother or older sister did not work.14 This suggests that the education effects

are driven by either changing returns to skill, or through the overall increases in female bargaining

power documented in Majlesi (2014). While we cannot separate those channels, the combined effect

of the two is still an important policy parameter, since it represents the effects of a new industry that

expands women and girls’ opportunity sets.

         We next examine whether the effects of exposure to garment jobs on schooling decisions

varies by a girl’s age. To do this, we use the complete school enrollment history for each child to

estimate how factory presence affects a child’s propensity to stay enrolled in school during each year

of her schooling life-cycle. The first column of Table 7 shows that a girl is 7.2 percentage points

more likely to be in school (relative to her brother) in the years when factories were active close to

the village. The estimates also imply that a girl in a garment-proximate village is 4.4 percentage

points more likely to be in school compared to a girl living in a control village in the same sub-

district. These effects are substantial relative to a mean enrollment probability of 42% across all ages

and years in the sample.

         Column 2 allows the effect of the garment industry on enrollment to vary by the child’s age.

The marginal effects of the garment industry on girl’s enrollment from the coefficients estimated in

this regression are shown in figure 5. The marginal effects are decreasing in age: they are positive

and significant for girls age 9 and under. For instance, a 6-year-old girl in a village with access to

garment jobs has a 7.6 percentage point increased probability of enrollment than a 6-year-old girl in

14
   One explanation for this effect is that negative time allocation effects (girls who fill in at home for a mother or older
sister in the garment industry) are bigger in magnitude than income effects.

                                                                                                                           23
a village without factories nearby. The marginal effects actually turn slightly negative for the oldest

girls (aged 17 and 18), suggesting a drop-out motive (Atkin 2012), where 17-18 year olds drop out to

go work in factories.

4.3 The Effects of the Garment Industry on Female Labor Force Participation

        Given this hint of drop-outs, we next turn to a more direct channel through which the

garment industry could prompt girls to delay marriage and childbearing: their labor force

participation decisions. Table 8 provides difference in difference results of the effects of easier

access to garment factories on the probability that a girl has ever worked outside of the home. In

column 1, we see that girls in garment-proximate villages are 15 percentage points more likely to

have ever worked outside the home than girls in control villages. Column 2 shows that these effects

are strongest amongst girls for whom factory presence coincided with the stage of their life-cycle

where they are most likely to enter the labor force (ages 10 to 29). These girls are 12 percentage

points more likely to have worked than girls of similar ages in control villages. In column 3, we

consider the age cutoff corresponding to the ages at which girls are at greatest risk for marriage in

Bangladesh; ages 10 and 23 are the 10th and 90th percentiles of age at marriage in our sample. Girls

that enjoyed factory exposure during that critical period are 13 percentage points more likely to work

outside the home than girls of the same age in control villages. This hints at the possibility that

working in garment factories is a potential reason why girls in garment-proximate villages choose to

delay marriage and childbirth relative to their counterparts in control villages.

4.4 The Effects of the Female Stipend Program (FSP) on School Enrollment, Marriage, and

Childbearing

        Having documented the effects of the garment industry expansion on girls’ marriage,

childbearing, and education, we now benchmark the magnitudes of those impacts against a large-
                                                                                                    24
scale education promotion policy for Bangladeshi girls: the government’s “female school stipend

program” (FSP). This program has been widely credited with narrowing and then over-turning the

gender gap in education in Bangladesh, and leading to delayed marriage and childbearing, and it is

therefore valuable to investigate how the garment industry effect on girls’ enrollment compares to

that of the FSP.

        We identify effects of the FSP by taking advantage of the fact that it was implemented in

1994, but only for girls in 6th grade and above. Accordingly we identify the FSP effects on

enrollment through a triple difference: Do FSP-eligible girls become more likely to stay enrolled

after 1994 than boys in grades 6 and above, allowing for gender-specific differential enrollment

effects post 1994? While the Post1994 × Female term allows for effects on younger girls, who stay in

school in anticipation of the program, and the Post1994 × In school 6 years allows for spillovers effects

on the male classmates of the girls receiving the subsidy, a caveat of this strategy is that it assumes

younger brothers are not affected by the subsidy. To the extent that their enrollment is either

boosted (if, say, the older girl can now accompany them to school) or lowered (if the family diverts

resources from older girls to younger boys), the FSP result we report may not be based on exactly

the right counter-factual. We nonetheless think that it is a useful benchmark, even in light of this

caution.

        Table 9 shows these results. We find no evidence that girls who had been in school for at

least 6 years were more likely to remain in school after 1994 and in fact, the point estimate on the

triple interaction Post1994 × Female × In school 6 years interaction is negative. Column 2 shows that

including controls for the garment industry does not affect this conclusion.

        Table 10 estimates the effects of the FSP on girl’s marriage and childbearing. Since we can

no longer use boys as a control group, we use a double-difference strategy that estimates whether


                                                                                                      25
the hazard of marriage or childbearing decreases in 1994 for girls who has been in school for 6 years,

relative to girls who had not. There is no evidence of this pattern; the coefficient on Post1994 × In

school 6 years is very close to zero in both the marriage and the childbearing regressions. While the

inability to use boys as a control group introduces a further caveat – younger girls may anticipate the

subsidy – we nonetheless again think that the effects are interesting even in light of this caveat.

Including controls for the garment industry does not change the conclusion; meanwhile the effects

of the garment industry on girls’ schooling remaining positive and significant.

         In summary, not only do we find that manufacturing growth in Bangladesh resulted in

significant changes to young girls’ schooling, work, marriage, and fertility decisions, the data indicate

that the garment industry is the more likely explanation for the reduced gender gap in schooling in

Bangladesh, rather than the prominent cash transfer program to which policymakers have been

quick to attribute that credit.15 Even data in its simplest form (the time series graphs of age at

marriage, fertility, and boys’ and girls’ enrollment in Figure 1) suggest that the these changes began

in Bangladesh started before the FSP program was instituted, and that differential trend simply

continued after FSP. While we do not wish to deny that conditional cash transfers have had large

and important impacts on girls elsewhere in the world,16 we only seek to argue broadly that careful

evaluations of such programs are needed to separate the effects of these programs from other


15
   For instance, International Development Association (2009) posted a write-up on its website entitled “Stipends Triple
Girls Access to School”, in which all of the increase in girls' enrollment between 1991 and 2005 was attributed to the
stipend. Since it did not have the data to estimate the counterfactual rise in girls' enrollment absent the program, it was
not able to substantiate the claimed effect size. A World Bank internal report writes “There is no systematic evaluation
that shows the causal effect of the program on increased enrolment of girls in schools, yet nothing else can explain the
exponential increase in gender parity.” See also Raynor and Wesson (2006) for a review of other potential effects
attributed to the FSP.
16
  The negligible effects of the FSP that we estimate may be due to its small transfer size (the current monthly stipend
ranges from $0.64 US to 6th graders to $1.50 US to 10th graders); other conditional cash transfer programs around the
world offer transfers that are a much larger percentage of the income of the median receipt household.

                                                                                                                          26
simultaneous factors, especially in environments like Bangladesh that have had such dramatic

increase in job opportunities for women.


5. Conclusion

         This paper has studied the effects of new employment opportunities in the ready-made

garment industry on women’s schooling, work, marriage and fertility decisions in a poor country.

We find that manufacturing sector growth in Bangladesh had sizeable effects on parents’ propensity

to keep younger girls in school, older girls’ propensity to engage in wage work, and both of these

factors allowed women to postpone marriage and childbirth. The garment industry has likely played

a key role in the remarkable progress Bangladesh has made in improving women’s lives over the past

40 years. Fertility has dropped from 5.9 children per woman in 1983 to 2.3 births per woman in

2009 (World Development Indicators), and woman’s average age at marriage has risen from 14.6 for

marriages between 1980 and 1985 to 17.0 for marriages between 2005 and 2009 (Demographic and

Health Survey).

         Moreover, Bangladesh attained gender parity in school enrollment fifteen years before the

Millennium Development Goals deadline for achieving this outcome. We now conduct an

approximate back-of-the-envelope calculation to infer how much of the gains in girls’ enrollment

nationwide can be attributed to the remarkable rise in garment exports. We multiply the actual

growth in garment exposure between 1983 and 2009 by the marginal effect of exposure to the

garment on enrollment estimated in our regression model, and find that in villages within

commuting distance to garment factories, exposure to these jobs led to a 38.6 percentage point

increase in school enrollment rates.18 Using our earlier back-of-the envelope calculation that 15% of


18Specifically, column 1 of table 6 indicates that an additional year of exposure to the garment industry increases the
probability a girl is enrolled in school by 0.0722. On average the sample was exposed for 38.2% of the sample period for
                                                                                                                     27
women between the ages of 16 and 30 across the country work in the garment sector (versus 39% in

our sample of garment-proximate villages), proportionally extrapolating from our estimates suggests

that roughly 14.8 percentage points of the national gain in girls’ enrollment could be attributed to

the growth in this export industry. While there are some important caveats to these results – they

assume that the estimated coefficients would apply to other areas of the country – they nonetheless

suggest that the garment industry was an important source of nationwide school enrollment growth.

         Taken together, our results suggest that education policy in developing countries is closely

tied to trade policy or industrial policy, and enrollments strongly respond to the arrival of jobs,

especially if these jobs reward education. The manufacturing growth also improves welfare for

young women, as they are able to avoid early marriage and childbirth, which have adverse inter-

generational consequences.




years after 1983, and there are 14 years of observations per child (during years they were between the ages 5 of 18), so on
average enrollment went up by 0.0772 x .382 x 14 = 38.6%. This effect appears large relative to other education-
focused interventions around the world, Mexico’s Progresa program (which provided three years of monthly cash grants
equivalent to one-fourth of average family income conditional on child school attendance) increased enrollment by 3.4-
3.6 percentage points for all students (Kremer and Holla 2009). In Kenya, providing free school uniforms to sixth grade
pupils increased the enrollment rate by 2 percentage points for boys, and by 2.5 percentage points for girls.

                                                                                                                        28
Appendix: Construction of sample and variables used in the analysis

        We began by randomly sampling 60 villages in 4 subdistricts in Dhaka and Gazipur districts

in Bangladesh (Savar and Dhamrai in Dhaka District; Gazipur Sadar and Kaliakur in Gazipur

district). We stratified by whether the villages were considered by a BGMEA official to be within

commuting distance of a garment factory (at the time of the survey, summer 2009) and then chose

44 garment-proximate villages and 16 control villages not within commuting distance to garment

factories.

        For each selected village, we conducted a census that provided a sampling frame of all

households in the villages and also identified whether the households contained a garment worker.

We then selected a random sample of households from each selected village, sampling more

households from the larger villages (exact stratification available from authors upon request). We

oversampled households with current garment workers (and also, for use in other projects,

households with a consanguineous marriage or a female born between 1975 and 1980).

        The retrospective schooling, marriage, and childbirth information is taken from the module

administered to the female household head.         This information was collected about all of her

offspring, whether or not they still reside in the home. Information about the work history of

female offspring not in the household was in the module administered to the male head; this

information is merged with information from the household roster on resident daughters to create a

dataset of work history of all female offspring.

        Below we provide more information on the construction of the variables used in the

empirical analysis:

 Variable                Definition
                         A binary variable equal to one if an individual was married in year t; and equal
 Married
                         zero in every year that he/she remained unmarried
                                                                                                    29
                              A binary variable equal to one if an individual first gave birth in year t (or first
 FirstBirth                   became a father, for males); and equal to zero in every year that he/she has not
                              yet become a parent
                              A binary variable equal to one if the BGMEA official considered the village to
 GarmentVillage
                              be within commuting distance of garment factories and zero otherwise

                              A continuous variable that gives the number of years of a certain critical period
                              (from birth to the time of marriage/first birth, or from 5 to 18 for the
 YearsExposure                education regressions) during which anyone from the village in which an
                              individual grew up (as defined by the place of residence of his/her parents) had
                              been working in the garment industry

 Education                    A continuous variable giving completed years of education

                              A binary variable equal to one if the individual was enrolled in school in a given
                              year (constructed using retrospective information about the age the individual
 Enroll
                              began school and ultimate completion), and zero if the individual was not
                              enrolled in school. It is defined from ages 5 to 18.

                              A binary variable equal to one if any from the village in which an individual
 PostGarments                 grew up (as defined by the place of residence of his/her parents) had begun
                              working in the garment industry by that year

                              A binary variable equal to one if a someone has ever worked outside the home;
 EverWorked
                              zero otherwise; we only have information for females

                              A binary variable equal to one if anyone from the village in which an individual
 AnyExposure                  grew up has been working in the garment industry during a certain critical
                              period


                                                     Bibliography


Afsar, R. 1998. "Working and Living Conditions of the Garment Factory Workers in Bangladesh and Health Hazards with
     Special Focus on the Threat of STDs/AIDS/HIV: A Case Study on the Role of NGO Interventions." .

Amin, S., I. Diamond, R. T. Naved, and M. Newby. 1998. "Transition to Adulthood of Female Garment-Factory
    Workers in Bangladesh." Studies in Family Planning 29 (2): 185-200.

Ashcraft, A., K. Lang, and I. Fernández-Val. 2013. "The Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: Consistent
     Estimates when Abortion Makes Miscarriage Nonrandom." Economic Journal 123 (571): 875-905.

Atkin, D. 2012. "Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico." Unpublished manuscript.


                                                                                                                      30
———. 2009. "Working for the Future: Female Factory Work and Child Health in Mexico." Unpublished
  Manuscript, Yale University.

Badiani, R. 2009. "Factories and Farms: How does Economic Growth Impact Rural Incomes and Education?"Yale
     University.

Banerjee, A., S. Cole, E. Duflo, and L. Linden. 2007. "Remedying Education: Evidence from Two Randomized
     Experiments in India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3): 1235-1264.

Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. 2010. "Foreign Trade Statistics of Bangladesh: 2008-09." .

Bangladesh Export Processing Bureau. 2009. "Annual Report on the Ready-made Garment Industry." .

Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA). 2013. "Ready-made Garment Yearbook." .

Brambilla, I., G. Porto, and A. Tarozzi. 2012. "Adjusting to Trade Policy: Evidence from US Antidumping Duties
    on Vietnamese Catfish." Review of Economics and Statistics 94 (1): 304-319.

Burde, D., and L. Linden. 2013. "The Effect of Proximity on School Enrollment: Evidence from a Randomized
    Controlled Trial in Afghanistan." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3): 27-40.

Chaaban, J. and W. Cunningham. 2011. "Measuring the Economic Gain of Investing in Girls: The Girl Effect Dividend."
    Policy Research Working Paper 5753.

Dinkelman, T., and C. A. Martinez. 2014. "Investing in Schooling in Chile: The Role of Information about
    Financial Aid for Higher Education." Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (2): 244-257.

Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer. 2011. "Peer Effects, Teacher Incentives, and the Impact of Tracking:
     Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya." American Economic Review 101 (5): 1739-1774.

Duflo, E., R. Hanna, and S. Ryan. 2012. "Incentives Work: Getting Teachers to Come to School." American
     Economic Review 102 (4): 1241-1278.

Federman, M., and D. I. Levine. 2005. "The Effects of Industrialization on Education and Youth Labor in
     Indonesia." Contributions to Macroeconomics 5 (1): 1-32.

Field, E., and A. Ambrus. 2008. "Early Marriage, Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling Attainment in
      Bangladesh." Journal of Political Economy 116 (5): 881-930.

Fletcher, J., and B. Wolfe. 2009. "Education and Labor Market Consequences of Teenage Childbearing: Evidence
     using the Timing of Pregnancy Outcomes and Community Fixed Effects." The Journal of Human Resources 44
     (2): 303-325.

Foster, A., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 1996. "Technical Change and Human-Capital Returns and Investments:
     Evidence from the Green Revolution." American Economic Review 86 (4): 931-953.

Geronimus, A., and S. Korenman. 1992. "The Socioeconomic Consequences of Teen Childbearing Reconsidered."
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (November): 1187-1214.

Gibbs, N. 2011. "The Best Investment." Time, 64.
                                                                                                                      31
Girl Up. 2011. "Girl Up Highlights the Importance of Counting Girls as World Population Grows to 7 Billion."
     Press release.

Glewwe, P., M. Kremer, and S. Moulin. 2009. "Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and Test Scores in Kenya."
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1): 112-135.

Glewwe, P., M. Kremer, S. Moulin, and E. Zitzewitz. 2004. "Retrospective Vs. Prospective Analyses of School
    Inputs: The Case of Flip Charts in Kenya." Journal of Development Economics 74 (1): 251-268.

Heath, R. 2011. "Why do Firms Hire using Referrals? Evidence from Bangladeshi Garment Factories."Yale
     University.

Helper, S. R., D. I. Levine, and C. Woodruff. 2006. "How does Economic Liberalization Affect Investment in
     Education? Evidence from Mexico."UCSD, .

Hotz, V. J., S. McElroy, and S. Sanders. 2005. "Teenage Childbearing and its Life Cycle Consequences: Exploiting
     a Natural Experiment." The Journal of Human Resources 40 (3): 683-715.

International Development Association. "IDA at Work: Bangladesh: Stipends Triple Girls' Access to School."2011,
     http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/IDA/0,,contentMDK:21227882~me
     nuPK:3266877~pagePK:51236175~piPK:437394~theSitePK:73154,00.html.

Jensen, R. 2010. "The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 125 (2): 515-548.

———. 2012. "Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women's Work and Family Decisions?
  Experimental Evidence from India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 753-792.

Jensen, R., and R. Thornton. 2003. "Early Female Marriage in the Developing World." Gender & Development 11 (2):
     9-19.

Kabeer, N., and S. Mahmud. 2004. "Globalization, Gender and Poverty: Bangladeshi Women Workers in Export
    and Local Markets." Journal of International Development 16: 93-109.

Khatun, F., M. Rahman, D. Bhattacharya, K. G. Moazzem, and A. Shahrin. 2007. "Gender and Trade Liberalization in
    Bangladesh: The Case of Ready-made Garments." .

Kremer, M., and A. Holla. 2009. "Improving Education in the Developing World: What have we Learned from
    Randomized Evaluations?" Annual Review of Economics 1: 513-542.

Le Brun, A., S. R. Helper, and D. I. Levine. 2011. "The Effect of Industrialization on Children's Education. the
     Experience of Mexico." Review of Economics and Institutions 2 (2): 2-34.

Levine, R., C. B. Lloyd, M. Greene, and C. Grown. 2009. "Girls Count: A Global Investment and Action Agenda." .

Majlesi, K. 2014. "Labor Market Opportunities and Women's Decision Making Power within Households."
     Unpublished Manuscript.

Mammen, K., and C. Paxson. 2000. "Women's Work and Economic Development." The Journal of Economic
   Perspectives: 141-164.
                                                                                                                   32
McKinsey & Company. 2011. "Bangladesh's Ready-made Garments Landscape: The Challenge of Growth." Apparel, Fashion
    & Luxury Practice.

Mobarak, A. M., R. Kuhn, and C. Peters. 2013. "Consanguinity and Other Marriage Market Effects of a Wealth
    Shock in Bangladesh." Demography 50 (5): 1845-1871.

Mostafa, R. and S. Klepper. 2009. "Industrial Development through Tacit Knowledg Seeding: Evidence from the
    Bangladesh Garment Industry." Unpublished manuscript.

Munshi, K., and M. R. Rosenzweig. 2006. "Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern World: Caste, Gender, and
    Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy." The American Economic Review 96 (4): 1225-1252.

Muralidharan, K., and V. Sundararaman. 2011. "Teacher Performance Pay: Experimental Evidence from India."
    Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 39-77.

New York Times. 2013. "Worker Safety in Bangladesh and Beyond." The New York Times.

Nguyen, T. 2008. "Information, Role Models and Perceived Returns to Education: Experimental Evidence from
    Madagascar." Unpublished manuscript.

Oster, E., and B. M. Steinberg. 2013. "Do IT Centers Promote School Enrollment? Evidence from India." Journal
     of Development Economics 104: 123-135.

Paul-Majumder, P. and A. Begum. 2006. Engendering Garment Industry: The Bangladesh Context The University Press
     Limited.

Pitt, M. M., M. R. Rosenzweig, and N. Hassan. 2012. "Human Capital Investment and the Gender Division of
      Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy." American Economic Review 102 (7): 3531-3560.

PRI/BBC. "US Ends Trade Privileges to Bangladesh Following Garment Factory Disasters."2014,
    http://www.pri.org/stories/2013-06-28/us-ends-trade-privileges-bangladesh-following-garment-factory-
    disasters.

Raynor, J., and K. Wesson. 2006. "The Girls' Stipend Program in Bangladesh." Journal of Education for International
    Development 2 (2).

Ribar, D. C. 1994. "Teenage Fertility and High School Completion." The Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (3): 413-
     424.

Shastry, G. K. 2011. "Human Capital Response to Globalization: Education and Information Technology in
     India." Journal of Human Resources 47 (2): 287-330.

Verhoogen, E. 2008. "Trade, Quality Upgrading and Wage Inequality in the Mexican Manufacturing Sector."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2): 489-530.

World Bank. 2011a. "Girls' Education: A World Bank Priority." .

———. . 2011b. "World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development." .

Zohir, S. C. 2001. "Gender Balance in the EPZ: A Socio-Economic Study of Dhaka Export Processing Zone in Bangladesh." .
                                                                                                                      33
                                Table 1: Summary Statistics of Individuals in 2009
                                                           Garment Villages
                                                                                          Non-Garment Villages
                                           Garment Workers         Non-Garment Workers

Age                                               26.004                      24.687             26.646
Female                                             0.546                       0.494              0.499
Wage (Taka)(1)                                  3800.759                   4929.739             4188.98
                         (1)
Years of Experience                               3.237                       6.991              8.634
Years of Education                                5.977                       4.086              3.188
Mother’s Years of Education                       1.491                       2.322              1.622
House has a Cement Floor                          0.79                        0.64               0.252
Married                                           0.742                       0.503              0.499
Has a Child                                       0.389                       0.426              0.458
N                                                  965                        3306               1225
(1)
      conditional on working. Sample includes all members of households in 2009 survey.
                                     Table 2: Differences in Garment vs. Non-Garment villages
                                                       Garment      Non-Garment
                                                                                P-value for Diff.
                                                       Villages       Villages                      Ngarment   Nnon-garment
  INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
Completed Education, Females 50+                         0.824          0.537          0.232          176          80
Completed Education, Males 50+                           3.486          1.943         0.002***        222          88
Age At Marriage, Females 50+                            14.788         14.462          0.604           85          39
Age At First Birth, Females 50+                         19.286         21.162         0.090*           84          37
   VILLAGE LEVEL
Distance to Dhaka (Km)                                   1.795          6.813        < 0.001***       44           16
Distance to a Girls' Secondary School (Km)               5.659          6.375          0.662          44           16
Distance to a Boys' Secondary School (Km)                6.932            10            0.16          44           16
Male Agr. Wage (Peak Season, In Taka)                   27.559         27.997          0.802          44           16
Female Agr. Wage (Peak Season, In Taka)                 22.563         22.701          0.945          44           16
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Only individuals born in village included
           Table 3: Discrete-Time Hazard Models Estimating the Effects of the Garment Industry on Marriage and Childbearing
                                                                                       Girls                                                        Boys
              Dependent Variable                        Married            Married             First Birth      First Birth             Married            First Birth
Garment village X years exposed                       -0.000482**          -0.00012         -0.000360**          1.23E-09               0.00012             7.89E-05
                                                       [0.000231]         [0.000128]         [0.000184]         [2.59e-09]             [7.33e-05]          [5.05e-05]
Garment village X years exposed X age                                     -2.08E-06                             -1.40E-10
                                                                          [1.38e-05]                            [2.95e-10]
Garment village X years exposed X age2                                     3.62E-07                              3.80E-12
                                                                          [3.83e-07]                            [8.02e-12]
Observations                                             29,081             29,081               30,180           30,180                 36,258              36,235
Mean dependent variable                                  0.0111             0.0111               0.0080           0.0080                 0.0071              0.0051
Mean years of garment exposure                            6.390              6.390                6.430            6.430                  6.098               6.209
The dependent variable equals 1 in the year in which an individual was married or had his/her first child. Individuals are in the sample from birth until either the
time of marriage or first birth, or the time of the survey (if unmarried or have not yet given birth). Years of exposure counts the years up to marriage or first birth
that an individual in the regression was exposed to the garment industry (i.e. people in the village in which the individual grew up have been working in the garment
industry). It equals zero for all individuals not in garment villages. All regressions have year of birth trends for garment and non-garment villages, and a dummy for
garment village. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the individual; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
       Table 4: Pre-Garment Industry Trends in Enrollment, Marriage and Time of First Birth
Sample                                                                       All           Females           Females
Dependent Variable                                                       Enrolled          Married          First Birth
Garment village X years to garment industry                               0.00515
                                                                         [0.00415]
Garment village X female X years to garment industry                      0.00295          6.84E-05           2.51E-11
                                                                         [0.00461]        [5.86e-05]         [4.95e-10]
Observations                                                               6,214            21,610             22,406
Mean Dependent Variable                                                    0.412            0.016              0.011

The sample in each regression is individuals in garment villages, in years before the first person from that village worked
in a garment factory. Years to garment industry is calculated by subtracting the year in which people from that village
first worked in a garment factory from the year of the observation. It equals zero for all individuals not in garment
villages. Column 1 includes family fixed effects, female X year of birth dummies, and age trends by gender; standard
errors in brackets are clustered at the level of the family. Columns 2 and 3 include year dummies and a quadratic in age;
standard errors in brackets are clustered at the level of the individual.*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
               Table 5: Effects of the Garment Industry on Educational Attainment
                           (Dependent Variable = Years of Education)
                                                                              Born 1995 or         Born 1990 or
                       Sample                                  All
                                                                                 before               before
Garment village X years exposed                             0.2596***             -0.1364            -0.1797*
                                                             [0.0750]            [0.0844]            [0.0971]
Garment village X years exposed X female                    0.2211***            0.1701**             0.1430
                                                             [0.0759]            [0.0855]            [0.0945]
Observations                                                  2,341                1,416               1,013
R-squared                                                     0.220                0.100               0.141
Mean dependent variable                                       4.317                5.931               5.938
Mean years of garment exposure                                6.759                5.377               4.041
Years exposed counts the years during which the individual was between age 5 and 18 during which people in
the village in which the individual grew up have been working in the garment industry. It equals zero for all
individuals not in garment villages. All regressions have sibling FE's, female X quadratic in year of birth, year of
birth trends for garment and non-garment villages by gender, and garment village X female. Standard errors in
brackets, clustered at the level of the family; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                      Table 6: Effects of the Garment Industry on Educational Attainment by Mother's and Sister's Work Status
                                                    (Dependent Variable = Years Of Education)
                                                                                                                                          Either mom or Neither mom
                                                                            Mom did not           Older sister      Older sister did
                       Sample                           Mom worked                                                                          older sister nor older sister
                                                                              work                 worked             not work
                                                                                                                                              worked         worked
Garment village X years exposed                             0.1939            0.2183***               0.2419           0.2483***              0.2174        0.1706*
                                                           [0.1484]            [0.0838]              [0.2224]           [0.0885]             [0.1327]       [0.1004]
Garment village X years exposed X female                    0.1717            0.2839***              -0.1409           0.3003***              0.1317       0.3504***
                                                           [0.1428]            [0.0872]              [0.2498]           [0.0832]             [0.1316]       [0.0964]
Observations                                                 705                1,610                  392                1,949                 942                1,373
R-squared                                                   0.433               0.171                 0.284               0.215                0.353               0.178
Mean dependent variable                                     3.133               4.816                 4.219               4.337                3.601               4.786
Mean years of garment exposure                              10.088              5.247                 8.809               6.347                9.497               4.816
Years exposed counts the years during which the individual was between age 5 and 18 during which people in the village in which the individual grew up have been
working in the garment industry. It equals zero for all individuals not in garment villages. All regressions have sibling FE's, a female-specific quadratic term for year of
birth; year of birth trends for garment and non-garment villages by gender, and garment village X female. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the family;
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        Table 7: Effects of the Garment Industry on School Enrollment
                      (Dependent Variable = 1[Enrolled])

Garment village X post garments                                    -0.0278            0.066
                                                                   [0.0327]         [0.0423]
Garment village X post garments X female                           0.0722*           0.0801
                                                                   [0.0426]         [0.0512]
Garment village X post garments X age                                             -0.0153***
                                                                                   [0.00404]
Garment village X post garments X female X age                                     -0.00291
                                                                                   [0.00476]
Observations                                                        23,129           23,129
R-squared                                                            0.051            0.056
Mean dependent variable                                              0.421            0.421
Mean 1(post garment)                                                 0.450            0.450

The dependent variable is a binary variable equal to 1 if the individual was enrolled in
school in a certain year. Post garments is a binary variable equal to 1 if people in the village
in which the individual grew up were working in the garment industry in a particular year. It
equals zero for all individuals not in garment villages. Regressions include family fixed
effects, garment village enrollment trends by gender, a dummy for female X garment village,
female X year of birth dummies, and age trends by gender. Standard errors in brackets,
clustered at the level of the family; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
             Table 8: Effects of the Garment Industry on Female Labor Force Participation
                                 (Dependent Variable = 1[Ever Worked])
Garment village                                                     0.154***           0.0650**             0.0455
                                                                    [0.0313]           [0.0315]            [0.0392]
Garment village X exposure between ages 10 to 29                                        0.117**
                                                                                       [0.0473]
Garment village X exposure between ages 30 to 49                                        -0.0426
                                                                                       [0.0751]
Garment village X exposure between ages 10 to 23                                                           0.127**
                                                                                                           [0.0537]
Garment village X exposure between ages 24 to 39                                                            0.0677
                                                                                                           [0.0587]
Observations                                                           917                917                 917
R-squared                                                             0.161              0.164               0.171
Mean dependent variable                                               0.215              0.215               0.215
Exposure between ages X and Y is a binary variable that equals 1 if anyone in the village in which the individual grew up
was been working in the garment industry when the individual was in a given age range. It equals zero for all individuals
not in garment villages. Regressions include dummies for year of birth. Age 23 is the 90th percentile of age at marriage
for women in the sample. Only females included. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the family; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
     Table 9: Effects of the Female Stipend Program on School Enrollment
                       (Dependent Variable = 1[Enrolled])
Post 1994 X ≥6 years of school                                      -0.194***             -0.194***
                                                                     [0.0461]              [0.0464]
≥6 years of school X female                                          -0.0156                -0.016
                                                                     [0.0607]              [0.0607]
Post 1994 X ≥6 years of school X female                              -0.0522               -0.0519
                                                                     [0.0672]              [0.0670]
Garment village X post garments                                                            -0.0138
                                                                                           [0.0317]
Garment village X post garments X female                                                    0.0408
                                                                                           [0.0372]
Observations                                                         23,129                 23,129
R-squared                                                             0.058                  0.058
Mean dependent variable                                               0.421                  0.421
Mean FSP exposure                                                     0.084                  0.084
The triple interaction of post 1994 X ≥6 years of school X female defines exposure to the FSP.
Dependent variable is enrollment in year t. Regressions include family fixed effects and controls for year
fixed effects interacted with a female dummy, garment village X female, age, female X age, and the main
effect of 6 years of schooling. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the family; ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
           Table 10: Effects of the Female Stipend Program on Marriage and Childbearing
         Dependent variable                    Married           First Birth          Married           First Birth
Post 1994 X ≥6 years of school                 0.00107            1.91E-10            0.00095            1.10E-10
                                              [0.00132]          [3.20e-09]          [0.00125]          [2.91e-09]
Garment village X years exposed                                                    -0.000546***        -0.000392**
                                                                                    [0.000210]          [0.000169]
Observations                                   29,081              29,081              30,180             30,180
Mean dependent variable                        0.0111              0.0111              0.0080             0.0080
Mean FSP exposure                              0.1157              0.1259              0.1157             0.1259

Only females included. In the female-only sample, the interaction of post 1994 X ≥6 years of school defines
exposure to the FSP. The dependent variable equals 1 in the year in which an individual was married or had his/her
first child. Regressions include controls for age, age squared, dummies for year, and a dummy for garment village in
columns 3 and 4. Standard errors in brackets, clustered at the level of the individual; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Figure




                     Figure 1: Enrollment, Female Marriage Age, and Fertility Trends in Bangladesh


                                                                 School Enrollment (children ages 5 to 18)




                                               .6    .5
                                    percent enrolled
                                          .4   .3
                                               .2




                                                          1970              1980                 1990            2000
                                                                                          year

                                                                                   Male          Female



                           Source: Bangladesh Household Income and Expenditure Survey


                                                                 Female Marriage Age and Fertility
                                     18




                                                                                                                     7
                                     17




                                                                                                                     6
                                                                                                                     births per woman
                             age at marriage
                                       16




                                                                                                                                 5
                               15




                                                                                                                          4
                                     14




                                                                                                                     3
                                     13




                                                                                                                     2




                                               1970                 1980            1990          2000        2010
                                                                                    year

                                                                           Marriage Age           Fertility



         Source: World Bank Development Indicators (fertility), Demographic and Health Surveys (marriage age)

         Note: Age at marriage is the average age of marriage of women entering their first marriage in the year
         given on the x-axis. Fertility is represents the number of children that would be born to a woman if she
         were to live to the end of her childbearing years and bear children in accordance with current age-specific
         fertility rates, as calculated by the World Bank for the World Development Indicators:
         http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN.
    Figure 2: Nation-wide Employment in the Garment Industry




Source: Bangladesh Garments Manufacturers and Exporter Association (BGMEA)
                      Figure 3: Characteristics of Sampled Female Garment Workers


                      Age and Education of Female Garment Workers
            10                     Age                                     Education




                                                             20
            8




                                                             15
            6
  Percent




                                                          Percent
                                                           10
            4




                                                             5
            2
            0




                                                             0


                 10     20    30           40   50   60             0       5           10        15
                                   years                                        years

From 2009 survey of resident workers in Savar, Dhamrai, Gazipur Sadar and Kaliakur subdistricts
Figure 4: Marginal Effects of the Garment Industry on Girls’ Marriage and Childbearing by Age


                                                                   Marginal effects of a year of garment
                                                                  exposure on the probability of marriage
                       .02
           change in probability
              -.02        0
                       -.04




                                                12          13       14       15       16        17         18     19     20   21   22    23
                                                                                                      age
                                                    ages shown are the 10th and 90th percentile of age at marriage




                 Note: Plots the marginal effect based on the regression results found in the second
                 column of Table 3


                                                                     Marginal effects of a year of garment
                                                                    exposure on the probability of first birth
                                   .02        .01
                        change in probability
                   -.02    -.01      0
                                   -.03




                                                     16             17               18               19             20        21        22
                                                                                                      age
                                                     ages shown are the 10th and 90th percentile of age at first birth




                 Note: Plots the marginal effect based on the regression results found in the fourth
                 column of Table 3
Figure 5: Marginal Effects of the Garment Industry on Girls’ School Enrollment by Age


                                               Marginal Effects of Garment Jobs on Girls' Enrollment
                                        .2
   Percentage Point Change in Enrollment
        -.1         0  -.2   .1




                                                    5      6     7     8     9     10    11 12       13    14     15    16    17   18
                                                                                        Age


                                             Note: Plots the marginal effect based on the regression results found in the second
                                             column of Table 7
