                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INTERNATIONAL RESERVES BEFORE AND AFTER THE GLOBAL CRISIS:
                      IS THERE NO END TO HOARDING?

                                         Joshua Aizenman
                                         Yin-Wong Cheung
                                             Hiro Ito

                                       Working Paper 20386
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20386


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




The support of faculty research funds of the Dockson Chair, University of Southern California; the
City University of Hong Kong; and Portland State University is gratefully acknowledged. We also
thank Jacinta Bernadette Rico for her excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Yu-chin Chen
and the participants at the April 2014 JIMF-USC conference for their insightful comments. All errors
are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joshua Aizenman, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
International Reserves Before and After the Global Crisis: Is There No End to Hoarding?
Joshua Aizenman, Yin-Wong Cheung, and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 20386
August 2014
JEL No. F3,F31,F32,F36

                                               ABSTRACT

We evaluate the impact of the global financial crisis (GFC) and recent structural changes in the patterns
of hoarding international reserves (IR). We confirm that the determinants of IR hoarding evolve with
developments in the global economy. During the pre-GFC period of 1999-2006, gross saving is associated
with higher IR in developing and emerging markets. The negative impact of outward direct investment
on IR accumulation is consistent with the recent trend of diverting international assets from the international
reserve account into tangible foreign assets; the "Joneses' effect" lends support to the regional rivalry
in hoarding IR as a motivation; and commodity price volatility induces precautionary buffer hoarding.
During the 2007–2009 GFC period, previously significant variables become insignificant or display
the opposite effect, probably reflecting the frantic market conditions driven by financial instability.
Nevertheless, the propensity to import and gross saving continue to display strong and even larger
positive effects on IR holding. The results from the 2010–2012 post-GFC period are dominated by
factors that had been mostly overlooked in earlier decades. While the negative effect of swap agreements
and the positive effect of gross saving on IR holdings are in line with our expectations, we find a change
in the link between outward direct investment and IR in the pre- and post-crisis period. The macro-prudential
policy tends to complement IR accumulation. Developed countries display different demand behaviors
for IRs -- higher gross saving is associated with lower IR holding, possibly reflecting high-income
countries' tendency to deploy their savings in the global capital markets. The presence of sovereign
wealth funds motivates developed countries to hold a lower level of IR. Our predictive exercise affirms
that an emerging market economy with insufficient IR holdings in 2012 tends to experience exchange
rate depreciation against the U.S. dollar when many emerging markets were adjusted to the news of
tapering quantitative easing (QE) in 2013.


Joshua Aizenman                                        Hiro Ito
Economics and SIR                                      Portland State University
USC                                                    1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
University Park                                        Portland, Oregon 97201
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043                             ito@pdx.edu
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Yin-Wong Cheung
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and City University of Hong Kong
cheung@ucsc.edu
1.        Introduction and Overview
          The global financial crisis (GFC) has ended the “great moderation” era, bringing
instability to the fore of challenges facing policymakers in the U.S., the Eurozone, and other
OECD countries—that is, volatility is back. Yet, for emerging markets, volatility never
disappeared, and the GFC is another crisis in the long sequence of turbulent events, this time
originating from the U.S. A key lesson of emerging markets’ growing financial integration has
been a greater exposure to capital flight and sudden-stop crises.1
          After the financial crises of the late 1990s, many emerging markets increased their
international reserves/GDP substantially, recognizing the benefits of self-insurance against the
volatility associated with financial globalization. Indeed, the growing financial integration of
emerging markets during the 1990s and the ensuing crises were identified as key factors in the
structural changes in the motives to hold international reserves (IR), among which the weights of
financial factors as well as the past crises history increased [Aizenman and Marion (2003),
Aizenman and Lee (2007); Cheung and Ito (2008, 2009)]. The crises many emerging markets
experienced in the late 1990s and early 2000s and the takeoff of reserves hoarding by China and
other countries in the 2000s added new factors to the list of determinants of hoarding IR,
including mercantilist motives [Aizenman and Lee (2008)], “keeping up with the Joneses,”
[Cheung and Qian (2009)], and self-insurance against local residents’ flight from domestic assets
in the context of the trilemma [Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2010); Aizenman, Chinn, and
Ito (2010)].
          This paper evaluates whether the GFC and recent structural changes in the global
economic environment are associated with new patterns of hoarding IR. This possibility is
exemplified in the recent experiences of China and South Korea, both of which have undergone
large structural changes that have impacted their IR/GDP in the past decades. China became the
largest IR holder in the mid-2000s, and held holds $3.8 trillion dollars, about 33% of the world’s
total, as of April 2014 (see Figure 1). After the GFC, however, China has experienced a sizable
decline in IR/GDP, resulting in a rebalancing of its export-led growth strategy in the face of
declining global demand, a liberalization of its outward foreign direct investment, and the
placing of greater emphasis on its sovereign wealth fund (SWF) [Aizenman, Jinjarak, and
Marion (2014)].


1
    See Calvo et al. (2004) on the empirics of sudden stops.

                                                           1
        In contrast, during the GFC, South Korea found itself struggling with confidence amid its
own banking crisis. Its sizable and once regarded sufficient stock of IR failed to isolate its
economy from massive deleveraging. The ensuing financial panic was ultimately abated only
with the help of the Fed’s offer of special swap lines. Arguably, the experience of Korea
illustrated the need to supplement reserves hoarding with prudential regulations dealing with
balance-sheet exposure of systemic banking. Indeed, unlike the 1997–1998 Korean crisis, the
crisis this time did not lead to a further increase in Korea’s reserves/GDP but to prudential
regulatory changes [(Park (2010), Bruno and Shin (2014)].
        The experiences of China and Korea raise the possibility that the GFC may have induced
structural changes in the behavior of IR holding, possibly motivating some countries to
supplement their hoarding of reserves with new policies [dynamic prudential regulations
including preemptive capital controls] and institutions [financial stability boards and SWFs,
among others]. These developments exemplify a growing trend among emerging markets. The
GFC and the resultant quantitative easing [QE] policy by the Fed and other central banks also led
to large, hot money inflows to emerging markets in search of yields. Emerging markets reacted
to these developments by experimenting with dynamic capital controls aimed at mitigating the
resultant appreciation pressure and reducing the exposure of future destabilizing outflows. These
dynamic policy reactions also included relaxing controls on outward capital flows to defuse
greater appreciation pressures from larger inflows, as has been the case in China and other
emerging markets [Aizenman and Pasricha (2013)].
        The greater reliance on sovereign wealth funds (SWF) as a means to manage the public
sector’s saving is another example of a possible supplement to IR hoarding, though it pre-dates
the GFC. The impetus of instituting an SWF has been based on the recognition that the primary
mandate of the central bank is to conduct monetary policy and ensure financial stability, not
managing IR. Hence, the opportunity cost of reserves in practice may be of limited relevance for
the central bank’s operations.2 Therefore, once the level of IR (as a share of GDP) reaches a
level high enough to cover self-insurance needs, countries, usually those with high saving rates,
may opt to manage their public saving in their own SWFs. Unlike the central bank authorities,
the mandate of SWFs is to secure stable income for future generations; therefore, an SWF
generally has a higher risk tolerance than the central bank, and aims for higher-than-expected

2
        This also explains the failure in the literature to find a stable and economically significant impact of the
opportunity cost of reserves on the observed international reserves/GDP ratios.

                                                         2
income and longer-term investments. Given these considerations, a higher savings rate could
increase the level of IR/GDP,3 while the presence of SWFs may lower IR/GDP for a given
savings rate.
          Against this background, we evaluate the stability of factors accounting for IR hoarding,
and the roles of conditional variables that had not been sufficiently studied before the GFC, such
as the presence of SWFs, macro-prudential policies, access to bilateral swap lines, saving rates,
commodity terms of trade volatility, outward foreign investment, export composition (shares of
fuel, commodity, services, or manufacturing exports in total exports), gross financial exposure,
and the “keeping-up-with-the-Joneses” motive.
          Over time, the introduction of an SWF may reduce the exclusivity of IR as the main, or
the only, financial buffer. Effective prudential regulations may reduce external borrowing and the
inflows of hot money, thereby reducing the need for IR hoarding for self-insurance purposes.
Accessibility to bilateral swap lines may also mitigate the need for IR at times of peril, although
this applies only if the use of swap lines does not entail the stigma effect and if the swap-line
arrangements are deemed durable. Export composition and terms of trade volatility matters in
determining the volatility of trade and the real exchange rate, explaining patterns of pro-active,
leaning-against-the-wind type of exchange rate and reserves policies.
          Previewing results, we group the explanatory variables into three broad factors. The
traditional macroeconomic factors include the propensity to import, the volatility of IR holdings,
the opportunity cost of holding IR, and exchange-rate regimes. These variables capture the
elements of an international reserve- demand equation from vintage 1970s. The financial factors
include domestic financial depth (measured by M2/GDP), external financing, cross-border
capital flows, and capital controls on capital flows. The third group includes several factors that
have come to the fore in recent discussions: the existence of national-level SWFs, bilateral
currency-swap agreements, the implementation of macro-prudential policies, gross saving,
outward direct investment, the composition of trade, the implicit-rivalry incentive (also known as
the “catching-up-with-the-Joneses’ effect”), and the discounted experience of past financial
crises.
          We confirm that the appropriate level of IR is not necessarily constant and determining
3
         Political economy considerations suggest another channel linking a lower gross savings rate with lower
IR/GDP; such a scarcity of saving would make it harder for the central bank to maintain sizable hoarding of IR, as
the reserve stock may be an administration’s target of opportunity at times of a fiscal crunch, as has been the
experience of Argentina and Venezuela [Aizenman and Marion (2004)].

                                                        3
factors continue to evolve with developments in the global economy. In 1999–2006, the pre-GFC
period, gross saving is associated with higher international reserves in the developing and
emerging markets; the outward direct-investment effect is consistent with the efforts of diverting
international assets from the IR account into the purchase of more tangible foreign assets; the
Joneses’ effect lends support to the implicit rivalry-hoarding motives; and commodity-price
volatility induces IR hoarding against uncertainty while fuel exporters store their proceeds partly
in the form of foreign reserves. During the 2007–2009 GFC period, many of the variables that
are significant contributors to IR hoarding in the previous period become insignificant or display
the opposite effect, probably reflecting the frantic market conditions that prevented a normal
economic relationship to hold. Nevertheless, the propensity to import and gross saving continue
to display strong positive effects (with greater magnitudes). The results for the post-GFC 2010–
2012 period are dominated by the “recently discussed factors.” While the negative effect of swap
agreements and the positive effect of gross saving on the observed IR/GDP are in line with our
expectations, the positive outward direct-investment effect implies a change in the link between
outward direct investment and IR holding behavior in the pre- and post-crisis periods. Such a
change deserves further analysis in future studies. The SWF seems to exert positive effect on IR
accumulation. Some other findings are unexpected or not totally intuitive such as a negative
Joneses’ effect among developing countries in Europe and the effect of banking-crisis experience.
Interestingly, most of these non-intuitive results disappear – they become either insignificant or
significant with the expected sign – when we pool the data from all the three subsample periods.
In addition, in the entire sample period, the existence of macro-prudential policies is found to
complement the IR-accumulation policy.
       We repeat the exercise using data from developed countries. In line with previous
findings in the literature, the developed and developing countries display fairly different IR
demand behaviors. We find that the IR hoarding behavior of developed countries is affected by
the recently discussed factors, including SWFs, gross saving, the Joneses effect, and trade
compositions, even in the pre-GFC period, though their results often differ from those of
developing countries. For example, the presence of an SWF has different implications for the
levels of IR holding of developed and developing countries in the pre-GFC years. Also, gross
saving has a negative impact on IR accumulation of developed countries, possibly because these
countries have better accessibility to the global capital market where they can invest their savings.



                                                 4
The Joneses effect is quite robust among both developed and developing Asian countries.
       Overall, the lists of significant variables are quite different between the groups of
developed and developing countries. At the minimum, the statistical-demand specification for IR
holdings not only evolves over time, but also differ between developed and developing countries.
All these suggest that the two groups of countries have different motivations for holding IR
because they face different economic realities.
       We close with an examination of the adequacy of IR holdings in the 2010–2012 period as
was reflected in exchange market pressures. Our empirical analysis confirms that the “fragile
five” countries (Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and Turkey) held fewer IR than our model
predicted in this period. Such a situation reflects the vulnerability of these countries to global
economic turbulences in the early 2010s. We test whether and to what degree economies with
IR-holding levels below model predictions are susceptible to external shocks, focusing on the
induced exchange rate depreciation against the U.S. dollar between 2012 and 2013, a period
dominated by the news coming from the Fed that QE may be tapering soon. We confirm a
negative and significant correlation between the exchange rate depreciation against the U.S.
dollar and our proxy for over-hoarding of IR given by the prediction error of IR holdings. That is,
if a country held an insufficient amount of IR, it tended to experience depreciation in its currency
value when adjusting to the tapering news.
       Sections 2 and 3 outline the empirical specifications and report the estimation results.
Section 4 compares the observed levels of IR hoarding with model predictions for several
emerging markets, and examines the link between prediction errors in IR hoarding and exchange
rate depreciation in 2012-2013. In Section 5, we reexamine the determinants of IR holding using
different estimation techniques as robustness checks. Section 6 provides concluding remarks.


2.     Empirical Specifications
       Our analysis examines annual data of 95 countries, 22 developed countries and 73
developing countries, from 1999 to 2012. Given the existing evidence that the IR demand
behavior differs across different historical time periods partitioned by global events and between
advanced and developing economies, we implement our empirical exercise for a) advanced and




                                                  5
developing economies separately, and for b) three disjointed sample periods; namely 1999-2006,
2007-2009, 2010-2012.4
2.1     Models
        We use the following regression equations to study the IR demand behavior:
         ri ,t = c + X 'i ,t 1    + Y 'i ,t 1  + D'i  +  i , t , and                                (1)

         ri ,t = c + X 'i ,t 1    + Y 'i ,t 1  + D'i  + Z 'i ,t 1  +  i , t .                     (2)

The variable of interest is ri ,t = Ri ,t / GDPi ,t , where Ri ,t and GDPi ,t are, respectively, generic

notations of economy i’s holding of IR and gross domestic product (GDP) at time t with both
variables measured in U.S. dollars. Scaling IR as a ratio to GDP facilitates comparison across
countries of different sizes. For brevity, we call the ratio ri ,t international reserves (IR),

henceforth.
        The four types of determinants are: a) X i ,t (= { xi ,k ,t ; k  1,..., N x }) includes the traditional

macro variables, b) Yi , t (= { yi , k ,t ; k  1,..., N y } ) includes the financial variables, c) Di ,t (=

{d i , k ,t ; k  1,..., N d } ) includes other characteristics of the economies, and d)                 Z i ,t   (=

{ zi , k ,t ; k  1,..., N z } ) includes the possible determinants discussed during the GFC and afterwards.

The definitions of these variables and their sources are given in Appendix 1. The coefficient
vectors  ,  ,  , and  are conformable to the associated explanatory variables. The
intercept and disturbance term are given by c and  i , t , respectively.

        With (1) as a benchmark, the relevance of the determining factors that come to the fore
during and after the GFC could be gauged by comparing results from (2) with those from (1).
2.2     Explanatory Variables
        The traditional macroeconomic variables considered under Xit are motivated by existent
studies on IR holding behavior, including Frenkel (1974a, b), Frenkel and Jovanovic (1981),
Heller (1966), and Kelly (1970). These variables include the propensity to import, the volatility
of IR holding, and the opportunity cost of holding IR. Thus, the Xit component of (1) captures the
elements of an IR demand equation of the 1970s vintage.
4
         Our sample period starts in 1999 based on the findings in Cheung and Ito (2008, 2009). They find that
economies alter their IR holding behaviors before and after major global financial disturbances, and that the last
global break point for IR holding is the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998. They also find that the developed and
developing countries displayed different IR hoarding behaviors; see also Bahmani-Oskooee (1988), Bussière, et al.
(2014), Frenkel (1974a), Frenkel (1980), and Lizondo & Mathieson (1987).

                                                           6
        The main economic characteristic (Dit) discussed in the subsequent literature is the
exchange rate regime arrangement. Frenkel (1980) and Flood and Marion (2002), for example,
report that exchange rate arrangements have effects on the holding of IR, while Lane and Burke
(2001) find no significant effect. Other country-specific characteristics including the past crisis
experiences are considered under Zit.
        Financial factors are playing an increasingly important role in the global economy in
general, and influencing the behavior of IR holding in particular (Aizenman and Lee 2007). The
financial variables in Yit include domestic financial depth (measured by M2/GDP) and external
financing capacity measured by net portfolio investment position. The money stock in a
developing economy is considered as a proxy for the potential magnitude of capital flight.
Holding IR can act as a buffer against such “internal drain” and alleviate the adverse impact of
sudden capital flight.5
        There are different views on the implications of external financing for IR holdings. One
view is that economies with a large external financing exposure in the forms of debts or portfolio
flows hold a high level of IR to guide against the possibility of reverse capital flow (Aizenman et
al., 2007; Feldstein, 1999).6 However, if external financing is a substitute for foreign reserves,
then the correlation between the two variables will be negative.
        The variations in IR holdings observed during and after the GFC have led to further
discussions on the determination of the appropriate amount of IR. The variable Zit includes
determining factors that received more attention among researchers in the recent discussions.
        Countries may institute sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) to hold and manage their external
assets. Typically, the monetary authorities use their IR to fund an SWF, suggesting that the
existence of an SWF can be negatively correlated with the level of IR holding. However, the
possibility of shifting external assets to an SWF offers a way to divert political pressures on
excessive IR holding. If it is the case, then IR holding could even increase in the presence of a
SWF. To assess its role, we include the dummy variable that represents the presence of
national-level SWFs in our empirical analysis.7 In passing, we note that the use of the SWF


5
         See, for example, de Beaufort Wijnholds and Kapteyn (2001), Calvo (1998, 2006), Aizenman and Lee
(2007), and Obstfeld, et al. (2009)
6
         Dooley et al. (2005, 2009), based on the Bretton Woods II system argument, note that external financing
flows and levels of IR hoarding are positively related.
7
         The information is from the SWF Institute (http://www.swfinstitute.org/fund-rankings/). Canadian or
American SWFs are not included in the analysis because they are all managed by provincial or state level authorities,

                                                         7
tenure does not change the results reported below.
        Bilateral currency swap agreements are another factor. If a country has access to hard
currencies via a currency swap arrangement, then it may have a weak incentive to hold IR. We
collect the from official websites information on bilateral swap agreements (regardless of the
currency of the agreement) signed since the breakout of the 2008 global financial crisis.
        The desire or the need to hold IR could be affected by the implementation of macro
prudential policies, which have attracted considerable discussions in the global community in the
aftermath of the GFC (Ostry et al., 2010; Ostry et al., 2011; The Strategy, Policy, and Review
Department, IMF, 2011). We include a qualitative variable that assumes a value of one if a
country implemented any of the macro prudential policies based on the information in Lim, et al.
(2012, 2013).
        Countries with a high level of gross saving tend to run a current account surplus, and
accumulate IR, unless they are purposefully investing the surplus abroad. Thus, a country’s
saving could be indicative of the level of IR holding. By the same token, a policy of promoting
outward direct investment (ODI) is one means to deploy international assets overseas. Hence, the
level of ODI can be negatively correlated with the level of IR holding. In the subsequent
empirical analyses, both gross saving and ODI are expressed as a ratio to GDP.
        Besides the usual economic considerations, the implicit rivalry incentive could drive
countries to accumulate IR in a “competitive” manner. Machlup (1966) first noted the so-called
“catching-up-with-the-Joneses effect,” and the Joneses effect was revived by Cheung and Qian
(2009) and Cheung and Sengupta (2011). Given the regional characteristics of the Joneses effect,
we allow for countries in different regions to display different Joneses effects by interacting the
Joneses variables with the corresponding regional dummy variables.8
        The composition of trade, in addition to trade intensity, can affect the IR hoarding
behavior. Hence, we explore the possible effects of the shares of fuel, commodity, or
manufacturing exports in total exports, commodity terms of trade volatility, and the relative share
of goods to services exports.
        We also control for the potential effects of past experiences of currency and/or banking
crises. For each type of crisis, we use a dummy variable for the crisis experience in the preceding


and are thereby not supposed to affect the holding of international reserves at the country level.
8
         The regions are: “North and South America,” “Europe,” which includes Western, Central, and Eastern
Europe, “East and South Asia,” “Middle-east and North Africa,” and “Sub-Saharan Africa.”

                                                    8
five-years (that is, t-1 to t-5), and calculate Dc(t-1) + .95* Dc(t-2) + .90*Dc(t-3) + .85*Dc(t-4)
+ .80*Dc(t-5), where Dc(.) = 1 if there is a crisis, and = 0, otherwise. In essence, we assume that the
memory of a crisis among policy makers “depreciates” at the annual rate of 5%.
       Most of these data are extracted from the World Development Indicator, International
Financial Statistics, and the IMF’s World Economy Outlook. See Appendix 1 for detail.


3.     Estimation Results
       Our discussion is focused on the estimation results of developing countries. The results of
developed countries are included mainly for comparison purposes.
3.1    Basic Results – Developing Countries
       Table 1 summarizes the results of estimating equation (1); that is, the estimation without
the newly focused variables (Zit), for the subsample of developing countries. We estimate the
model with country-fixed effects because the Hausman test chooses a fixed effects specification
over a random effects specification. To avoid the endogeneity issue, all the right-hand-side
variables are lagged by one year. We choose the model specification in Table 1 using the
following strategy. First, in the pre-test stage, we consider the 1999-2006 period, and examine all
the possible traditional macroeconomic, financial, and (institutional) characteristics variables;
that is, Xit, Yit, and Dit. We sequentially drop insignificant variables, and come up with the
specification reported in column 2 of the table. Then, we fit the same model to the sample
periods of 2007-09, 2010-12, and 1999-2006.
       A few observations are in order. First, in the 1999-2006 subsample, the positive effect of
the propensity to import variable suggests that a higher level of IR is expected to cover a higher
level of imports (Frenkel, 1974b). The negative reserve volatility effect, however, is different
from the prediction of the buffer stock model of IR (Frenkel and Jovanovic, 1981). In the current
panel setting, the negative effect could be associated with the anecdotal observation that large
variations in a developing country’s IR are usually caused by large drawn downs.
       In addition to the internal drain and capital flight interpretation, the positive money
supply stock effect is also in line with the early monetarist model of balance of payments that
predicts an excess demand for money leads to an increase in IR (Courchene and Youssef, 1967;
Johnson, 1958). The other financial variable, the net value of portfolio liabilities, on the other
hand, has a significantly negative effect on IR holdings. One possible interpretation is that, on
average, developing countries treat IR and portfolio flows as substitutes.

                                                  9
         Second, the performance of these explanatory variables in the tranquil 1999-2006 period
is quite different from their performance during the GFC crisis and post-crisis sample periods.
The coefficient estimates of these variables change in terms of the magnitude, the sign, and the
level of significance. For instance, during the 2007-2009 crisis period, the propensity to import is
the only significant variable. During the post-crisis period, the import propensity effect becomes
negative – a finding that is counter-intuitive.9 When we pool the three sample periods, the
estimation results resemble those of the pre-GFC 1999-2006 period, with the exception that the
net portfolio liabilities show no significant effect.
         These results reinforce the previous findings that the IR demand function as well as its
determinants are evolving over time (Cheung and Ito, 2008, 2009). Apparently, authorities
respond to market conditions and adjust their reserve hoarding behavior accordingly. That is, the
level of IR that is deemed sufficient is not necessarily constant.
3.2      The “New” Factors – Developing Countries
         Here, we examine the results pertaining to the variables in Zit; that is, determining factors
which have received considerable attention during the GFC and in its aftermath.
         We augment the first estimation model shown in Table 1 with the elements of Zit along
with the variables from X, Y, and D that were found significant. As we did previously, we started
with all the variables (shown in Appendix 1) and sequentially dropped insignificant variables
until we obtained a parsimonious representation comprised only significant explanatory variables.
We repeated the exercise for each of the sample periods, and reported the results in Table 2 for
developing countries and Table 3 for developed countries.
         One obvious observation is that the “newly discussed” variables (Zit) have different
effects over different sample periods. 10 Although these variables are labeled as “recently
discussed” factors, some of these variables are statistically significant even in the pre-GFC
period. For example, gross saving has the expected positive sign in all the sample periods. This
result lends support to the view that, for developing countries, a high level of national saving
leads to a better current account balance and a higher level of IR holding.11

9
         The negative effect of the propensity to import is consistent with Heller’s (1966) argument that the demand
for IR should be negatively related to the marginal propensity to import because a higher propensity to import (m)
implies a smaller marginal cost of balance of payments adjustment (that is, 1/m).
10
         Indeed, the Chow tests confirm that the estimation models from different subsample periods are
significantly different from each other; that is, there are structural changes in the set of explanatory variables over
time. These results are available upon request.
11
         That implies that financial account is relatively closed compared to current account, which is often the case

                                                         10
        The outward direct investment effect in the pre-GFC years is consistent with the view
that investing overseas helps divert international assets from IR accumulation. As anticipated, the
Joneses effect varies across different regions and over different time periods. The Joneses effects
for Asian countries in the pre-GFC and full sample periods echo the results reported in Cheung
and Qian (2009). However, the region’s rivalry-driven IR hoarding motive reverses its sign
during the crisis period. Countries in other regions do not display a stable Joneses effect across
the sample periods, either.
        The two commodity-related variables, the manufactured exports ratio, and the two crisis
variables do not perform consistently across the sample periods, though fuel exports seem to be a
positive factor especially in the pre-GFC period. The negative banking crisis effect is somewhat
difficult to interpret, but it may suggest that a country that experienced a banking crisis in the
past tends to experience persistent external drain.
        During the 2007-9 crisis period, some of the variables found significant in the pre-crisis
period become insignificant, some insignificant variables become significant, while some
continue to be significant but display the opposite effect. The change in the performance of these
variables may not be surprising because the crisis-driven frantic market conditions could prevent
normal economic relationships from holding. Nevertheless, the propensity to import and gross
saving continue to display a strong positive effect even with greater magnitudes.
        The result from the post-crisis 2010-2012 period may be the most surprising one. The list
of significant variables is dominated by the factors included in Zit. Interestingly, signing on a
bilateral currency swap agreement with a major central bank negatively contributes to IR
accumulation, suggesting that currency swap agreements can supplement IR accumulation.12
Given the negative effect of swap agreements is found in the immediate aftermath of the GFC,
we conjecture that the negative effect is not driven by stigma (or possibly resultant speculative
attacks) from signing on the agreements. Rather, we can stipulate that a swap agreement can
relax liquidity constraint and ensure accessibility to a hard currency when there is liquidity
shortage. The access to hard currencies is especially helpful when the global economic


for many developing countries including China.
12
        We include a dummy variable that takes the value of one if a country has a bilateral currency swap
agreement with a major central bank (regardless of the currency of the agreement) such as the Fed, the ECB, and the
Bank of Japan. This dummy variable does not refer to the currency swap agreements with the People’s Bank of
China because the Chinese renminbi is not capital account convertible and, thus, does not provide liquidity to the
same extent as major hard currencies do.

                                                        11
conditions are still fragile in the immediate aftermath of the GFC. Hence, a swap agreement
provision allows countries to hold less of IR than they would otherwise.
        We continue to find the positive effect of gross saving in the post-crisis period, signifying
the important role of saving. The positive outward direct investment effect, however, implies a
change in the link between outward direct investment and IR hoarding in the pre- and post-crisis
periods. Such a change deserves further analysis in future studies.
        As far as the post-GFC years are concerned, having an SWF seems to have a positive
externality on IR accumulation. However, the estimate is found to be significantly negative in the
full sample period, which is more in line with our priors, making the positive externality only
unique to the post-GFC period.
        Interestingly, when we pool the data from the three sample periods, most of the
non-intuitive results in the crisis- and immediate post-crisis periods disappear (either become
insignificant or significant with the expected sign). In addition, the macro prudential policy is
found to complement the IR accumulation policy while having an SWF could divert international
assets from IR accumulation.13
3.3     The Developed Countries
        We repeat the same exercise for the sample of developed countries and present the results
in Table 3. In accordance with the past literature, developed and developing countries display
different IR demand behaviors in each of the sample periods.
        For developed countries, some of the “recently discussed” factors, such as SWFs, gross
saving, the Joneses effect, and trade compositions affect the reserve hoarding behavior, even in
the pre-GFC period. However, the estimated effects reported in Table 3 are different from those
of developing countries in Table 2. For example, the presence of an SWF decreases the level of
IR holding in the pre-GFC years, and gross saving has a negative impact on IR accumulation.
The different saving effect may be caused by the fact that developed countries have better
accessibility to the global capital market where they can invest their savings. The Joneses effect
is quite robust among the Asian countries, a common characteristic between developed and
developing countries.
        Overall, the lists of significant variables in Tables 2 and 3 are quite different. Besides

13
         We also investigated the effect of IMF stabilization measures by including a country-specific dummy
variable that takes the value of one if a country receives non-concessional loans from the IMF in year t. However,
this dummy variable is not statistically significant in any of the models considered.

                                                       12
gross saving, the contrasting results of the opportunity cost and M2 variables are noteworthy;
among developed countries, both variables have negative impacts on IR accumulation. In a
country with more developed financial markets, that can be suggested by a higher level of M2
(as a share of GDP), holding a large amount of IR can involve higher levels of foregone
investment opportunities. This also explains why the estimate on the opportunity cost is
significantly negative in all the sample periods except for the pre-GFC period, a result consistent
with theoretical predictions and in contrast with the case of developing countries in the 2007-09
crisis period. Other variables with conflicting results compared to developing countries include
bilateral swap agreements and banking crisis experience.


4.     Prediction Exercises
4.1    Are Developing Countries Over- or Under-Hoarding International Reserves?
       In the last two decades or so, economists and policymakers alike have been debating on
the issue of the adequacy of IR holding. While holding an insufficient level of IR can trigger
economic and financial instabilities, excessive hoarding of reserves can lead to over-heating of
the domestic economy and contribute to global economy instability. An overarching issue of the
debate is how to determine the ‘sufficient’ level of IR, either theoretically or empirically. While
the debate on what level of IR constitutes a ‘sufficient’ level cannot be settled, at the very least,
we can provide a statistical benchmark based on the past historical patterns of IR holding so as to
obtain some inferences about whether the actual level of IR holding is too high or too low.
       The estimation results in the previous section clearly show that the empirical IR demand
function has evolved over time, including different sets of factors as the determinants in different
time periods. Thus, even if we wanted to estimate a benchmark level of IR as a reference point,
the estimated degree of over- or under-hoarding would depend upon which empirical model to
compute the benchmark. Nonetheless, we use our estimated models to generate the predicted
levels of IR and compare them with the actual levels of IR hoarding.
       Figure 2 plots predicted levels of IR holdings for selected individual countries and
countries groups based on the estimated models reported in Table 2 for different sample periods
and, the corresponding actual levels. . The individual countries include Argentina, China, Korea,
Malaysia, Mexico, Thailand, and the “Fragile Five” of Brazil, India, Indonesia, South Africa, and
Turkey. The country groups are the developing Asia excluding China, Latin America, and



                                                 13
emerging market economies. 14 For each specification, we generate the in-sample and
out-of-sample forward, but not backward, predictions. For example, by using the model
estimated for the 2007-2009 sample, we generate in-sample predictions for 2007 to 2009, and
out-of-sample predictions for 2010 to 2012.
       Regarding these graphs, we must note that the predictions are generated without
country-fixed effects, though the estimations are conducted with country-fix effects. We conceive
that predictions made without country-fixed effects would resemble the way international
investors compare cross-country investment destinations for arbitrage opportunities. One could
argue that predictions with country-fixed effects are relevant only for assessing whether the path
of actual holdings of IR are higher or lower relative to their historical tendencies. However,
international investors would also compare the levels of IR holding across countries so that they
could react to market signals and reorganize their portfolios when necessary.
         Let us consider the period of 2010 to 2012. In the figure, we can see that, among the
predictions of the demand for IR estimated for the four sample periods, the predictions for the
1999-2006 and 1999-2012 periods tend to resemble each other, reflecting the estimation results
in Table 2. For some individual countries or country groups, predictions from the 2007-2009 or
2010-2012 specifications differ greatly from those of either 1999-2006 or 1999-2012
specifications.
       These plots confirm that whether a country is under- or over-hoarding IR depends on
which estimation model to use to compute the benchmark. For example, during the 2010-2012
period, China appears to hold IR far more than those predicted by the model estimated for the
2007-2009 period, but less than what is predicted by the other three specifications, especially the
1999-2006 model. Figure 2 shows similar results for other Asian economies and the group of
ex-China Asian developing economies. In short, Figure 2 suggests that many of the countries
displayed in the figure appear to “under-hoard” IR according to the benchmarks based on either
1999-2006 or 1999-2012 specifications. These results suggest that the behavior of IR holding for
these countries may have experienced a regime shift after the GFC.
       Table 4 allows us to take a closer look at the IR holding behavior in reference to the
different benchmarks by reporting the averages of prediction errors in 2010-2012 for the same
countries as in Figure 2 and the country groups of “Emerging Asia,” “Western Europe,” Eastern


14
       For the country groups, we presented simple cross-country averages of actual and predicted IR holdings.

                                                      14
and Central Europe,” “Emerging Latin America,” “Fragile Five,” and “BRICS.”15 The first four
columns report the 2010-2012 averages of prediction errors while the errors do not incorporate
country-fixed effects. The second four columns report the 2010-2012 averages of prediction
errors, but the errors do reflect country-fixed effects.16 As we have discussed previously, the
errors without country-fixed effects are more suitable for cross-country comparison, but those
with country-fixed effects are suggestive of over- or under-hoarding from historical perspectives
for each country.
        The country group averages of prediction errors without country-fixed effects suggest
that the country groups of Emerging Asia, Fragile Five, and BRICS appear to hold fewer IR than
the predictions using either the 1999-2006 or 1999-2012 model, implying that these country
groups may have experienced a significant change in the behavior of IR holding after the GFC.
The result is somewhat surprising in view of the anecdotal argument that massive IR allowed
emerging Asian economies to be resilient to the GFC. However, the result for this group is
mainly driven by the results of India, Indonesia, and Korea.17 Figure 3, which compares the
actual and predicted levels of IR holding for the 1999-2006 and 1999-2012 models, confirms the
result graphically.
        However, the prediction errors that incorporate country-fixed effects give us a more
nuanced picture. The ‘under-hoarding’ countries based on the 1999-2006 or 1999-2012 models
are now reduced to India, Indonesia, Korea, and Malaysia. Countries like China and Thailand are
not ‘under-hoarding’ compared to their historical patterns. Among the country groups, according
to the 1999-2006, only the Fragile Five appears to be under-hoarding compared to its pre-GFC
patterns.
        Figure 2 confirms the under-hoarding of IR by “Fragile Five,” that could be viewed by
the market as vulnerable to the reverse of the U.S. quantitative easing (QE) policy. These five
countries tend to be deficient in IR holding during the period of 2010-2012; they usually appear
to be under-hoarding by three of the four specifications. Combined with the results in Table 3
and Figure 3, among the Fragile Five, India and Indonesia particularly appear vulnerable,
justifying the market’s concern over these economies’ deteriorating current account conditions.


15
         “BRICS” comprises Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa.
16
         The in-sample country fixed effects are used in the process of calculating these errors.
17
         Sri Lanka and Pakistan, both included in the Emerging Asia group, also displayed IR under-hoarding based
on the 1999-2006 and 1999-2012 specifications.

                                                       15
4.2    International Reserve Holdings and Currency Depreciation
       How are the countries vulnerable to external financial shocks doing lately? In recent
years, emerging market economies have ambivalent feelings about the spillovers from advanced
economies. On the one hand, emerging market economies should benefit from the recovery of
advanced economies, which are their important trading partners after all. On the other hand, with
recovery underway, the advanced world will trigger the tapering policy to end the extremely low
interest rate policy, which could in turn cause massive capital outflow from emerging market
economies. Indeed, on May 22, 2013 the world witnessed the adverse effect of tapering on
emerging financial markets when the comment by the Federal Reserve chairman Ben S.
Bernanke on the possibility of tapering the QE policy ended up jittering the emerging economies.
       As amplified in the media, economies that are financially vulnerable, including the
Fragile Five discussed above, have been experiencing economic and financial stresses. One sign
of economic and financial stresses is exemplified by the falling value of the domestic currency
which is caused by concerns over anticipated capital outflow and possible deteriorating
economic performance.
       Although our estimation results do not answer definitely the question of whether or to
what extent a country is holding too much or too little IR, they can shed light on the relative
sufficiency or deficiency of IR hoarding. To investigate the issue, we study the possible links
between our estimates of IR holding and the observed exchange rate movements. Specifically,
we investigate whether the currency stress is associated with the relative levels of IR holding to
our predictions, which we interpret as a barometer of a country’s vulnerability to external
financial shocks.
       Figure 4 displays scatter diagrams of the magnitude of the U.S. dollar exchange rate
depreciation against the degree of over-hoarding of IR, which is measured by the prediction error
based on our estimated models. The prediction errors, or the proxies for “over-hoarding,” are
defined as the difference between the actual and predicted levels of IR – a positive difference
implies over-hoarding and a negative one under-hoarding. If a prediction error is a reasonable
measure of vulnerability to external financial shocks, a fall in the prediction error should be
associated with a rise in the exchange rate (that is, currency depreciation).
       The scatter plots of the annual averages of exchange rate depreciation observed during
the year of 2013 and the over-hoarding proxies for the period of 2010-2012 display different



                                                 16
patterns depending on the estimation model to use. For instance, the proxies derived from the
2010-2012 model (Panel C) exhibit a wide dispersion relative to those from other model
specifications. Nonetheless, a (weak) negative association of the two variables could be
visualized in these four scatter plots.
        To shed additional insight, we regress the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate against
the U.S. dollar on the proxy for IR over-hoarding, and report the results in Table 5. Two types of
over-hoarding proxies are considered: one is the average of the 2010 to 2012 values, and the
other is the proxy value as of 2012.
        The estimation results lend support to the visual inspection that the two variables are
negatively related. When we use the proxy average of the 2010 to 2012 period, all coefficient
estimates are negative and, with the exception of the 2010-2012 case, statistically significant.
The explanatory power, as given by the adjusted R-squared estimates, ranges from 0% to 6% for
the significant cases. Apparently, the information conveyed by the 2012 proxy for over-hoarding
has a stronger impact for exchange rate depreciation than the one embedded in the annual
averages of 2010 to 2012. Generally, the adjusted R-squared estimates are higher as well.
        Based on the presumption that the market will drive down the currency value of a country
experiencing signs of external vulnerability and a resultant fall in IR holding, our findings either
lend support to this presumption or are indicative of the relevance of the estimated demand
models for international reserves (with the 2010-2012 model as a likely exception). A strong
inference is that, if a country holds a deficient amount of international reserves, it tends to
experience currency depreciation. Furthermore, the outcome will be reinforced by foreign
exchange market interventions conducted by countries’ monetary authorities that would further
deplete the holding of reserves.


5. Additional Analyses
5.1 A Robustness Check with the Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
        Admittedly, we considered a large number of potential explanatory variables to
investigate the reserve holding behavior. The regression analysis may suffer from the issues
associated with the curse of dimensionality. Although the correlation between the reported
explanatory variables is usually not strong, some members of the original set of potential
explanatory variables overlap with others conceptually or qualitatively (for example, the share of



                                                17
fuel in total exports and that of commodity exports), and thus can display a high level of
association with each other. Hence, it is worthwhile assessing the robustness of the estimation
results by controlling for potential multicollinearity.
         To reduce the dimensionality, we consider principal components (PCs) of individual
groups of potential explanatory variables instead of the variables themselves in the regression
analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a statistical tool that extracts PCs, which are
orthogonal linear combinations of a set of variables based on their ability to capture the
variations of these variables. While each of the PCs is correlated with some of the original
variables, PCs are orthogonal to each other. Applying PCA to p number of variables would yield
p number of PCs. However, usually, using some threshold (e.g., the Kaiser criterion), only a
fewer number of PCs than p could be chosen because they are sufficient enough to cover most of
the variation of all the original variables. In short, PCA has the benefit of reducing the dimension
of the parameter space with a minimum loss of information. See Appendix 2 and Anderson
(2003) for additional discussions of PCA.
         To have a better understanding of how to apply this methodology in our context, let us
think about the following hypothetical case. Assume that the level of IR hoarding (as a share of
GDP: ri,t ) is estimated as a function of {x1 (-), x2 (+), x3 (-), x4 (+), x5 (+)} with the estimated signs

shown in parentheses. When we apply PCA to x’s, it turns out that we get the first and second
PCs (PC1 and PC2) as the PCs that sufficiently covers the variations of the original x’s. We also
find PC1 highly positively correlated with x2 and x4 and PC2 negatively with x1 and x3. If we
regress ri,t on PC1 and PC2, as long as the estimates on both PC1 and PC2 are positive, we

could conclude that such a finding is consistent with the original estimation, because the signs
are consistent.
         Using the PCA, we extracted the PCs of the group of macroeconomic/financial variables
and the group of trade/industrial structure and obtain PCs.18 Table A1 in Appendix 2 reports the



18
          See Appendix 2 for selection criteria. We combined the macro/traditional variable group (Xit) and the
financial variable group (Yit) into one variable group and extracted thier PCs. Also, as Appendix 2 shows, we
included some of the “recently discussed” variables in Zit, such as gross saving, outward direct investment, and the
crisis variables, in this group as well because it is reasonable to expect these variables are correlated with each other.
By extracting PCs from a large number of variables, we obtain large variable reduction effects. We do not extract
PCs from dummy variables of sovereign wealth funds, bilateral swap agreements, macro-prudential policies, and
fixed or crawling peg exchange rate regimes because applying PCA to discrete variables may bias the estimates
(Kolenikov and Angeles, 2004).

                                                           18
selected PCs of the sample of developing countries for all the four subsample periods.19 Thirteen
macroeconomic or finance-related variables are reduced to six PCs for the 1999-2006 and
1999-2012 samples, and to five PCs for the 20007-2009 and 2010-2012 subsamples. Five trade
or industrial structure variables are reduced to two PCs in all the subsamples.20
        Using these selected PCs and the other potential explanatory variables, we repeated the
same regression analyses underlying Tables 2 and 3, and reported the resulting parsimonious
models in Table A2 of Appendix 2. Column (2) in each panel of the table reports the results of
the estimations where the variables that are not highly correlated with any of the PCs are
included in the estimation. 21 For the 1999-2006 sample, PC2, PC3, and PC4 of the
macro/finance variables are significant. PC2 is found to be a positive contributor to IR holdings
(Table A2) and it is positively correlated with net FDI liabilities and gross saving (Table A1);
implying that both net FDI liabilities and gross saving are positive contributors to IR holdings.
The implied gross saving effect is consistent with the finding reported in Table 2. These results
indicate that gross saving is a robust variable - it is a significant factor in both the simple OLS
estimation and the regression with PCs.
        Table 6 summarizes the comparison of the estimation results. The “OLS-FE” column
reports the signs of the significant estimates found when individual variables are used in the OLS
estimation with country-fixed effects (Table 2). The “PC” column reports the implied signs
inferred from OLS exercises with PCs (Tables A1 and A2). For instance, gross saving, net
portfolio liabilities, the Joneses variables for Asia and Europe, and the share of fuel exports (in
total exports) displayed the same signs from both estimation exercises in the 1999-2006 period.22
        Overall, the models that include PCs perform relatively well. The within R-squares
estimates of the models with PCs are close to those of the OLS-FE models. For all the subsample
periods, except for the 2007-2009 period, the signs of many significant variables under the
OLS-FE specifications are the same as those implied by the OLS-PC exercise. The 2007-2009
exception is likely due to the instability of estimation results during the GFC period. It is


19
          To conserve space, the results of the developed country group are not reported. They are available from the
authors upon request.
20
          Component loadings, that is, correlations between the original variables and PCs, with absolute value
smaller than .40 are omitted from presentation for easier interpretation. Hence, the tables show only relatively high
correlations.
21
          The low levels of correlation suggest they are relatively orthogonal to the chosen PCs.
22
          M2/GDP has the consistent sign when it is included in the estimation in addition to the PCs. Note that none
of the PCs is highly correlated with M2/GDP (column (2) of TableA2(a)).

                                                        19
noteworthy noting that most of the “recently-discussed” variables that were found significant in
the OLS-FE estimations, such as gross saving, Joneses variables, and the dummies for SWF,
bilateral swap agreements, and macro-prudential policies, are significant in the estimations with
PCs.
         Lastly, we calculated the predicted errors of IR holdings, which we use as proxies of
reserve over-hoarding, using the estimation results of Table A2. We then regressed the rate of
exchange rate depreciation against the U.S. dollar on these estimated errors. Comparable to the
results reported in Table 5, the estimated errors from the specifications with PCs are significant
predictors of currency depreciation for all the four subsample periods when the average rate of
depreciation during the 2010-2012 period is considered. For the 2012 rate of depreciation, the
estimated errors from the 2010-12 or 1999-2012 model are significant predictors.23
5.2 Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA)
         While the choice of a parsimonious model based on the statistical significance of
parameter estimates seems reasonable, one may say the approach does not explicitly allow for
model uncertainty. Suppose there are p possible explanatory variables. These p variables give

rise to 2p possible model specifications,           Mi that form the model space M = { M1 , M2 , …,
     p
M 2 }. As long as the process of selecting appropriate explanatory variables involves some
degree of uncertainty, there is uncertainty about which one of these 2p models is the true model.24
         The Bayesian Model Average (BMA) methodology accounts for such model uncertainty
in assessing parameter estimates. In essence, the estimate of a parameter is a weighted average of
its estimates from all the 2p possible model specifications, with the weight of each estimate
determined by the performance of the model from which it is obtained. See, for example,
Hoeting, et al. (1999), Luca and Magnus (2011), Hoeting (2002), and Montgomery and Nyhan
(2010) for a detailed discussion of the methodology.25
         For each sample period, we labelled the variables that are significant in Table 2 as the
“focus regressors,” and other insignificant candidate variables as the “auxiliary regressors.”


23
          The results are qualitatively the same when estimated errors incorporating country-fixed effects are used.
Indeed, the predicted levels of reserve holdings from the specifications using a) individual variables and b) PCs have
a level of correlation of 90%, except for the 2007-2009 period (76%).
24
          The decision of which variable to be excluded involves a trade-off between bias and precision of the
estimators of the variables included in the model (“focus variables”).
25
          Fernández, et al. (2001) on growth model is one of the few economics studies that used the BMA
methodology.

                                                         20
Following the literature, the focus regressors are those believed to be more certain to be in the
regression than the auxiliary variables. The BMA estimation will be based on all the possible
variable combinations and comes up with the weighted averages of the estimates obtained from
these possible model specifications.
         Table 7 reports the BMA estimates and their corresponding posterior inclusion
probabilities (“PIPs”). The PIP is the posterior probability of including a variable in the model.
Under each sample period heading, the estimates of focus regressors are presented first (above
the line) followed by those of auxiliary regressors (below).26 We follow a convention to include
an explanatory variable if its PIP is 0.5 or greater in the model. These admitted variables are
marked in the bold font. Note that a PIP larger than 0.5 corresponds to a t ratio of one or greater
in absolute value. To conserve space, t ratios are not presented.
         There are a few observations from comparing Tables 2 and 7. First, the explanatory
variables that are significant in Table 2 are found to be quite robust; that is, PIP =1.00 in Table 7.
Second, several BMA estimates have signs that are opposite those the corresponding ones in
Table 2.27 Third, the estimates in Table 7 often have magnitudes differ from the corresponding
ones in Table 2. However, we cannot generalize and infer which approach yields estimates that
are consistently larger than the other one. [Last, when we use the PIP of 0.5 as the criterion,
BMA still identify some other robust variables especially for the 1999-2006 and 1999-2012
models.
         Despite some differences, the BMA results are in general comparable to those in Table 2.
The differences may be attributed to the fact that our BMA procedure does not control for a) the
correlation between potential regressors in estimating all possible model specifications, and b)
the country-fixed effects. As argued by Montgomery and Nyhan (2010), despite the usefulness of
the estimation technique, BMA should not be regarded as a panacea for model selection. It would
best work as an estimation technique to test competing theory-based models or as a robustness
check to show that the main estimation results are not overly sensitive to model specifications.
As such, we could state that most of the determinants we found significant are robust with the
BMA estimation, although the estimation also suggests the possibility of other variables entering

26
        The signs in parentheses next to variable names are those in Table 2.
27
        These estimates are: net portfolio liability position, Joneses x Asia, commodity volatility in the 1999-2006
model; reserve volatility, net debt liability position, net FDI liability position, and the number of currency crises in
the 2007-2009 model; financial exposure, outward direct investment, and the number of banking crises; and SWF
and Joneses x Asia in the 1999-2006 period.

                                                          21
the models.


6. Conclusions
       Our analysis puts to the fore the changing nature of the hoarding of international reserves.
We empirically confirmed structural changes associated with new patterns of hoarding IR
especially in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. Among the determinants that received
more attention in the post-GFC period, we found that the saving rate has been playing an
important role in determining the level of IR hoarding even before the GFC – emerging markets
with higher saving rates tend to use higher buffers of IR, partially accounting for the higher
levels of IR in East Asia in comparison of Latin America. Other variables we newly identified
include the accessibility to swap lines, implementations of macro-prudential regulations, the
existence of a sovereignty wealth fund, and the attitude towards outward foreign investment.
       While there is no end in sight for hoarding reserves, some of the newly identified factors
may mitigate eventual reserve accumulation. Some of the macro prudential measures are
purported to preemptively prevent excessive credit growth through both macroeconomic and
microeconomic countercyclical measures while others are particularly targeted to dwarf the
influx of overseas capital to an overheating economy by imposing capital controls. Hence, an
implementation of macro-prudential policies may lead to fewer IRs if countries feel less need to
hold precautionary IR, or it could lead to more IRs if the policies help prevent a drainage of IRs.
Interestingly, we found the negative impact of macro-prudential policies for developed countries
and the positive one for developing countries.
       The proliferation of SWFs and possible rebalancing of emerging markets that followed
aggressive export-led growth before the GFC may reduce reserve/GDP ratios of developing
countries, as confirmed in the predictive exercises using the latest data. The robustness of the
“Keeping with the Joneses” effect also suggests potential gains from regional and global steps
towards deeper use of swap lines and cooperative pooling arrangements.
       These predictions, however, should be taken with a grain of salt. Given the dynamic
nature of the forces that shape the hoarding of reserves, there is no reason to expect future
stability in the patterns of hoarding IR. Thus, on top of the relevance of the new determining
factors, one should be aware of the possible shift in the hoarding behavior in the future.




                                                 22
Appendix 1: Data Definitions

Macro/Traditional Variables (X):
Propensity to import – Imports as a ratio to GDP.
Reserve volatility – Standard deviations of the growth of IR holding in five year windows (t – 5
through t – 1) are used. The data are extracted from WDI and IFS.
Gross saving – Gross saving is used as % of GDP. WDI and WEO.
Opportunity cost of holding reserves – It is the difference between the long-term government
bond yields and the U.S. 10-year government bond yields (Previously, I used the Treasury bill
rates, not any more). For the countries for which the long-term bond yields data are not available,
“lending rates” from the IFS are used. The data are from WDI and IFS.


Financial and Institutional Variables (Y):
M2 as % of GDP – M2 as a share of GDP (I used liquid liability ratios in the previous round)
De jure measure of financial openness – The index is based on Chinn and Ito (2006, 2008) and
downloaded from http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/Chinn-Ito_website.htm .
Gross Portfolio Exposure – The sum of external assets and liabilities divided by GDP. The data
are extracted from Lane-Milesi-Ferretti dataset. Previously, we used “net” exposure or change in
the net exposure.
Net liabilities for FDI, debt, and portfolio investment – For each of the cross-border investment
types, the net liabilities are calculated as <external liability minus external asset>, using the
updated dataset of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007 and updates).


Country Characteristic Variables (D):
Dummies for the fixed/pegged and crawling peg regimes – The Reinhart-Rogoff (2004) index is
used to construct the exchange rate regime dummy variables. Their index ranges from 1 “no
separate legal tender,” to 14 “Freely falling” (with increasing flexibility of exchange rate
movement) and is a “de facto” index (in contrast to IMF’s “de jure” exchange rate regime
classification). Here, as in Cheung and Ito, we aggregate these categories into three groups;
namely “floating,” “Crawling Peg,” and “Fixed/Pegged.” The Reinhart and Rogoff index is
updated to 2010. For 2011, we assume countries have the same exchange rate regime as in 2010.
Other characteristic dummy variables are not tested because the estimations are conducted with
country-fixed effects.


‘New’ Variables (Z)
Dummy for the sovereign wealth funds (SWF) – Using the data from the SWF Institute
(http://www.swfinstitute.org/fund-rankings/), we assign the value of one for the country and
years in which the country of concern possesses a national-level SWF.
Dummy for bilateral swap agreements (SWAP) – This dummy takes the value of one if a country


                                                23
is in an agreement of bilateral currency swap (regardless of the currency of the agreement) such
as the Fed, the ECB, and the Bank of Japan. The data are compiled using website information.
Dummy for macro prudential policies (MPP) – This dummy takes a value of one if a country has
in place any of the macro prudential policies Lim, et al. (2013) compiled.
Gross saving – Gross saving is used as % of GDP. WDI and WEO.
Commodity TOT Volatility – Using the commodity terms of trade data compiled by Spatafora and
Tytell (2009), we use the moving five-year standard deviations (in t-5 through t-1) of the change
in the commodity TOT index as a proxy for commodity TOT volatility.28
Joneses’ Effects – This variable is supposed to capture regional externality of IR holding and its
computation is based on Cheung and Qian (2009). It is essentially the average of IR holding in
the region country i belongs to, but it excludes the level of IR holding of country i itself. The
regions are: “North and South America,” “Europe,” “East and South Asia,” “Middle-east and
North Africa,” and “Sub-Saharan Africa.”29
Outward direct investment (ODI) – Outward direct investment as a share of GDP. The data are
extracted from UNCTAD’s database.
Oil exporters – The dummy is assigned for oil exporters defined by the World Bank or Spatafora
and Tytell (2009).
% of commodity exports – The “commodity exports” are the sum of fuel, food, agricultural goods,
and minerals, all of which are extracted from WDI. It is shown as the share of total exports.
% of manufacturing exports – The data are from WDI. It is shown as the share of total exports.
Ratio of goods exports to service exports – Using the BoP data, we calculate the proportion of
service exports in goods and service exports. Then, we come up with the ratio as (1 minus
service exports as % of total exports)/(service exports as % of total exports).
Financial Exposure – We use the ratio of (total external assets + total external liabilities) to GDP.
The data are based on Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007 and updates).
Currency and Banking Crises – We use the dummy for both currency and banking crisis episodes
that are identified in Aizenman and Ito (2013). For the identification of currency crisis,
Aizenman and Ito (2013) first calculate the exchange rate market pressure (EMP) against the
base country (Aizenman, et al., 2008, Eichengreen, et al. 1995, 1996). For the countries whose
data for the EMP are not available, the crisis dummy is supplemented by the currency crisis
identification by Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Their banking crisis data are essentially based on
Laeven and Velancia (2008, 2010, 2012). We count the number of past crisis years over t-1
through t-5 for each type of crises while assigning weights on the crisis dummies depending on
the year. That is, the crisis variables are calculated as: Dc(t-1) + .95* Dc(t-1) + .90*Dc(t-3)
+ .85*Dc(t-4) + .80*Dc(t-5). We assume that the weight diminishes by 5% every year, that is, that
the memory of a crisis among policy makers “depreciates” at the annual rate of 5%.




28
   The original data are available up to 2009, but we obtained more updated data (up to 2011) from the authors. We
thank authors for the generosity to share the data.
29
   “Europe” includes Western, Central, and Eastern Europe.

                                                       24
Appendix 2: Estimations with the Principal Component Analysis (PCA)

Because we use many candidate variables to investigate the determinants of IR holding,
admittedly, our regression analysis may involve the risk of having some of the right-hand-side
variables correlated with each other. Although simple correlation analysis does not report high
levels of correlation among the explanatory variables (not reported), it is worthwhile for us to
examine if we still obtain similar results once we control for potential multicollinearity.
         For that purpose, the principal component analysis (PCA) can be a useful tool.30 PCA is
a statistical tool that extracts, from a matrix composed of p variables and n samples, orthogonal
linear combinations of the variables that capture the widest variance of the variables. In other
words, when there is a possibility that some of p variables are correlated with each other, PCA
would redefine the axes in a way that the distribution of p variables is captured most successfully.
The linear combinations of the variables are called principal components (PCs), and there are as
many PCs as the number of the variables tested. The first PC, Y1 as shown below, covers the
greatest variance of the original variables: (X1, X2, … Xp).

        Y1  a11 X 1  a12 X 2  ...  a1 p X p           (A1)

        The second PC, Y2, covers the second greatest variance of the original variables, and
there are as many PCs as the number of the original variables (p). As the order of the PC
increases, the extent of an incremental increase in the coverage of the variance of the original
variables, known as eigenvalues, monotonically decreases while the cumulative coverage of the
variance monotonically increases and eventually becomes one for the pth PC.31 Because
eigenvalues decline for higher orders of the PCs, certain PCs with higher orders would not be of
much use to explain the variation of the original variables. Therefore, using some threshold, one
can choose some number, say k, of the PCs (0 < k ≤ p) instead of using all p PCs, so that a
smaller number of variables, that is, k, can be used to represent the variation of the p number of
the original variables. Many researchers often use the Kaiser criterion as the threshold; the PCs
whose eigenvalue is less than one will be cut off. Hence, PCA is a useful way to reduce the
number of the original variables while the created (reduced number of) PCs are, by definition,
orthogonal to each other.
        The weights, a ip , in equation (A1) are the eigenvectors of the variance-covariance matrix
of the original data, also known as “component loadings,” indicating the correlation, or
covariance, of the original Xi with respect to the PC (that is, Yi). ai ’s are derived with the
constraint that their sum of squares equals one. ai ’s indicate the correlation of the original Xi
with the PCs. In other words, the PCs are newly defined variables that represent, that is, are
highly correlated with, some of the original Xi’s.32 For more details on PCA, refer to Anderson
(2003) and other statistics textbooks.
        Using the PCA, we will examine if we can obtain similar results as in the OLS regression
exercises. For that, we will take the following steps.


30
   We thank Yu-chin Chen for suggesting this.
31
   The eigenvalues are the diagonal elements of the variance-covariance matrix of the principal components.
32
   The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) measure can be used to determine whether the use of the PCs is appropriate or
not. The KMO, which ranges between zero and one, of above 0.5 is often used as the threshold for the
appropriateness of the use of PCs.

                                                     25
     1. Regroup the candidate determinants to the group of macroeconomic/financial variables;
        that of variables pertaining to trade/industrial structure; and that of the Joneses effect
        variables. We do not include in any of the groups the dummy variables for sovereign
        wealth funds, bilateral swap agreements, macroprudential policies, and fixed or crawling
        peg exchange rate regimes.33
     2. Apply the PCA to each of the variable groups for both subsamples of developed and
        developing countries, and select the PCs using the cut-off eigenvalue of 1. However, if
        the PCs chosen with the cut-off eigenvalue of 1 would only yield the cumulated coverage
        of the variance of the original variables less than 75 %, higher orders of PCs would be
        chosen until the cumulated coverage of the variance becomes greater than 75%.
     3. Using all the selected PCs and the other variables that are not used for the PCA, repeat
        the same exercise as in Tables 2 and 3, that is, obtain parsimonious estimation models by
        sequentially dropping the insignificant variables from the specifications.34
     4. Estimate again with the variables that are only weakly correlated with any of the PCs.35
     5. Compare the results from Steps 3 and 4 with those of Tables 2 and 3.

         As an example, when we apply the PCA to the group of macroeconomic/financial
variables for the subsample of developing countries (LDC) from the 1999-2006 period, the
Kaiser criterion leads us to obtain six PCs for this group of variables (instead of 13), which
covers 78% of the variation in all of the group’s variables (see the bottom row of Table A1(a)).36
In Table A1 (a), we can see that the first PC, or PC1 (that alone covers 31% of the variation), is
positively correlated with the variables for propensity to import and financial exposure,
suggesting that PC1 is considered to be a variable that represent the possible risk from trade of
both goods and financial assets.37 PC2 is positively correlated with net FDI liability position and
gross saving (and therefore represents possible safe guard against capital reversals); PC3 is
positively correlated with both crisis variables, and so forth. Table A1 (b) report that the group of
trade structure variables yields two PCs. PC1 is negatively correlated with the share of
manufacturing exports and positively with the shares of fuel exports and commodity exports.
         After obtaining PCs, we take the above Step 3 to come up with a parsimonious model by
testing all the PCs and other variables and sequentially dropping the insignificant variables from
the specifications. We report the result of the parsimonious model in the first column of Table A2
(a). We also estimate the model again including the variables that are only weakly correlated with
the PCs such as the variables for the opportunity cost, M2 (as a share of GDP), and net debt
liability position. We compare these results with those reported in the first column of Table 2 and
report the comparison in Table 4.


33
   Strictly speaking, the PCA should be applied primarily to continuous, normally distributed variables. Discrete
variables such as categorical variables and dummy variables may bias the estimates (Kolenikov and Angeles, 2004).
Dummy variables derived from categorical variables (such as the dummy variables for exchange rate regimes we
use) or those which could not have continuous basis could especially bias the estimates. The compositions of the
variable groups can be seen in Table A1.
34
   Because the KMO measure indicates that it is not appropriate to obtain the principal components for the Joneses
effect variables, these variables are included in the estimations as they were in Tables 2 and 3.
35
   Because these variables are not represented by any of the PCs.
36
   We do not report eigenvalues and the coverages of variables’ variations to conserve space. However, they are
available upon request.
37
   The table omits reporting component loadings with absolute value smaller than 0.40 for easier presentation.
Hence, the loadings reported in Table A1 indicate those for ‘highly’ correlated variables with the PC.

                                                       26
Table A1: Results of the PCA for the LDC Sample
(1) 1999 – 2006
 (a): Macro/Traditional variables (# of variables = 13; N = 441; KMO = 0.7080)*
                            PC1       PC2       PC3       PC4        PC5       PC6
  Prop. to import         0.4091
  Reserve Vol.                                                      0.7264
  Opp. Cost
  M2 / GDP
  Chinn-Ito                                                         -0.4649
  N. Port. Liab. Pos.                                    0.4742
  N. Debt Liab. Pos.
  N. FDI Liab. Pos.                 0.5334
  Financial Exposure      0.4326
  Gross Saving (%)                  0.4077
  Outward Dir. Invest.                                                        0.6683
  Currency crisis                              0.5798
  Banking crisis                               0.4958    -0.5209
  Cumulative coverage     0.3055    0.4526     0.5587    0.644      0.7165    0.7762

 (b): ‘Trade Structure’ Variables (# of variables = 5; N = 441; KMO = 0.5862)*
                                     PC1        PC2
   Commodity Volatility                        -0.6208
   % of Manuf. Exports              -0.6132
   Ratio of Good to Service Exp.                0.5814
   % of Fuel Exports                0.4383      0.4858
   % of Commodity Exports           0.6122
   Cumulative coverage              0.4948      0.7779


(2) 2007 – 2009
 (c): Macro/Traditional variables (# of variables = 13; N = 182; KMO = 0.7089)*
                           PC1        PC2       PC3        PC4        PC5
  Prop. to import          0.4019
  Reserve Vol.                                            -0.5979   -0.5160
  Opp. Cost                                                         0.4737
  M2 / GDP
  Chinn-Ito                          -0.4122
  N. Port. Liab. Pos.                           0.4190
  N. Debt Liab. Pos.
  N. FDI Liab. Pos.                   0.5750
  Financial Exposure       0.4503
  Gross Saving (%)                    0.5096
  Outward Dir. Invest.     0.4160
  Currency crisis                               0.4310     0.4367
  Banking crisis                                0.4806     0.4686
  Cumulative coverage      0.3330     0.4721    0.5819     0.6737   0.7524

 (d): ‘Trade Structure’ Variables (# of variables = 5; N = 182; KMO = 0.6212)*
                                     PC1        PC2
   Commodity Volatility                         0.8272
   % of Manuf. Exports              -0.5580
   Ratio of Good to Service Exp.
   % of Fuel Exports                0.4482     -0.5229
   % of Commodity Exports           0.5574
   Cumulative coverage              0.5671      0.7790
*Notes: Component loadings with absolute value smaller than .40 are omitted from presentation for easier
interpretation. “KMO” means the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy.


                                                         27
(3) 2010 – 2012
 (e): Macro/Traditional variables (# of variables = 13; N = 154; KMO = 0.7288)*
                            PC1       PC2       PC3       PC4        PC5
  Prop. to import         0.4040
  Reserve Vol.                                           0.5390
  Opp. Cost                                    0.4881
  M2 / GDP
  Chinn-Ito                         -0.5048
  N. Port. Liab. Pos.
  N. Debt Liab. Pos.
  N. FDI Liab. Pos.                 0.5437
  Financial Exposure      0.4430
  Gross Saving (%)                  0.4784
  Outward Dir. Invest.    0.4158
  Currency crisis                                                   0.8293
  Banking crisis                                         0.6384
  Cumulative coverage     0.3589    0.5014     0.5997    0.6884     0.7627

 (f): ‘Trade Structure’ Variables (# of variables = 5; N = 154; KMO = 0.6837)*
                                     PC1        PC2
   Commodity Volatility                        -0.6740
   % of Manuf. Exports              -0.5622
   Ratio of Good to Service Exp.                0.5460
   % of Fuel Exports                0.4203      0.4585
   % of Commodity Exports           0.5637
   Cumulative coverage              0.5839      0.8378


(4) 1999 – 2012
 (g): Macro/Traditional variables (# of variables = 13; N = 777; KMO = 0.7451)*
                           PC1        PC2       PC3        PC4        PC5      PC6
  Prop. to import          0.4046
  Reserve Vol.                                                      -0.7101
  Opp. Cost                                               0.4255
  M2 / GDP                                                                    -0.4289
  Chinn-Ito                                                         0.4461    0.4658
  N. Port. Liab. Pos.
  N. Debt Liab. Pos.
  N. FDI Liab. Pos.                   0.5458
  Financial Exposure       0.4394
  Gross Saving (%)                    0.4581
  Outward Dir. Invest.
  Currency crisis                               0.5968
  Banking crisis                                0.5586    -0.4568
  Cumulative coverage      0.3248     0.4646    0.5722     0.6568   0.7303    0.7864

 (h): ‘Trade Structure’ Variables (# of variables = 5; N = 777; KMO = 0.6106)*
                                     PC1        PC2
   Commodity Volatility                        -0.6910
   % of Manuf. Exports              -0.5880
   Ratio of Good to Service Exp.                0.5110
   % of Fuel Exports                0.4576      0.4442
   % of Commodity Exports           0.5878
   Cumulative coverage              0.5209      0.7808
*Notes: Component loadings with absolute value smaller than .40 are omitted from presentation for easier
interpretation. “KMO” means the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy.



                                                         28
                         Table A2: Determinants of IR holding Using Principal Components – LDC

(a) 1999-2006                                                       (b) 2007-2009
                                (1)           (2)                                                   (1)           (2)
       Crawling Peg             -0.017       -0.013                      Swap agr., dummy           0.055        0.054
                               (0.010)*      (0.010)                                              (0.026)**    (0.026)**
         Fixed/Peg              -0.029        -0.021                   PC2 for macro-fin vars.      0.062        0.052
                              (0.012)**     (0.012)*                                             (0.019)***    (0.022)**
   PC2 for macro-fin vars.       0.012         0.015                       Joneses x Asia           -2.522       -2.618
                             (0.005)***   (0.005)***                                             (0.890)***   (0.879)***
   PC3 for macro-fin vars.      -0.011        -0.012                      M2 (% of GDP)                           0.187
                             (0.003)***   (0.004)***                                                            (0.124)
   PC4 for macro-fin vars.      -0.010        -0.009                       Net Debt Liab.                         0.128
                              (0.004)**    (0.005)**                                                            (0.085)
       Joneses x Asia            2.390         1.897                          Constant              0.344        0.245
                             (0.347)***   (0.364)***                                             (0.038)***   (0.088)***
      Joneses x Europe           1.363        1.209                              N                   182           182
                             (0.380)***   (0.379)***                       # of countries             67            67
    PC1 for Trade/Indust.       0.019         0.024                           W/in R2                0.16         0.20
            vars.                                                             B/w R2                 0.12         0.00
                             (0.007)**    (0.007)***                        Overall R2              0.12          0.00
      Opportunity Cost                       0.019
                                                                                 * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
                                           (0.009)**
      M2 (% of GDP)                           0.108
                                          (0.026)***
       Net Debt Liab.                        -0.008
                                            (0.014)
          Constant              0.072        0.007
                             (0.020)***     (0.025)
             N                   441           441
       # of countries             70            70
          W/in R2                0.20         0.25
          B/w R2                 0.05         0.12
        Overall R2              0.12          0.20
             * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                          29
                  Table A2 (cont’d): Determinants of IR holding Using Principal Components – LDC

(c) 2010-2012                                                    (d) 1999-2012
                                (1)           (2)                                                    (1)            (2)
       SWF, dummy                0.071         0.076                      SWF, dummy                 -0.027          -0.026
                              (0.034)**    (0.034)**                                                (0.014)*       (0.014)*
     Swap agr., dummy           -0.035        -0.026                 Macro Prud.Pol., dummy           0.022           0.019
                              (0.016)**      (0.017)                                              (0.007)***     (0.007)***
   PC2 for macro-fin vars.       0.037         0.050                        Fixed/Peg                -0.028         -0.029
                             (0.013)***   (0.015)***                                              (0.009)***     (0.009)***
   PC4 for macro-fin vars.      -0.033        -0.033                 PC1 for macro-fin vars.          0.041          0.057
                             (0.010)***   (0.010)***                                              (0.004)***     (0.006)***
      Joneses x Europe          -2.120       -2.363                  PC2 for macro-fin vars.          0.014          0.016
                              (1.009)**    (1.012)**                                              (0.004)***     (0.005)***
      Joneses x MENA             0.632        0.660                  PC4 for macro-fin vars.         -0.013          -0.011
                             (0.113)***   (0.122)***                                              (0.004)***     (0.004)***
    M2 (% of GDP, t-1)                         0.001                 PC5 for macro-fin vars.         -0.010         -0.010
                                             (0.079)                                              (0.004)***      (0.004)**
       Net Port. Liab.                         0.053                      Joneses x Asia              1.037           1.018
                                             (0.113)                                              (0.175)***     (0.175)***
       Net Debt Liab.                         -0.092                   Joneses x West Hem.            0.470           0.367
                                            (0.046)*                                               (0.236)**        (0.241)
          Constant              0.304          0.295                PC1 for Trade/Indust. Vars.       0.014          0.013
                             (0.046)***   (0.074)***                                               (0.006)**      (0.006)**
             N                   154            154                       Net Port. Liab.                            -0.041
       # of countries             58             58                                                                 (0.040)
          W/in R2                0.39           0.42                      Net Debt Liab.                             -0.019
          B/w R2                 0.05           0.04                                                                (0.016)
        Overall R2              0.06            0.05                   Outward Direct Inv.                          -0.391
                                                                                                                 (0.117)***
             * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01                                  Constant                0.163            0.170
                                                                                                  (0.011)***     (0.012)***
                                                                                N                     777              777
                                                                          # of countries               73               73
                                                                             W/in R2                  0.29             0.30
                                                                             B/w R2                   0.25             0.29
                                                                           Overall R2                0.37              0.42
                                                                                * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01




                                                       30
References
Aizenman, J., and H. Ito. 2013. Living with the Trilemma Constraint: Relative Trilemma Policy
        Divergence, Crises, and Output Losses for Developing Countries. NBER Working Paper No.
        19448 (September). Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming, Journal of
        International Money and Finance.
Aizenman, J., M. D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2008. “Assessing the Emerging Global Financial Architecture:
        Measuring the Trilemma's Configurations Over Time.” NBER Working Paper #14533.
        Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Aizenman, J., M. D. Chinn, and H. Ito. 2010. "The Emerging Global Financial Architecture: Tracing and
        Evaluating the New Patterns of the Trilemma's Configurations" (with Joshua Aizenman and
        Menzie Chinn), Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 29, No. 4, p. 615-641 (2010).
Aizenman, J., Y. Jinjarak, and N. Marion. 2014. “China's Growth, Stability, and Use of International
        Reserves. NBER Working Paper #19739. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Open Economies Review, 25: 407-428
Aizenman, J. and J. Lee. 2007. “International Reserves: Precautionary Versus Mercantilist Views, Theory
        and Evidence,” Open Economies Review 18, 191-214.
Aizenman, Joshua, Yeonho Lee, and Youngseop Rhee. 2007. “International Reserves Management and
        Capital Mobility in a Volatile World: Policy Considerations and a Case Study of Korea,” Journal
        of the Japanese and International Economies, 21, 1-15.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion. 2003. “The High demand for International Reserves in the Far
        East: What’s Going On?” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 17, 370-400.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion. 2004. “International Reserve Holdings with Sovereign Risk and
        Costly Tax Collection,” The Economic Journal, 114, 569–591.
Aizenman J. and G. Pasricha. 2013. “Why do emerging markets liberalize capital outflow controls? Fiscal
        versus net capital flows concerns" Journal of International Money and Finance, 2013, 39, pp:
        28-64.
Anderson, T. W. 2003. An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis, 3rd Edition, Wiley Series in
        Probability and Statistics, New York: Wiley.
Bahmani-Oskooee, Mohsen. 1988. “Oil Price Shocks and Stability of the Demand For International
        Reserves,” Journal of Macroeconomics, 10, 633-41.
Bruno, V. and H.S. Shin. 2014. “Capital Flows and the Risk-taking Channel of Monetary Policy, mimeo,
        Princeton University.
Bussière, M., G. Cheng, M.D. Chinn, and N. Lisack. 2014. “For a Few Dollars More: Reserves and
        Growth in Times of Crises,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #19791.
        Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvo Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo and Luis-Fernando Mejía, 2004. "On the empirics of Sudden
        Stops: the relevance of balance-sheet effects," Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of San
        Francisco.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Hiro Ito. 2009. “Cross-sectional analysis on the determinants of international
        reserves accumulation.” International Economic Journal, Vol. 23, No. 4, p. 447-481. December
        2009).
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Hiro Ito. 2008. “Hoarding of International Reserves: A Comparison of the Asian
        and Latin American Experiences,” In Ramkishen S. Rajan, Shandre Thangavelu, and Rasyad A
        Parinduri (eds), Exchange Rate, Monetary and Financial Issues and Policies in Asia, World
        Scientific Press, p. 77-115.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Xingwang Qian. 2009. “Hoarding of International Reserves: Mrs Machlup’s
        Wardrobe and the Joneses. Review of International Economics, 17(4), 824–843.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Rajeswari Sengupta, 2011, Accumulation of Reserves and Keeping Up with the
               Joneses: The Case of LATAM Economies, International Review of Economics & Finance
               20 (Jan), 19–31.
Cheung, Yin-Wong and Clement Yuk-Pang Wong. 2008. “Are All Measures of International Reserves


                                                  31
        Created Equal? An Empirical Comparison of International Reserve Ratios,” Economics: The
        Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal, Vol. 2, 2008-15.
        http://www.economics-ejournal.org/economics/journalarticles/2008-15.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
        Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, 81, 163-192.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2008. “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” Journal of Comparative
        Policy Analysis, Volume 10, Issue 3 (September), 309 - 322.
Courchene, Thomas J., and G.M. Youssef. 1967. “The Demand for International Reserves,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 75, 404-413.
de Beaufort Wijnholds, J. Onno and Arie Kapteyn. 2001. “International Reserve Adequacy in Emerging
        Market Economies”, IMF Working Paper 01/43.
Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2005. “International Financial Stability:
        Asia, Interest Rates, and the Dollar,” Deutsche Bank Global Research.
Dooley, Michael P., David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber. 2009. “Bretton Woods II Still Defines The
        International Monetary System,” Pacific Economic Review, Blackwell Publishing, vol. 14(3),
        297-311, 08.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz. 1995. Exchange Market Mayhem: The Antecedents and
        Aftermaths of Speculative Attacks. Economic Policy. 21 (October). pp. 249−312.
Eichengreen, B., A. Rose, and C. Wyplosz. 1996. Contagious Currency Crises: First Tests. Scandinavian
        Journal of Economics. 98 (4). pp. 463−484.
Feldstein, Martin. 1999. “A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets,” Foreign Affairs, 78, 93 – 109.
Flood, Robert P., and Peter M. Garber. 1984. “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
        Examples,” Journal of International Economics, 17, August, 1-13.
Flood, Robert P., and Nancy Marion. 2002. “Holding International reserves in an Era of High Capital
        Mobility,” IMF Working Paper 02/62.
Frenkel, Jacob A.. 1980. “International Reserves Under Pegged Exchange Rates and Managed Float:
        Corrections and Extensions,” Journal of Monetary Economic,s 6, 295-302.
Frenkel, Jacob A.. 1974a. “The Demand for International Reserves by Developed and Less-Developed
        Countries,” Economica, 41, 14-24.
Frenkel, Jacob A.. 1974b. “Openness and the Demand for International Reserves,” in Robert Z. Albier
        (Ed.), National Monetary Policies and the International Financial System, University of Chicago
        Press, Chicago.
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Boyan Jovanovic. 1981. “Optimal International reserves: A Stochastic Framework,”
        Economic Journal, 91, 507-14.
Heller, Heinz Robert. 1966. “Optimal International Reserves,” Economic Journal, 76, 296-311.
Heller, Heinz Robert. 1968. “The Transactions Demand for International Means of Payment,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 76, 141-145.
Hoeting, J. 2002. Methodology for Bayesian Model Averaging: An Update, In Proceedings – Manuscripts
        of invited paper presentations, International Biometric Conference, Freiburg, Germany, 231-240.
Hoeting, J. A., D. Madigan, A. E. Raftery, and C. T. Volinsky. 1999. “Bayesian Model Averaging: A
        Tutorial.” Statistical Science 14: 382–417.
Johnson, Harry G.. 1958. International Trade and Economic Growth: Studies in Pure Theory, Harvard
        University Press: Cambridge.
Kelly, Michael G. 1970. “The Demand for International reserves,” American Economic Review, 59,
        655-667.
Kolenikov S, Angeles G. 2004. “The Use of Discrete Data in PCA: Theory, Simulations, and Applications
        to Socioeconomic Indices,” Working Paper of MEASURE/Evaluation project, No. WP-04-85,
        Carolina Population Center, UNC.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2010. Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly. IMF
        Working Paper 10/146. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2008. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working Paper


                                                  32
        WP/08/224, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2010. “Resolution of Banking Crises: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly,” IMF
        Working Paper No. 10/44. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia. 2012. “Systematic Banking Crises: A New Database,” IMF Working Paper
        WP/12/163, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.Levy-Yeyati, E. and F. Sturzenegger.
        2003. “To float or to fix: Evidence on the impact of exchange rate regimes on growth.” The
        American Economic Review 93(4): 1173–1193.
Lane, Philip R., and Dominic Burke. 2001. “The Empirics of Foreign International Reserves,” Open
        Economies Review, 12, 423-434.
Lane, P., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended
        Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–2004. Journal of International Economics
        73(2): 223−250.
Lim, C. H., I. Krznar, F. Lipinsky, A. Otani, and X. Yu. 2013. “The Macroprudential Framework: Policy
        Responsiveness and Institutional Arrangements.” IMF Working Paper, WP/13/166. Washington,
        D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Lizondo, Jose Saul, and Mathieson, Donald J. 1987. “The Stability of the Demand for International
        Reserves,” Journal of International Money Finance, 6, 251-282.
Luca, G. D. and J. R. Magnus. 2011. “Bayesian Model Averaging and Weighted-average Least Squares:
        Equivariance, Stability, and Numerical Issues. The Stata Journal 11. Number 2, pp. 518-544.
Obstfeld, M., Shambaugh, J. C. and Taylor, A. M. 2010. “Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and
        International Reserves.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2: 57-94.
Machlup, Fritz. 1966. “The Need for Monetary Reserves,” Reprints in International Finance 5. Princeton
        University.
Montgomery, J. and Brendan Nyhan. 2010. “Bayesian Model Averaging: Theoretical Developments and
        Practical Applications.” Political Analysis 18(2): 245-270.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish R. Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Luc Laeven, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi,
        and Annamaria Kokenyne. 2011. “Managing Capital Inflows: What Tools to Use?,” IMF Staff
        Discussion Note, SND/11/06.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Atish Ghosh, Karl Habermeier, Marcos Chamon, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Dennis
        B.S. Reinhardt. 2010. “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls,” IMF Staff Position Note 10/04.
Park, Y. C. 2010. “Reform of the Global Regulatory System: Perspectives of East Asia’s Emerging
        Economies, Proceedings, Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, pp.
        187-212.
Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
        Reinterpretation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 119(1), pages 1-48,
        February.
Roubini, Nouriel, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1989. “Government Spending and Budget Deficits in the Industrial
       Countries,” Economic Policy, 8, 99-132.
Spatafora, N. and I. Tytell. 2009. “Commodity Terms of Trade: The History of Booms and Busts. .” IMF
        Working Paper, WP/09/205. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
The Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, IMF (2011), “Recent Experiences in Managing Capital
        Inflows – Cross-Cutting Themes and Possible Policy Framework,” IMF Policy Paper,
        http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/021411a.pdf.




                                                 33
Table 1: Determinants of Holdings of International Reserves -- Developing Countries
                                1999-2006 2007-09         2010-12     1999-2012
     Propensity to Import (t-1)    0.098        0.303      -0.117        0.107
                                (0.035)*** (0.160)*      (0.060)*     (0.031)***
         Reserve Volatility        -0.013       0.261      -0.147        -0.019
                                  (0.007)*     (0.187)    (0.212)      (0.008)**
        M2 (% of GDP, t-1)          0.142       0.050       0.150        0.233
                                (0.026)*** (0.145)        (0.094)     (0.022)***
        Net Port. Liab.(t-1)       -0.101       0.065      -0.151        0.023
                                 (0.040)**     (0.127)    (0.127)       (0.035)
             Constant               0.064       0.029       0.214        0.024
                                (0.018)*** (0.098) (0.072)***           (0.016)
                 N                   441         182         154          777
          # of countries              70          67          58           73
            Overall R2               0.56        0.34        0.15         0.58
             W/in R2                0.16         0.06       0.07          0.23
   Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Estimated with country fixed effects. All the explanatory
   variables are lagged by one year to avoid endogeneity.




                                               34
Table 2: Determinants of Holdings of International Reserves – Developing Countries
                                               (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)
                                           1999-2006     2007-2009    2010-2012    1999-2012
               Propensity to Import          0.079           0.398                    0.096
                                           (0.035)**     (0.147)***                (0.031)***
                 Reserve Volatility                          0.353                   -0.021
                                                          (0.167)**                (0.008)***
                 Opportunity Cost                            0.042
                                                           (0.024)*
                     Fixed/Peg                                                       -0.026
                                                                                   (0.008)***
                  M2 (% of GDP)               0.096                                   0.152
                                           (0.025)***                              (0.026)***
            Net Portfolio Liability Pos.     -0.137
                                           (0.038)***
              Net Debt Liability Pos.                      0.169
                                                         (0.073)**
               Net FDI Liability Pos.                      0.132
                                                          (0.081)
                Financial exposure                                      -0.048        0.010
                                                                      (0.017)***   (0.004)***
             De jure financial openness                    -0.206
                                                         (0.083)**
             Sovereign Wealth Funds,                                     0.082       -0.024
                      dummy                                           (0.033)**     (0.013)*
            Bilateral swap agreements,                                  -0.026
                      dummy                                            (0.015)*
             Macro Prudential Policy                                                  0.017
                      dummy                                                         (0.007)**
                   Gross saving                0.159       0.526         0.235        0.280
                                           (0.046)***    (0.202)**     (0.091)**   (0.043)***
                Outward Direct Inv.           -0.170                     0.536
                                            (0.077)**                 (0.176)***
                  Joneses x Asia               1.588       -2.150                     0.619
                                           (0.348)***    (0.894)**                 (0.170)***
                 Joneses x Europe              0.973                     -2.506       -0.672
                                           (0.351)***                  (0.968)**    (0.302)**
                 Joneses x MENA                                          0.650
                                                                      (0.107)***
                  % of fuel export           0.113                                    0.182
                                           (0.046)**                               (0.044)***
               Commodity Volatility          0.065
                                           (0.031)**
             % of commodity exports                        0.269
                                                         (0.120)**
                # of Currency crisis                       0.056
                      (t-5|t-1)                          (0.024)**
                # of Banking crisis                                     -0.051
                      (t-5|t-1)                                       (0.010)***
                      Constant               -0.051        -0.027        0.359       -0.024
                                           (0.023)**      (0.155)     (0.052)***    (0.021)
                         N                    441           182           154         777
                   # of countries              70            67           58           73
                    Between R2                0.21          0.01         0.01         0.48
                     Within R2                0.27          0.35         0.47         0.35
                    Overall R2                0.31          0.01         0.01         0.54
   Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Estimated with country fixed effects. All the explanatory
   variables, except for reserve volatility and currency and banking crises, are lagged by one year to
   avoid endogeneity.



                                                    35
Table 3: Determinants of Holdings of International Reserves – Developed Countries
                                             (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                                          1999-2006    2007-2009      2010-2012     1999-2012
            Propensity to Import                         -0.568
                                                       (0.245)**
             Reserve Volatility              0.230                       0.864
                                          (0.054)***                 (0.283)***
              Opportunity cost               0.061       -0.155         -0.047        -0.070
                                          (0.012)***   (0.038)***     (0.019)**     (0.014)***
              M2 (% of GDP)                              -0.110                       -0.083
                                                       (0.031)***                   (0.017)***
         Net Portfolio Liability Pos.                                  -0.148
                                                                     (0.047)***
           Net Debt Liability Pos.           0.027        0.131        -0.167         -0.099
                                           (0.013)**   (0.035)***    (0.031)***     (0.013)***
             Financial exposure              -0.003      -0.018        -0.031
                                            (0.002)*   (0.004)***    (0.010)***
         De jure financial openness          0.275       -1.219                        0.548
                                          (0.090)***   (0.241)***                   (0.145)***
          Sovereign wealth fund,             -0.036
                   dummy                  (0.011)***
         Bilateral swap agreements,                       0.051                        0.043
                   dummy                               (0.009)***                   (0.010)***
          Macro Prudential Policy,          -0.012
                   dummy                   (0.006)*
                Gross saving                -0.311                     -1.451
                                          (0.091)***                 (0.395)***
            Outward Direct Inv.                                        -0.428         -0.159
                                                                     (0.091)***     (0.056)***
               Joneses x Asia                 0.963                                    0.918
                                          (0.241)***                                (0.238)***
              Joneses x Europe               -0.549
                                          (0.179)***
            Commodity Volatility             -0.201
                                          (0.051)***
         % of manufacturing export            0.153       0.667                        0.331
                                          (0.057)***    (0.389)*                    (0.119)***
              % of fuel export               0.152        1.865                        0.674
                                           (0.070)**   (0.329)***                   (0.189)***
          % of commodity exports                         -1.809                       -0.468
                                                       (0.474)***                   (0.171)***
      Ratio of Goods to Service exports                  -0.122
                                                       (0.043)***
            # of Currency crisis                                                       -0.031
                  (t-5|t-1)                                                          (0.012)**
            # of Banking crisis             -0.015        0.071         0.028          0.015
                  (t-5|t-1)               (0.004)***   (0.010)***    (0.007)***     (0.003)***
                  Constant                  -0.208        1.760         0.224          -0.577
                                           (0.107)*    (0.469)***     (0.119)*      (0.180)***
                     N                        159           64           58             281
               # of countries                  22           22           20              22
                Between R2                   0.00         0.09          0.01            0.02
                 Within R2                   0.58         0.83          0.84            0.53
                Overall R2                    0.01         0.08         0.01            0.00
  Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Estimated with country fixed effects. All the explanatory
  variables, except for reserve volatility and currency and banking crises, are lagged by one year to
  avoid endogeneity.



                                                 36
                                     Table 4: Over-Hoarding Estimates: 2010-2012

                                     Models (Pred. errors w/out FE)                           Models (Pred. errors w/ FE)
                         1999-2006       2007-09      2010-2012       1999-2012   1999-2006       2007-09    2010-2012      1999-2012
   Emerging Asia          -0.225           0.618        0.087          -0.131      -0.014         0.165        0.002         0.009
   Western Europe          0.079          -0.071         0.411         -0.008      0.065          -0.033       0.000         0.008
   E. & C. Europe         -0.041          -0.079        0.246          0.085       -0.003         0.001        0.002         0.001
Emerging Latin America     0.036          -0.129        -0.275         -0.042      -0.011         -0.004       -0.001        -0.014
    “Fragile Five”        -0.196           0.098        -0.185         -0.124      -0.051          0.031       0.001         -0.008
        BRICs             -0.143          0.131         -0.100         -0.095      -0.012          0.017       0.001          0.006
      Argentina            0.067          -0.254        -0.232         -0.025      -0.006         -0.032       0.000         -0.010
        Brazil             0.046          -0.118        -0.277         -0.014       0.030         -0.016       0.000          0.019
       Mexico              0.053          0.011         -0.308         -0.012       0.029          0.040       0.000          0.012
        China             -0.265          0.742         -0.097         -0.139       0.018          0.124       0.000          0.019
        India             -0.483          0.414         -0.238         -0.304      -0.171                      0.006         -0.035
      Indonesia           -0.473          0.495         -0.331         -0.260      -0.116          0.073       0.000         -0.021
        Korea             -0.412          0.699         -0.161         -0.254      -0.137          0.123       0.000         -0.049
      Malaysia            -0.253          0.603         0.014          -0.125      -0.082          0.100       0.000         -0.043
       Thailand           -0.173          0.739         0.121          -0.028       0.066          0.156       0.000          0.080
     South Africa          0.019          -0.192        -0.209         -0.095       0.028         -0.004       0.000          0.008
       Turkey             -0.089          -0.003        0.121           0.052      -0.029          0.070       0.000         -0.012




                                                                 37
                     Table 5: The Proxy of Over-hoarding and Exchange Rate Depreciation in 2012-13
                                                                Dep. Var.: % of Depreciation 2012-13
                                      Prediction errors 2010-12                                   Prediction errors as of 2012
        Model          1999-2006      2007-2009       2010-2012       1999-2012      1999-2006     2007-2009      2010-2012      1999-2012
                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)            (8)
     Pred. errors.       -0.065         -0.055           -0.018          -0.101        -0.055        -0.077         -0.061         -0.114
                       (0.031)**       (0.032)*          (0.016)        (0.052)*      (0.030)*      (0.042)*       (0.035)*       (0.061)*
      Constant           0.021           0.031            0.016           0.019         0.027         0.038         0.018           0.026
                       (0.008)**      (0.011)***        (0.009)*       (0.008)**     (0.010)***    (0.013)***      (0.010)*      (0.009)***
     Adjusted R2          0.03            0.06            0.00           0.05           0.01           0.11          0.06           0.07
          N                75              59              68             78            59             49             52            63
Notes: * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors are robust standard errors.




                                                                        38
                                 Table 6: Comparison b/w OLS-FE and PCA Estimation Results – Developing Countries
        1999-2006            OLS-FE         PC          2007-2009           OLS-FE             PC            2010-2012           OLS-FE          PC          1999-2012            OLS-FE          PC
    Propensity to Import         +                  Propensity to Import        +                         Financial Exposure         –                   Propensity to Import         +            +
      M2 (% of GDP)              +          (+)      Reserve Volatility         +                               SWF                  +           +        Reserve Volatility          –            +
     Net Portfolio Liab.         –           –       Opportunity Cost           +                           Bilateral swap           –           –            Fixed/Peg               –            –
        Gross saving             +           +         Net Debt Liab.           +                            Gross saving            +           +         M2 (% of GDP)              +
     Outward Direct Inv.         –                   Net FDI Liab. Pos.         –              +         Outward Direct Inv.         +                    Financial Exposure          +            +
       Joneses x Asia            +           +           Chinn-Ito              –              –           Joneses x Europe          –           –               SWF                  –            –
      Joneses x Europe           +           +          Gross saving            +              +          Joneses x MENA             +           +         Macro Prudential           +            +
      % of fuel export           +           +         Joneses x Asia           –              –          # of Banking crisis        –           –           Gross saving             +            +
    Commodity Volatility         +                  Commodity exports           +                                                                           Joneses x Asia            +            +
                                                    # of Currency crisis        +                                                                          Joneses x Europe           –
                                                                                                                                                           % of fuel export           +            +

            N                         441                   N                        182                         N                        154                    N                          777
      # of countries                   70             # of countries                 67                    # of countries                 58               # of countries                    73
         B/w R2                0.21         0.05         B/w R2               0.01         0.12               B/w R2               0.01         0.05          B/w R2                 0.48         0.25
         W/in R2               0.27         0.20         W/in R2              0.35         0.16               W/in R2              0.47         0.39          W/in R2                0.35         0.29
       Overall R2              0.31         0.12       Overall R2             0.01         0.12             Overall R2             0.01         0.06        Overall R2               0.54         0.37

    Other estimates found associated by PCA:        Other estimates found associated by PCA:             Other estimates found associated by PCA:        Other estimates found associated by PCA:
      Crawling Peg (-); fixed/Peg (-); net FDI      Swap (+);                                            Chinn-Ito (-); net FDI Liab.(+); Reserve vol.   net FDI Liab.(+); Opp. Cost (-); banking crisis
    Liab.(+); currency crisis (-); banking crisis                                                        (-)                                             (+); Chinn-Ito (-); Joneses Westhem. (+);
    (+/-); Chinn-Ito (-); manufacturing exp. (-);                                                                                                        manufacturing exp. (-); Comm. exp. (+); (ODI
    (Opp. Cost (+))                                                                                                                                      (-))



        Note: The signs in parentheses in the “PCA” columns indicate they are based on the results of the estimations where the variables that are not highly correlated
with any of the PCs are included in the estimation (that is, models shown in column (2) of each table).




                                                                                                    39
                                             Table 7: Estimation Results of BMA – Developing Countries
     1999-2006                                  2007-2009                                       2010-2012                                  1999-2012
                           Coeff.   PIP                               Coeff.   PIP                                    Coeff.   PIP                               Coeff.   PIP
     (N = 441)                                  (N = 182)                                       (N = 154)                                  (N = 777)
Propensity to Import (+)   0.168    1.00   Propensity to Import (+)    0.239   1.00        Financial Exposure (-)     0.054    1.00   Propensity to Import (+)   0.159    1.00
   M2 (% of GDP) (+)       0.140    1.00     Reserve Volatility (+)   -0.204   1.00                 SWF (+)           0.008    1.00     Reserve Volatility (-)   -0.039   1.00
 Net Portfolio Liab. (-)   0.078    1.00     Opportunity Cost (+)      0.024   1.00            Bilateral swap (-)     -0.050   1.00         Fixed/Peg (-)        -0.018   1.00
     Gross saving (+)      0.127    1.00      Net Debt Liab. (+)      -0.080   1.00            Gross saving (+)       0.670    1.00     M2 (% of GDP) (+)        0.152    1.00
 Outward Direct Inv. (-)   -0.586   1.00    Net FDI Liab. Pos. (-)    -0.056   1.00        Outward Direct Inv. (+)    -0.639   1.00    Financial Exposure (+)    0.032    1.00
    Joneses x Asia (+)     -0.011   1.00         Chinn-Ito (-)        -0.060   1.00          Joneses x Europe (-)     -0.548   1.00            SWF (-)           0.028    1.00
  Joneses x Europe (+)     0.167    1.00       Gross saving (+)        0.475   1.00         Joneses x MENA (+)        0.189    1.00     Macro Prudential (+)     0.037    1.00
  % of fuel export (+)     0.083    1.00       Joneses x Asia (-)     -0.369   1.00         # of Banking crisis (-)   0.000    1.00        Gross saving (+)      0.312    1.00
Commodity Volatility (+)   -0.075   1.00   Commodity exports (+)       0.027   1.00             Net Debt Liab.        -0.136   0.92       Joneses x Asia (+)     -0.121   1.00
   Financial Exposure      0.030    1.00   # of Currency crisis (+)   -0.042   1.00            M2 (% of GDP)          0.157    0.91     Joneses x Europe (-)     -0.016   1.00
     Net Debt Liab.        -0.070   1.00        M2 (% of GDP)          0.196   1.00                Fixed/Peg          -0.062   0.70     % of fuel export (+)     0.103    1.00
    Reserve Volatility     -0.031   0.99       % of fuel export        0.199   0.94            % of Manuf. Exp.       -0.063   0.38        Joneses MENA          0.300    1.00
        Crawl Peg          0.030    0.99           Fixed/Peg          -0.083   0.93            Reserve Volatility     -0.096   0.35       Outward Dir. Inv.      -0.703   1.00
     Joneses MENA          0.290    0.97      Financial Exposure       0.022   0.81             % of fuel export      0.036    0.29        Net Debt Liab.        -0.077   1.00
    Macro Prudential       0.029    0.81       Outward Dir. Inv.      -0.897   0.73           # of Currency crisis    0.018    0.28           Crawl Peg          0.036    0.97
      Net FDI Liab.        0.046    0.81       Joneses x Europe       -0.453   0.55                Chinn-Ito          -0.019   0.25           Chinn-Ito          -0.037   0.89
          SWF              0.016    0.48      # of Banking Crisis     -0.340   0.45              Joneses x Asia       -0.250   0.18          Joneses SSA         0.061    0.31
       Joneses SSA         0.022    0.22      Joneses West Hem.        0.025   0.45           Joneses West Hem.       -0.455   0.17      Joneses West Hem.       -0.061   0.29
   Joneses West Hem.       -0.045   0.21        Joneses MENA           0.041   0.35               Joneses SSA         -0.425   0.17         Bilateral swap       -0.007   0.23
   # of Currency crisis    -0.001   0.16         Joneses SSA          -0.069   0.18           % of Commd. Exp.        -0.001   0.17       % of Manuf. Exp.       -0.001   0.06
        Chinn-Ito          -0.001   0.08         Bilateral swap       -0.007   0.13                Crawl Peg          0.006    0.14      # of Currency Crisis    0.000    0.06
    % of Manuf. Exp.       0.001    0.06    Goods/Serv. Exp. Ratios    0.002   0.12           Net Portfolio Liab.     -0.018    0.1      % of Commd. Exp.        -0.002   0.05
        Fixed/Peg          0.000    0.06           Crawl Peg           0.003   0.10         Commodity Volatility      0.016    0.08     Commodity Volatility     0.001    0.05
   % of Commd. Exp.        -0.001   0.06       Net Portfolio Liab.    -0.005   0.08        Goods/Serv. Exp. Ratios    0.001    0.08       Net Portfolio Liab.    0.001    0.04
          Swap             0.001    0.05       Macro Prudential        0.001   0.07              Net FDI Liab.        0.004    0.08    Goods/Serv. Exp. Ratios   0.000    0.04
 Goods/Serv. Exp. Ratios   0.000    0.05     Commodity Volatility      0.006   0.07            Macro Prudential       0.002    0.07           Opp. Cost          0.000    0.04
        Opp. Cost          -0.000   0.05              SWF              0.000   0.06          Propensity to Import     -0.002   0.06         Net FDI Liab.        0.000    0.04
   # of Banking Crisis     0.000    0.05       % of Manuf. Exp.        0.007   0.06                Opp. Cost          0.000    0.05      # of Banking Crisis     0.000    0.04


Notes: “PIP” refers to posterior inclusion probability, that is, the posterior probability that a variable is to be included in the model. The PIP of 0.5 approximately
corresponds to a t ratio of one in absolute value. Figures in bold are the estimates whose PIP’s are 0.50 or greater. The explanatory variables shown above the
horizontal line are the “focus regressors” and those below are “auxiliary regressors.”




                                                                                      40
Figure 1: International Reserve Holding as a ratio to GDP (a) and to the world total (b)
                              (a) IR Holding as % of GDP



                      .5       .4
          IR holdng as % of GDP
        .1       .2   0 .3




                                         1960   1970          1980            1990      2000          2010
                                                                       Year

                                                       Japan                             China
                                                       ex-China Emerging Asia            ex-JPN IDC

 Note: For the country groups, the group’s aggregate IR is divided by the group’s aggregated GDP

                                                (b) IR Holding as % of the World’s IR Total
                                    .6
        IR holdng as % of World Total
             .2       0 .4




                                         1960   1970          1980            1990      2000          2010
                                                                       Year

                                                       Japan                             China
                                                       ex-China Emerging Asia            ex-JPN IDC

      Note: For the country groups, the group’s aggregate IR is divided the world’s total IR




                                                                     41
                                                       Figure 2: Predictions with Different Estimation Models
                               Argentina                                                                 Brazil                                                                 China
.4




                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                      .4
.3




                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                      .3
.2




                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                             0
.1




                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                             -.5
0




                                                                      0
      1998   2000   2002    2004     2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012
                                   Year                                                                   Year                                                                   Year

                    Actual                   1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model
                    2007-09 model            2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model
                    1999-2012 model                                                       1999-2012 model                                                        1999-2012 model



                                   India                                                             Indonesia                                                                  Korea




                                                                      .6




                                                                                                                                             1
.6




                                                                      .4
.4




                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                      .2
.2




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                             0
0




                                                                      -.2
-.2




                                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                             -.5
      1998   2000   2002    2004     2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012
                                   Year                                                                   Year                                                                   Year

                    Actual                   1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model
                    2007-09 model            2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model
                    1999-2012 model                                                       1999-2012 model                                                        1999-2012 model



                               Malaysia                                                                  Mexico                                                           South Africa
.8




                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                                             .4
.6




                                                                      .4




                                                                                                                                             .3
.4




                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                             .2
.2




                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                             .1
0




                                                                      .1
-.2




                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                             0
      1998   2000   2002    2004     2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012         1998   2000   2002    2004      2006   2008    2010       2012
                                   Year                                                                   Year                                                                   Year

                    Actual                   1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model                              Actual                    1999-2006 model
                    2007-09 model            2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model                                2007-09 model             2010-12 model
                    1999-2012 model                                                       1999-2012 model                                                        1999-2012 model




                                                                                                         42
                                                           Figure 2-cont: Predictions with Different Estimation Models
                                                                              Thailand                                                                                Turkey




                                                                                                                            .2
                                       .6




                                                                                                                            .15
                                       .4




                                                                                                                            .1
                                       .2




                                                                                                                            .05
                                       0




                                                                                                                            0
                                       -.2




                                                                                                                            -.05
                                             1998     2000     2002      2004     2006        2008     2010      2012              1998     2000     2002      2004      2006         2008     2010      2012
                                                                                Year                                                                                   Year

                                                                Actual                         1999-2006 model                                        Actual                           1999-2006 model
                                                                2007-09 model                  2010-12 model                                          2007-09 model                    2010-12 model
                                                                1999-2012 model                                                                       1999-2012 model




                    ex-China Developing East Asia                                                                   Latin America                                                                 Emerging Market Economies




                                                                                  .4
.6




                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                                                         .25
                                                                                  .3
.4




                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                  .2
.2




                                                                                                                                                                         .15
                                                                                  .1
0




                                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                                                                         .05
-.2




                                                                                  0




      1998   2000   2002     2004     2006          2008     2010      2012            1998     2000     2002      2004     2006          2008     2010      2012              1998     2000     2002      2004     2006   2008    2010       2012
                                    Year                                                                                  Year                                                                                    Year

                     Actual                          1999-2006 model                                      Actual                           1999-2006 model                                        Actual                    1999-2006 model
                     2007-09 model                   2010-12 model                                        2007-09 model                    2010-12 model                                          2007-09 model             2010-12 model
                     1999-2012 model                                                                      1999-2012 model                                                                         1999-2012 model




                                                                                                                          43
                            Figure 3: Actual vs. Predicted Levels of IR Holding
                                  (a) Predictions based on the 1999-2006 model


            .8     .6
    Actual %IR, 2012




                                                                                           Thailand
                                                                                             Malaysia
        .4




                                                                                              China


                                                                                            Korea, Rep.
            .2




                                  Brazil
                               Mexico                                               India
                                South Africa Turkey                               Indonesia
                            Argentina
            0




                        0                .2                    .4             .6                        .8
                                                           Predicted IR, 2012


                                  (b) Predictions based on the 1999-2012 model
            .8     .6
    Actual %IR, 2012




                                                                             Thailand
                                                                                Malaysia
        .4




                                                                                China


                                                                             Korea, Rep.
            .2




                                        Brazil
                                                                     India
                               Turkey MexicoSouth Africa        Indonesia
                                    Argentina
            0




                        0                .2                    .4             .6                        .8
                                                           Predicted IR, 2012


Note: For clarity purposes, the observations with actual or predicted IR levels greater than 80% (of
GDP) are omitted from presentation.


                                                               44
                                                                           Figure 4: Over-hoarding and Exchange Rate Depreciation
                                                                          (a) 1999-2006 model                                                                                   (b) 2007-09 model
                                           Pred. errors vs. % Depreciation of exch. rate                                                                                 Pred. errors vs. % Depreciation of exch. rate

               .5




                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                 Venezuela
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                              .4
% depreciation of exch. rate




                                                                                                                                 % depreciation of exch. rate
                    .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                            Argentina                                                                                                    Argentina
            .2




                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                             Jamaica                                                                                                                Jamaica
                                                            Brazil                                                                                                               Brazil                        Indonesia
    .1




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                      Colombia                                                                                                                 Colombia
                                          Malaysia        Chile                                                                                                                  Chile                               Malaysia
                                         Philippines                       Singapore
                                                                             Hong Kong                                                                                                             Trinidad and Tobago Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hong  Kong
               0




                                                                                                                                                0
                                          ChinaThailand                                                                                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ChinaRep.
                                                        Mexico                                                                                                                           Mexico                          Korea,
               -.1




                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                  -.4     -.2        0         .2         .4      .6     .8     1   1.2       1.4     1.6                                          -.4   -.2         0        .2        .4      .6     .8          1   1.2   1.4   1.6
                                                                        Pred. errors, 2010-12                                                                                                         Pred. errors, 2010-12



                                                                        (c) 2010-12 model                                                                                  (d) 1999-2012 model
                                           Pred. errors vs. % Depreciation of exch. rate                                                                                 Pred. errors vs. % Depreciation of exch. rate
               .5




                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                                                                                          Venezuela
                             .4




                                                                                                                                                              .4
% depreciation of exch. rate




                                                                                                                                 % depreciation of exch. rate
                    .3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                            Argentina                                                                                                                                Argentina
            .2




                                                                                                                                             .2



                                                  Jamaica                                                                                                                          Jamaica
                                        Indonesia
                                           Brazil                                                                                                                        Indonesia Brazil
    .1




                                                                                                                                     .1




                                          Colombia                                                                                                                            Colombia
                                          Chile         Malaysia                                                                                                              Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                   Chile
                                                  Philippines                                             Singapore   Hong Ko                                                    Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                        Hong Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                            Trinidad
                                                                                                                                                                                               Kong and Tobago
               0




                                                                                                                                                0




                                                 China      Thailand                                                                                                          ChinaThailand
                                         MexicoKorea, Rep.                                                                                                               Korea, Rep.Mexico
               -.1




                                                                                                                                                -.1




                                  -.4     -.2        0         .2         .4      .6     .8     1   1.2       1.4     1.6                                          -.4   -.2         0        .2        .4      .6     .8          1   1.2   1.4   1.6
                                                                        Pred. errors, 2010-12                                                                                                         Pred. errors, 2010-12




                                                                                                                            45
