                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ON THE INTERACTION OF MEMORY AND PROCRASTINATION:
                        IMPLICATIONS FOR REMINDERS

                                     Keith M Marzilli Ericson

                                       Working Paper 20381
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20381


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2014




I thank Stefano DellaVigna, David Laibson, Ted O'Donoghue, Matthew Rabin, and seminar participants
at the Univeristy of California-Berkeley, Harvard University, and ESA-North America for helpful
comments. I thank the Williams College Tyng Committee and the National Science Foundation for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Keith M Marzilli Ericson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
On the Interaction of Memory and Procrastination: Implications for Reminders
Keith M Marzilli Ericson
NBER Working Paper No. 20381
August 2014
JEL No. D03,D81,D86,D9

                                              ABSTRACT

I examine the interaction between present-bias and limited memory. Individuals in the model must
choose when and whether to complete a task, but may forget or procrastinate. Present-bias expands
the effect of memory: it induces delay and limits take-up of reminders. Cheap reminder technology
can bound the cost of limited memory for time-consistent individuals but not for present-biased individuals,
who procrastinate on setting up reminders. Moreover, while improving memory increases welfare
for time-consistent individuals, it may harm present-biased individuals because limited memory can
function as a commitment device. Thus, present-biased individuals may be better off with reminders
that are unanticipated. Finally, I show how to optimally time the delivery of reminders to present-biased
individuals.


Keith M Marzilli Ericson
Boston University School of Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kericson@bu.edu
1       Introduction

      People forget to follow through on plans they have made, despite the availability of
ubiquitous and inexpensive memory technologies, such as calendars, task lists, and reminder
services. Forgetting can have substantial impacts on productivity via missed deadline. For-
getting to take medication can even be life threatening, and even though reminder systems
can be e¤ective, adherence to medication remains low (McDonald, Garg, and Haynes 2002).
It is a puzzle that while individuals can set up their own reminders, small reminder inter-
ventions can have an economically signi…cant impact on behavior in a variety of domains,
including savings (Karlan, McConnell, Mullainathan and Zinman (2010) and loan repay-
ments (Cadena and Schoar 2011).1
      Understanding and optimally designing reminders is valuable in many di¤erent contexts.
Project managers and educators must determine when to remind their employees or students
about upcoming deadlines. Firms selling products with recurring purchases (e.g. health
insurance) or o¤ering retail promotions must determine when to remind customers about
an upcoming decision deadline. Adherence to medical treatment could be improved through
better use of reminders, and even small tasks of living (home and car maintenance, portfolio
rebalancing, etc.) could bene…t from improved reminder design.
      The design of reminders must take into account not just limited memory, but how
memory interacts with other psychological phenomena to produce behavior. Economists
examining how psychological phenomena a¤ect behavior often consider a bias or deviation
in isolation, a logical …rst step. Yet psychological phenomena may interact in complex ways,
o¤setting or magnifying each other. This paper examines the interaction between two major
components of decision making– present-bias and limited memory– and their implications
for reminders and deadlines. It shows that this interaction can have counter-intuitive e¤ects.
For instance, while reminders increase the probability an individual remembers about a task,
they also can increase the probability an individual procrastinates, and in the end, leave her
worse o¤.
      Behaviors that involve costs in the present but bene…t in the future are prevalent:
e.g. looking for a job, enrolling in a retirement plan, investing in a health behavior. The
way in which individuals attempt to complete these tasks depends heavily on whether they
are time-consistent or present-biased (O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999a, 1999b, 2001). Present-
biased individuals have a declining rate of time preference, overweighting the present relative
to the future and leading to preference-reversals (Laibson 1997).2 As a result of present-
    1
     See also appointment show-ups (Guy et al. 2012), appointment sign-ups (Altmann and Traxler 2012),
rebate claims (Letzler and Taso¤ 2013), and donations (Damgaard and Gravert 2014)
   2
     Both laboratory and …eld evidence indicate that individuals tend to make relatively impatient choices for


                                                      1
bias, individuals procrastinate3 in doing tasks. For instance, an individual may repeatedly
plan to act tomorrow rather than today, but when tomorrow arrives, she changes her plan.
Sophisticated individuals who recognize their present-bias will wish to bind their future
behavior via commitment devices. Yet evidence also suggests that individuals are at least
partially naive about their present bias, and fail to predict their future behavior (Ariely and
Wertenbroch 2002, DellaVigna and Malmendier 2006, Acland and Levy 2013).
     When action is delayed, memory is relevant. A growing literature on memory shows
that individuals not only have limited prospective memory4 –remembering to take an action–
but are also overcon…dent about their memory ability.5 For instance, Ericson (2011) elicits
incentivized forecasts of subjects’subjective probability of remembering to claim a delayed
payment, and …nds that while their choices imply at least a 75% probability of claim, they
only claim the payment about half the time. Similarly, Letzler and Taso¤ (2013) …nd that
individuals are overoptimistic about claiming rebates at a delay, claiming about 30% of the
time despite believing they would claim about 80% of the time. Reminders need to take
account that individuals may have biased beliefs about their memory.
     This paper shows that present-bias and memory interact in ways that have substantial
e¤ects on welfare and behavior.6 I examine individuals who are choosing whether and when
to complete a valuable task that entails immediate costs and delayed bene…ts. I extend the
framework of O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a, 1999b, 2001) to analyze how individuals with
both imperfect memory behavior and present-bias behave. I then use that framework to
consider the e¤ect of improving memory by providing reminders or changing the deadline
length.
     Present-bias expands the range of problems in which limited memory might have an
e¤ect on behavior and magni…es memory’s economic consequences in three ways. First, be-
cause present-bias induces delay, individuals have more of an opportunity to forget. Second,
decisions that involve immediate costs or bene…ts, but relatively more patient choices when choosing for the
future. Discount rates are high at short horizons, but lower discount rates at long horizons, found not only
for money (Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue 2002) but also for direct consumption experiences (e.g.
McClure et al. 2007 for juice, Read and van Leeuwen 1998 for food). Augenblick et al. (2013) show that
choices for real consumption display a larger present-bias than choices for money. Present-biased preferences
have been used to explain patterns of consumption (Laibson 1997, Angeletos et al. 2001) and default-taking
or status quo bias (e.g. Madrian and Shea 2001, Carroll et al. 2009).
   3
     I use "procrastination" to refer to any additional delay in action induced by present-bias.
   4
     Prospective memory is memory for action, and is distinct from retrospective memory (recalling infor-
mation about the past). See McDaniel and Einstein (2007) for a review.
   5
     This literature is closely connected to that on the salience of a decision (Gilbert and Gra¤ Zivin 2013)
or limited attention (Reis 2006, Taubinsky 2013).
   6
     In related work, Holman and Zaidi (2010) model the economic consequences of limited memory for time-
consistent individuals. They show that in the presence of limited memory, the probability of task completion
may decrease in the length of time allocated to it, and that overcon…dence in prospective memory can explain
the existence of free trials, automatic renewal o¤ers and rebates.


                                                     2
present-biased individuals can procrastinate on setting up a memory technology (e.g. lists,
calendars, and smartphones), as doing so entails immediate costs for future bene…ts. Con-
sistent with these theoretical predictions, Karlan et al. (2010) …nd that randomly assigned
reminders increase total savings and have a larger e¤ect on present-biased individuals. Fi-
nally, I show that sophisticated present-biased individuals may deliberately reject even free
reminders, using limited memory as a commitment mechanism to act.
     Biases that seem small may combine to yield larger e¤ects than a single bias alone.
Naiveté about present-bias and overcon…dence regarding memory ability both lead individu-
als to ine¢ ciently delay completing a task, as they do not recognize that failing to act today
may lead to procrastinating or forgetting next period. For a time consistent individual,
small amounts of overcon…dence regarding memory have no …rst-order welfare e¤ect, since
she was close to her optimum. Yet for even small amounts of present bias, small amounts
of overcon…dence regarding memory entail a …rst-order welfare loss, as the individual has a
pre-existing bias.7 The combination of these two biases can place a wedge between action
and welfare (as the individual herself would judge it), and is an example of a "psychological
factor leading to inaction" in the framework of Ericson (2014).
     Present-bias a¤ects the cost of limited memory and the design of reminder systems. The
cost of reminder systems bound the cost of limited memory to time-consistent individuals
with correct memory beliefs, though overcon…dence can lead to large welfare losses. How-
ever, if reminder systems themselves are costly enough to setup, naifs will not use them,
even if they ultimately forget a valuable task; sophisticates will only use them with some
probability less than 1. The timing of providing one-shot reminders (e.g. an email reminding
individuals about an upcoming deadline) is a¤ected by present-bias as well. The optimal
time to provide reminders to present-biased individuals can be much later than for time con-
sistent individuals: even once reminded about a task that had been forgotten, present-biased
individuals will procrastinate on completing the task and may forget again.
     This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the task completion model, and
Section 3 describes behavior and the e¤ect of memory in the simple case in which the cost
of completing the task is constant over time. Section 4 considers the more general case of
stochastic task completion costs. Section 5 considers an individual’s decision to invest in
reminder systems. Section 6 shows how to choose when to provide a one-shot reminder,
along with numerical simulations showing the di¤erence between present-biased and time
consistent individuals. Finally, Section 7 concludes.
   7
    For instance, Bernheim, Fradkin and Popov (2011) argues that present-bias alone cannot calibrationally
explain default-taking in retirement savings plans due to the large stakes involved; however, it is possible
present-bias and memory interacting could produce such behavior.



                                                     3
2       Model: Completing a Task

2.1      Setup

     Consider an individual choosing when to do a particular task that involves costs today
(e¤ort) but gives bene…ts in the future. This is a general set up that captures many econom-
ically relevant tasks: for instance, choosing to enrolling in a health insurance or retirement
plan, working on a research paper, or starting an exercise program. O’Donoghue and Rabin
(1999a, 1999b, 2001) use a similar framework to analyze the behavior of present-biased in-
dividuals. I adapt this framework to allow for the possibility of imperfect memory, nesting
the case of both perfect memory and no present-bias.
     Each period, the individual decides whether to do a task that can be done only once.
She can only determine her behavior this period, and cannot commit to future actions.8 If
the individual does the task in period t, she pays cost ct that period and receives bene…t y
in the next period.9 The cost of action is allowed to be stochastic, with draws each period
from a known time-invariant distribution F with associated density function f: I allow for
the possibility of a deadline: after T periods, the opportunity to do the task disappears.
When T = 1; there is no deadline.
     I model limited memory as an exponential decay in the probability the task will be
recalled (see Levy and Loftus 1984). Each period, an individual with imperfect memory
will forget about the task with some probability; If the individual forgets about the task,
they cannot act. If she remembers in one period, the probability she remembers in the next
period is : Thus, if the individual remembers about the task today, she will remember it
m periods from now with probability m : In this model, forgetting is an absorbing state:
once she forgets about the task, she does not remember again. This form of limited memory
accords with psychological evidence on memory (Mullainathan 2002, Holman and Zaidi
2010): once something is forgotten, it is much less likely to be remembered in the future.
Modeling forgetting as a fully absorbing state (as opposed to generalizing the model to allow a
positive probability of moving from a state of forgetting to remembering) is a simpli…cation
that makes analysis more tractable, akin to how the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model
is a simpli…cation of hyperbolic discounting. Moreover, my model of memory is distinct
from "slipping the mind", in which an individual forgets this period and does not act but
    8
     In some contexts, the use of commitment devices is possible, but here I consider either non-contractible
behaviors or an environment with transactions costs high enough to rule out commitment devices. Note
that in any case, individuals who are naive about their present-bias would not pay to take up commitment
devices.
   9
     The value of y may represent a one-time bene…t that is received tomorrow, or a ‡ow of bene…ts received
in the future, beginning tomorrow.



                                                     4
remembers next period. Slipping the mind is transitory and does not impact the probability
of remembering in future periods; it is easily accommodated in the distribution of task costs
F as some probability of drawing ct = 1:
      Present-bias is captured by quasi-hyperbolic discounting (Laibson 1997, O’Donoghue
                                                          P
and Rabin 1999) in which discounted utility is u0 + ( 1     m=1
                                                                  m
                                                                    um ) ; where ut is the ‡ow
utility in each period t. All future periods beyond the present period are discounted by
      1, in additional to the standard per period discount factor          1:When = 1, the
individual is time consistent (TC) and discounts the future exponentially, but when < 1
the individual has time inconsistent preferences.
      Because individuals may be present-biased and have incorrect beliefs, the choice of
welfare criterion must be explicit. I de…ne welfare the way an individual with present bias
and correct beliefs would judge their welfare a period before having the opportunity to do
the task. That is, welfare is ex ante welfare as judged from the perspective of = 1 by an
individual who has correct beliefs about their future behavior and memory. Hence, welfare
                     P1 t
is given by Ui =       t=0 ut . This de…nition is natural and is useful for evaluating how
individuals choose (or would like to choose) task environments; it is often used (Gruber and
Koszegi 2002, O’Donoghue and Rabin 2006, Heidhues and Koszegi 2010). However, it di¤ers
from other proposed welfare criteria for individuals with present bias (see e.g. Bernheim and
Rangel 2009).

2.2   Equilibrium Behavior for Sophisticates and Naifs

      An individual’s behavior today will depend on what she expects to do in the future,
about which she may have correct or incorrect beliefs. Speci…cally, let individuals believe
that they will act in the future as though they had present-bias parameter ^ : If ^ = the
individual correctly anticipates her future present bias, and I call her sophisticated. If ^ > ;
the individual believes she will not be as present-biased in the future as she is now. I analyze
  < ^ = 1 individuals, who display present-bias in the present period, but who think each
period that they will act like a time-consistent ( = 1) individual in the future. I always
assume individuals correctly perceive :
      I also allow for the possibility that individuals have incorrect beliefs about memory
ability: the individual believes her probability of remembering from period to period be
^       : When ^ = I call the individual and her beliefs "calibrated", and when ^ > ; I
call them "overcon…dent". This language allows a distinction between beliefs in this domain
and in the present-bias domain, where ^ = individuals are "sophisticated" and ^ >
individuals are "naive".
      To determine how individuals behave, I follow O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999a, 1999b,

                                               5
2001) and require that individuals follow perception-perfect strategies. Perception perfect
strategies require that each period’s behavior maximizes that period’s preferences given
beliefs about future strategies, and requires that beliefs be dynamically consistent. With
dynamically consistent beliefs, individuals think they will act optimally in the future, given
their beliefs about future preferences and strategies. The formal de…nition is given in the
appendix; here I describe the implications of perception-perfect strategies for the types in
the model. A strategy st is a plan of action for period t, and I restrict strategies to take two
forms: a strategy is a cuto¤ ct so that the individual who remembers acts if ct ct ; and a
probability of action 2 [0; 1] if c = ct . I further require that strategies be dependent only on
the state, not the history, a restriction that is only relevant for present-biased sophisticates;
it is intuitive and simpli…es the analysis substantially.10
      I examine three types of individuals (TC, N, and S), distinguished by their degree of
their present-bias and sophistication level:

                                   TC: Time Consistent ( = ^ = 1)
                                   N: Naif ( < ^ = 1)
                                   S: Sophisticated ( = ^ < 1)

     De…ne the current value function W in period t; for type i 2 fT C; N; Sg, given memory
beliefs ^ and anticipated future strategies S^t = s^tt+1 ; s^tt+2 ; ::: as:
                                                                                 !
                                                   X
                                                   1
                               Wit^ jS^t = ut +           ^m   m
                                                                   ut+m s^tt+m
                                                   m=1


where s^tt+m is the individual’s belief in period t about the strategy she will follow in period
t + m: Note that the individual only is able to implement the strategy in period t + m if she
remembers, which she anticipates happens with probability ^m ; if she forgets, she cannot
act and gets ut+m = 0: (However, once she acts, she gets the bene…t of the task next period
regardless of whether she would have remembered next period.) If an individual acts m
periods in the future, ut+m = y ct+m ; if the individual acts in the current period t, I
make a slight abuse of notation and write ut = y ct .
     A perception-perfect strategy for a time-consistent individual with beliefs ^ is that of
a standard optimizing individual: their maximize their expected utility WT^C , given per-
ceived memory ^ and given that they expect the maximize expected utility in each future
period. A time-consistent individual always predicts her behavior correctly, conditional on
remembering, but may mispredict her probability of remembering.
 10
      See the discussion in O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999b) for more detail, particularly footnotes 9 and 31.


                                                      6
     Naifs maximize their perceived expected utility WN^ , given their perceived memory
^; and given that they expect to act like a time-consistent individual in all future pe-
riods. Naifs therefore mispredict their behavior, conditional on remembering, and may
also mispredict their probability of remembering. Sophisticates recognize that they will
have present-bias in the future. They maximize WS^ and correctly perceive that each s 2
arg max WS^ jS^ ^ = ; ^ :


3   Simple Case: No Bene…t to Delay

     Before moving to the general model of stochastic task completion, I analyze behavior in
a context in which there is no bene…t to delaying completing the task: the cost of completing
the task is constant across all periods with ct = c for all t. This case captures environments
in which the e¤ort cost does not vary much over time. Comparing this case to that of a
stochastic cost of action (and hence potential bene…t to delay) illustrates how the e¤ect of
the interaction between imperfect memory and present bias depends on the bene…t to delay.
     The results for time-consistent individuals are simple: so long as ever acting is optimal
( y > c); they act immediately. When the task is a net gain, delaying this gain lowers
discounted utility: y c > ( y c) : Thus, memory and beliefs about memory have no
e¤ect on time-consistent individuals.
     For individuals with present bias, I make two assumptions. First, I assume that the task
is " worthwhile": it is worth doing eventually even for someone with present bias, requiring
that y > c: Thus they would rather act today than never; if this were not the case, then
a present-biased individual would never do the task. I also assume that the task has high
enough cost that procrastination is desirable for an individual who believes they have perfect
memory (^ = 1); this is a minimal requirement, as if procrastination is not desirable with
perfect memory it will not be with imperfect memory either. This assumption requires that
cost be high enough, relative to discount bene…ts: c > (1(1 )) ( y) ; and is satis…ed for all
c > 0 when = 1: Since is the exponential discount factor, near 1 is likely.

Assumption 1. The task is    worthwhile (         y > c) and procrastination is desirable with
perfect memory: c (1  ) > (1   ) y:

    Then, the following proposition describes the behavior of the various individuals:

Proposition 1. In the no-bene…t to delay case:

     Time consistent individuals act immediately.



                                              7
     A naif acts immediately if perceived memory is low enough ( ( yy cc) > ^): If the naif
     does not act immediately, they never act if there is no deadline; with a deadline, they
     procrastinate until the deadline and then act conditional on remembering.

     Sophisticates facing a deadline use a cyclical strategy, in which they plan to act at
     the deadline and every d + 1 periods before the deadline (conditional on remember-
     ing), where the maximum tolerable delay d is the lowest integer such that y c >
       ( ^)d +1 ( y c) : When the task has no deadline (T = 1), the sophisticate can either
     use a cyclical strategy acting every d + 1 periods or a mixed strategy. With the mixed
     strategy, she plans to act with probability ^ = 1c (1 y )c (1 ^ ^ ) each period she remembers.

     The naive agent believes she will act tomorrow (conditional on remembering) if she does
not act today, because she believes she will behave as a time consistent agent would in the
future. A naif would only act today if y c > ^ ( y c) ; as she discounts the future
by and believes she will only remember with probability ^: By assumption, the naif will
not act today when ^ = 1; always expecting to act the next day. If there is a deadline, the
naif will act in that period, if she remembers and hasn’t acted yet: in the deadline period,
she compares acting in that period versus not acting at all. Since the task is    worthwhile,
she will act. The probability she remembers in the deadline period is T :
     Individuals who are sophisticated about their present-bias act di¤erently from naifs or
time-consistent individuals. When memory is perfect ( = 1), the strategy "never do the
task" is not a perception perfect equilibrium: a sophisticate would act today if she knew she
would never act in the future, since the task is   worthwhile. Similarly the strategy "do the
task each period" is not a perception-perfect equilibrium, as the sophisticate would rather
delay to tomorrow than do it today (see O’Donoghue and Rabin 1999a). There are two types
of strategies a sophisticated agent can follow: cyclical strategies (with a maximum tolerable
delay of d periods, so act every d + 1 periods) or mixed strategies (act with probability
each period). I emphasize the mixed strategy results, since cyclical strategies are sensitive
to when the cycle is begun. (Mixed strategies are also the limit strategy for the stochastic
case described in the next section).
     Having established how individuals behavior, we can examine the e¤ects of memory:

Proposition 2. In the no-bene…t to delay case, the e¤ects of memory are as follows:

     Changing memory       or perceived memory ^ has no e¤ect on time-consistent individuals.

     Increasing memory without changing beliefs ^ raises the welfare of naifs (weakly) and
     sophisticates (strictly).


                                                8
      Raising ^ holding …xed weakly lowers the welfare of naifs and strictly lowers the
      welfare of sophisticates playing non-degenerate mixed strategies.

      Increasing memory while maintaining calibrated beliefs (^ = ) lowers the welfare
      of sophisticates playing non-degenerate mixed strategies by lowering ; but has an am-
      biguous e¤ect on naifs. Increasing memory raises welfare if the naif was originally
      procrastinating, but decreases welfare if doing so enables procrastination by a naif who
      originally acted at the start.

      Changing memory has important e¤ects on present-biased individuals, but not on time
consistent individuals in the no-bene…t to delay case, since time consistent individuals act
immediately. For present-biased individuals, increasing memory ability holding …xed beliefs
raises welfare: strategies don’t respond since they are based on beliefs, but individuals are
less likely to forget the task.
      Limited memory has a cost, but for individuals with self-control problems, awareness
of limited memory has a bene…t: it can act as a commitment device. Increasing perceived
memory ^ (i.e. adding overcon…dence) while holding …xed actual memory is always (weakly)
harmful to present-biased individuals, since doing so enables delay. For naifs, increasing ^
reduces the range of parameters for which they will act immediately. When ^ = 0; the
naif will act immediately, since if she were to delay, she would be sure to forget; imperfect
memory can therefore emulate the e¤ect of a deadline. For sophisticates, a higher ^ leads to
a lower probability of action without any compensating increased ability to remember.
      Increasing memory ability and beliefs together combines the bene…ts of increased mem-
ory with the costs of strategies that lead to delay. For naifs, the e¤ect is ambiguous. If the naif
was already procrastinating before memory was increased, they still procrastinate; as a result,
they on net bene…t from increased ability to remember. However, if = ^ was low enough
that the naif acted immediately, increasing and ^ can lead to delay, and lower welfare. For
the sophisticate, the net e¤ect on welfare is negative. The mixed strategy is chosen so that
                                                                                   P
an individual is indi¤erent between acting and not:          y c = ^ ( y c) 1        t=0
                                                                                           t
                                                                                             Pr(act
in t). This can be rearranged to give that the expected welfare for the sophisticate is
EUS = y ^ c ; decreasing in ^ . (Welfare under cyclical strategies depends on where the cycle
starts, but lowering ^ shortens the length of the cycle.)
      Memory technologies can modeled in a variety of ways. For instance, a one-time re-
minder will brings the task to mind if it has been forgotten; I consider these in Section
6. Here, consider "reminder systems": technologies that lower the probability of forgetting
each period, thereby raising : For instance, an individual may keep a to-do list (raising the
probability the task is remembered each period) but may also lose or cease paying attention

                                                9
to the list, leading to forgetting. A reminder system can be totally e¤ective (raising to 1)
or partially e¤ective. Anticipated reminder systems change beliefs ^ as well as actual mem-
ory, while unanticipated reminders hold ^ …xed. Propositions 1 and 2 imply the following
corollary.

Corollary 1. Suppose reminder systems are costless. When there is no bene…t of delay,
unanticipated reminder systems raise the welfare of a naif or sophisticate. Anticipated re-
minder systems have an ambiguous e¤ect on welfare: anticipated reminders lower the prob-
ability the naif will act immediately, but conditional on delay, they raise the probability the
task will be completed. For a sophisticate playing a mixed strategy, anticipated reminder
systems lower the probability of action each period and lower welfare; anticipated reminder
systems also increase the maximum tolerable delay d in cyclical strategies.

4        Task Completion With Stochastic Costs

4.1       Behavior

     In this section, I allow for the possibility of a bene…t to delaying action by letting the
cost of acting in each period be stochastic: the cost ct is drawn independently each period
from a distribution F that I assume is continuous, di¤erentiable and has positive density
throughout the range 0 to y. I restrict results here to the in…nite horizon (T = 1) case for
clarity, as individuals will have time varying strategies in the presence of a deadline.
     Strategies are cuto¤s ci such that below ci an individual of type i acts and above c the
individual does not act.11 This cuto¤ maximizes their current value function Wi^ (c), which
represents an individual’s preferences and perceived future strategy. The cuto¤ will depend
on the expected continuation value EVi^ (c) ; which in turn depends on distribution of c; the
expected future strategies of type i; and perceived memory ability ^. Given the recursive
structure of the task, we can de…ne the current value functions
                                                             (      and perceived continuation
                                                                   y c        if act
value functions. The current value function Wi^ (c) =                   ^                ; with
                                                                ^ EVS if do not act
values of = 1 for time consistent individuals and < 1 for naifs and sophisticates. The
cuto¤ strategies are then:

                                      cT C =        y       ^EVT^C
                                       cN =       cT C
                                        cS =            y    ^EVS^
    11
   I assume that there is no mass of probability at c ; so that it does not matter what an individual does
when c = c .

                                                   10
     Present-biased individuals’time inconsistent preferences result in their the current value
function di¤ering from the perceived continuation value function Vi^ . An individual’s contin-
uation value function discounts utils exponentially (since all these periods are in the future),
even if he is present-biased. It is a perceived continuation value function because it depends
on perceived memory ^, as well as perceived future strategies. Naifs believe they will follow
the time consistent strategy in the future, and so their perceived continuation value is the
same as that of the time consistent individual: VN^ (c) = VT^C (c) : Sophisticates correctly
recognize their future cuto¤s depend on and so correctly forecast their future action. The
perceived continuation value functions Vi^ for each type are then given as follows:
                                         n                      o
                      VT^C   (c) = max       y   c; ^   EVT^C
                       VN^ (c) = VT^C (c)
                                 8                              h                  i
                                 < y c if c                         y   ^   EVS^
                       VS^ (c) =                                h                  i
                                 : ^ V ^ (c) if c >                 y   ^ EVS^
                                         S


Recall that ex ante welfare is de…ned from the perspective of = 1: Only when = ^ and
^ = = 1 are the current value, continuation value, and welfare functions the same.
     Note that beliefs about memory only a¤ect welfare via strategies. Lemma 1 shows that
increasing perceived memory ^ makes all types more demanding regarding getting a low cost
draw in order to act. This is intuitive, as increasing perceived memory increases the perceived
continuation value. However, ^ has a subtle e¤ect on sophisticates, as they recognize that
increasing ^ will enable procrastination in the future, which is ine¢ cient. They trade o¤ this
induced procrastination with the actual bene…ts from action, and the net e¤ect of raising ^
on all types is still to decrease ci ; and therefore decrease the probability of action in a given
period (conditional on remembering and not having acted yet).
                                                                                       dci
Lemma 1. Time consistent, naive, and sophisticated individuals all have                d^
                                                                                             < 0 : increasing
perceived memory ability lowers action cuto¤s and enables delay.

4.2   Results

     Proposition 3 describes the e¤ects of increasing memory. Improving memory has am-
biguous e¤ects on the welfare of present-biased individuals if beliefs also adjust. For present-
biased individuals, there is a trade-o¤ that comes from raising both memory ability and
beliefs together. Improving memory itself has a welfare gain when there is a potential ben-
e…t of delay due to stochastic tasks costs: the individual is less likely to forget when she
waits. Yet when beliefs adjust, better memory also has a cost, because strategies adjust and

                                                 11
delay is more likely. (Improving memory while holding beliefs ^ …xed is unambiguously
good for welfare: if strategies do not respond, increasing simply raises the probability the
task is remembered and completed.) When an individual is already very likely to act im-
mediately (e.g. when ^ is near 0), increasing memory has a strategy response that leads to
additional delay, which is a welfare cost, but there is limited direct gain, since the individual
was not delaying often. Conversely, when is close to 1, they are near the optimum from a
welfare perspective, and so lose less from strategies adjusting; the gain from increasing the
probability of remembering to act dominates.

Proposition 3. Increasing memory while maintaining calibrated beliefs (^ = ) raises the
welfare of time consistent individuals, but has an ambiguous e¤ect on the welfare of naive and
sophisticated present-biased individuals. The e¤ect on present-biased individuals is negative
if the probability of action in a period F (ci ) is high enough and is positive if is close to
1. Increasing memory alone (holding beliefs constant) has a …rst order positive e¤ect on the
welfare of all types.

    These results about memory imply a corollary about reminder systems.

Corollary 2. Unanticipated reminder systems raise the welfare of all types. For all types,
anticipated reminder systems lower action cuto¤s and enable delay. Anticipated reminder
systems raise the welfare of time consistent individuals, but have an ambiguous e¤ect on
present-biased individuals.

    I now consider how biases interact. Small amounts of overcon…dence do not have a …rst
order welfare loss for time consistent individuals, even though they need not act immediately
and forget with positive probability. However, because of the e¤ects of procrastination, small
amounts of overcon…dence have a …rst order welfare loss for present-biased individuals. The
proposition below formalizes this:

Proposition 4. For time consistent individuals, adding small amounts of overcon…dence
(^ > ) about memory has no …rst order welfare e¤ect. For present-biased individuals, both
naive and sophisticated, adding small amounts of overcon…dence about memory leads to a
…rst order welfare loss.

     Overcon…dence about memory induces all types to delay more than would be optimal,
since they underestimate the costs of delay. Yet time consistent individuals are indi¤erent at
the margin cT C between acting and delaying (an application of the Envelope Theorem). For
present-biased individuals, the situation di¤ers. Although they too (in a given period) are
indi¤erent between acting and delaying at ci ; from a welfare perspective their action cuto¤

                                               12
is already suboptimal due to present bias. We can see that taking the derivative of welfare
with respect to ^; holding …xed and evaluating at ^ = ; we have

                   d                      1                                          dc
                      EUi j =                       [( y       ci )     ^EUi ]f (ci ) i
                   d^         1         [1 F (ci )] |             {z       }         d^
                                                      Non-zero with present bias


From the de…nition of ci for present-biased individuals, ( y ci ) > ^EUi . Overcon…dence
therefore has a …rst order welfare loss when < 1; even for small amounts of present bias,
because there is a preexisting distortion in the individual’s choice of action.


5        Investing in Reminder Systems: "Writing it Down"

      Individuals have the ability to manipulate their memory ability through the use of
memory technologies, which include calendars, lists, reminder services, and others. Since
there are many apparently cheap calendar technologies, it is a puzzle that limited memory
still a¤ects economic outcomes (Ericson 2011; Karlan, et al. 2010). This section considers
whether individuals will invest in using a memory technology. Three factors combine to
lead individuals to fail to use memory technologies. First, they simply may be overcon…dent
about their memory ability, leading them not to invest in memory technologies. Second,
present-biased individuals may procrastinate in setting up memory technologies, since they
involve costs today but bene…ts in the future. Third, sophisticated present-biased individuals
may optimally reject memory technologies, in order to commit themselves to act sooner.
      I consider a simple and stark reminder system: "writing it down". Writing it down
entails a cost of w today, which in turn guarantees perfect memory ( = ^ = 1) in all future
periods. As in Section 4, the individual chooses whether to act each period based on their
draw of the task cost ct . However, the individual also has another option each period: if she
does not act, she has the choice of whether to "write it down". The timeline is as follows:
within each period, the individual chooses …rst whether to act or not and then chooses
between writing or not-writing. A strategy is then si = fci ; ! i g where ci is the cuto¤ for
acting and ! i 2 [0; 1] is the probability that the individual will write in a given period if
she does not act. I continue to require that individuals of each type play perception perfect
strategies, including the decision of whether to write.
      First, consider a time consistent agent with correct memory beliefs. She will write
immediately or not all,12 and will write whenever it is optimal from a welfare perspective.
Hence, for such an agent, the welfare loss of limited memory is bounded by the cost of
    12
    Writing immediately results from the assumption that the cost of writing is constant. This is likely to
be roughly true, but some delay in writing could result if the cost of writing ‡uctuated substantially.


                                                    13
memory aids (cf. Holman and Zaidi 2010).

Proposition 5. The welfare loss to a time consistent individual with correct memory beliefs
(^ = ) is limited by the cost w of writing. She will write if w < wT C where wT C
 EVT1C ^ EVT^C : If she ever writes, she will write immediately.

      Since a time-consistent individual with correct beliefs will write down if it is optimal to
do so, it is never bene…cial to force them to write, or to subsidize reminder systems. Since
the welfare loss is limited by the cost of memory aids, limited memory should not play an
important role for calibrated, time-consistent individuals. Yet if individuals are overcon…dent
about their memory ability, they will underinvest in memory technology. The cost of limited
memory in the presence of overcon…dence is bounded only by the bene…t of doing the task.
In the limit, a person may think he has perfect memory, and so choose never to write. He
may in fact be certain to forget, and thereby forego the bene…t of the task (see also Ericson
2011, Holman and Zaidi 2010).
      A number of factors combine to reduce present-biased individuals’use of memory tech-
nologies. First, note that writing things down may not be optimal for a present-biased
individual. Recall the previous propositions show that improving memory may reduce the
welfare of a present-biased individual. In such cases, individuals who are sophisticated about
their present-biased preferences would not pay to improve their memory and might welcome
lower memory as a commitment device. (However, naifs might still invest in improving their
memory, not realizing that doing so will make them worse o¤.)
      Even when improving memory does improve their welfare, present-biased individuals still
will not write down often enough from an ex ante perspective: using the memory technology
is a costly e¤ort task with bene…ts in the future but costs today, and hence subject to the
same procrastination problems as other tasks. For some costs of writing, present bias will
lead sophisticates and naifs never to write when they would have chosen to commit to write
tomorrow; in other cases, naifs may plan to write tomorrow but never do so, and sophisticates
will delay writing, playing a mixed strategy and writing with some probability each period.13
      Consider just the …rst e¤ect by removing the ability to procrastinate on writing it down:
let individuals have a one-shot option to write it down, after which the opportunity to write
disappears. With a one-shot opportunity, an individual will write if EVi1                EVi >
 1
   w, while from a welfare perspective it is optimal for sophisticates to write whenever
  EVS1      EVS > w: Thus, in the one-shot option, sophisticates will write so long as the
    discounted bene…t of the project with perfect memory exceeds that of the project with
imperfect memory by more than the cost of writing. (Naifs should optimally write when
 13
      The individual may also play a cyclical strategy. I focus on the mixed strategies only.


                                                      14
 EUN1      EUN > w: Their perceived continuation values are not equal to their welfare, as
they misperceive their future strategies.)
    The more striking results come when individuals can procrastinate on writing it down.
Then, naifs will never write if the cost of writing is more than the cost of going one period with
imperfect memory–because they misperceive their future actions and plan to act tomorrow.

Proposition 6. Naifs will plan to write tomorrow whenever a time consistent agent would
write. When wT C < w < wT C ; a naif will never write it down, but always plan to do so the
next day. If w < wT C ; then a naif will write it down today.

     The naif compares writing down today, and thereby remembering tomorrow for sure
(getting EVN1 w) with not writing today, and potentially forgetting before tomorrow.
Hence, whenever w > wL ; the individual will not write today, where

                     wL =       EVN1      EVN (plan to write tomorrow)

It is easily seen that wL decreases in ; since for a naif, the perceived continuation values
do not depend on : From Proposition 3, we see that increasing memory can lower welfare;
a naif may write it down when doing so lowers their welfare. Moreover, the cost of limited
memory is not bounded by the cost of memory aids for naifs, since they may never use a
memory aid even if they plan to.
     Sophisticates’strategies for writing are similar to those for completing the task in Propo-
sition 1, and follow the same intuition. Sophisticates may not want to write (since they
recognize it could reduce their welfare). Suppose they do want to write. As approaches 1,
the sophisticates will write immediately, since they will act like a time consistent individual.
But when is low enough, the sophisticate will not write. Thus, as for a naif, the sophisti-
cate may want to use a memory aid, but because they do not do so immediately, they may
forget before they write or complete the task.

Proposition 7. Suppose sophisticates would like to commit to write tomorrow: There is a
range of costs of writing such that either 1) sophisticates will play a mixed strategy in which
they will write with some probability w each period or 2) sophisticates will play a cyclical
strategy in which they write every dw periods.

     Hence, this model in which individuals can write things down at an e¤ort cost w is akin
to overlaying one procrastination problem (the "no bene…t to delay case", for the choice of
whether to write) on top of a stochastic cost task completion problem.



                                               15
6        One-Shot Reminders Before a Deadline

     How should one-shot reminders be designed so that they are most e¤ective? For time-
consistent, calibrated individuals, it is always optimal to tell them in advance that a reminder
will be provided. With these anticipated reminders, strategies will adjust appropriately: a
future reminder will bring the task back to mind, and enable optimal delay if early cost-
draws are high. However, for present-biased individuals, ancitipated reminders may actually
lower their welfare by enabling procrastination; Propositions 2 and 3 showed that increasing
memory may lower welfare.
     Unanticipated reminders, however, can only increase welfare–they hold perceived mem-
ory ^ constant while increasing actual memory : Here, I consider when to provide an unan-
ticipated reminder. The optimal time to provide a reminder trades o¤ two e¤ects. First, the
probability the reminder will be useful increases as time goes on, since the individual is more
likely to forget. Second, the value of the reminder (conditional on it being useful) depends
on the number of periods until the deadline. If the reminder comes too close to the deadline,
the individual may not have time to act after being reminded (i.e. if they are unlucky and
get a high task cost draw); if the reminder comes too early, the individual may delay action
(due to procrastination or memory overcon…dence) and forget before acting.
     A time-consistent individual’s welfare always increases in the length to the deadline, but
this is not true if individuals are present-biased or have incorrect beliefs.14 De…ne = T t
to be the number of periods until the deadline. I write EU ;i to be the expected utility
(welfare) of getting the task with periods before the deadline. We have for each type i:
                                 Z   ci;T
                  EU    ;i   =              ( y   c) dF (c) + 1   F ci;T        EU    1;i
                                 0


Figure 1, Panel C shows a combination of parameters for which a shorter deadline increases
the welfare of the naif: with a long deadline, the naif ine¢ ciently delays, which leads to
forgetting. Of course, for the calibrated time-consistent individual, longer deadlines are
better, and the net value of the task decreases as the deadline approaches.
     Reminders are only potentially useful15 when the individual has forgotten and not yet
acted. The value of the reminder in this case is the value of being given the task with a
deadline periods from now: EU ;i : Then, the discounted expected value of a reminder with
    14
     Empirically, Shu and Gneezy (2010) …nd that longer deadlines for redeeming a gift certi…cate lowered
redemption probability; however, a lower redemption probability need not imply lower welfare.
  15
     I think of the reminder as being "potentially useful" even if the individual does not act after having
received the reminder. The usefulness comes from moving the individual from a state of forgetting to a state
of remembering.



                                                        16
  periods remaining in the task (and t periods into the task) is:

                                                                  (T t)         j 1
                                                                  X             Y
                                      t                                   j 1
                   V aluei ( ; t) =       EU   ;i   (1        )                       (1   F (ck ))
                                                                  j=1           k=0

The value of getting a potentially useful reminder EU ;i may not monotonically decline in
(unless the individual is calibrated and time-consistent). However, the probability a reminder
is potentially useful (which comprises the remaining terms in the equation above) increases
as time passes, and can be recursively de…ned:
     Pr (usef ult ) = Pr (usef ult 1 ) + (1     ) 1 F ct 1 Pr(Remembert 1 and did not act
beforet 1 )
     A reminder is always potentially useful if it was potentially useful in the previous period:
in these cases, you have forgotten, implying you would not be able to act. The increase in
probability of the reminder being useful comes from the state of the world in which you do
not act but do forget: this occurs (1       ) [1 F (ct 1 )] of the time that you had been in state
of remembering but not acting: raised to a power times the product of all the previous
probabilities you hadn’t acted.
     Below, Figure 1, top panel, plots how the value of one-shot reminders varies by when
they are given. The task considered has a deadline in period T = 15: For a time consistent
individual, a reminder is most valuable in period 4, but does not vary that much over time.
This individual is very likely to act early (their probability of acting in the …rst period is
about 74%), and so if they have not acted by period 4 it is likely they have forgotten, in
which case it is valuable to give them a reminder quickly so that they can act without further
delay.
     In contrast, the best time to give a reminder to a presented-biased naif (for this set of
parameters) is in the very last period. The naif has a low probability of acting early on
(only 19% in the …rst period), so even though the reminder is potentially useful because
they may have forgotten (Figure 1, middle panel), it will not actually be used because the
naif continues to procrastinate. The high value of the reminder in the …nal period then
comes from the fact that the naif is better o¤ having a short deadline, without the ability
to procrastinate and forget: it is better to get the task with a short deadline than a long
deadline (Figure 1, bottom panel). By contrast, the value of the task to a time consistent
individual increases as the deadline lengthens, driving the result that their reminder should
be early.




                                                         17
                                                     Value of Reminder Given in Period t
                   Reminder Expected Valuei
                     0   .05    .1   .15




                                              0              5                        10          15
                                                                      Period t


                                                     Probability Forgotten and Not Acted
                                .3
                   Pr(Useful)
                    .1   .2     0




                                              0              5                        10          15
                                                                      Period t


                                              Value of Getting Task withτ Periods Until Deadline
                               .5
                   Expected Uτ,i
                   .4  .45




                                              15             10                        5          0
                                                              τ Periods Until Deadline

                                                             Time Consistent               Naif




Figure 1: One Shot Reminders, with and without Present-Bias. Assumes reminder is unan-
ticipated, ^ = = 0:9; = 0:8; = 0:99; y = 1; c is uniformly distributed between 0.4 and
0.6, and deadline T = 15:




                                                                     18
7   Conclusion

     Psychology paints a rich picture of individual decision making. Memory and present
bias interact in ways that are interesting, welfare relevant, and a¤ect reminder design. Con-
sidering a single phenomenon in isolation may be misleading— for instance, overcon…dence
regarding memory ability as a larger e¤ect on the welfare of a present-biased individual than
a time-consistent individual. Yet it is also the case that the limitations of memory may help
present-biased individuals in some situations. Researchers calibrating models of present bias
or making inferences about naiveté or sophistication should take into account the e¤ects
limited memory may have on individuals’behavior. Limited memory also has implications
for other aspects of task design, such as deadlines. When calibrating a model for an optimal
deadline, the both memory and present-bias should be considered.
     An individual’s memory ability is endogenous to her decision to invest in memory tech-
nologies. This paper has shown that present-biased individuals–especially naifs–will invest
less in reminders and procrastinate in setting up memory devices, suggesting that present-
biased individuals will have lower rates of e¤ective memory ability.
     The way to deliver a reminder depends on whether an individual is present-biased.
Time-consistent individuals should be given anticipated reminders so that they can opti-
mally respond. For present-biased individuals, anticipated reminders can lower welfare but
unanticipated reminders are always bene…cial. This paper also showed that the timing of
reminder delivery also depends on the degree of present bias.


REFERENCES

Acland, Daniel and Matthew Levy. 2013. "Naivete, Projection Bias, and Habit Formation
in Gym Attendance." SSRN Working Paper.

Altmann, S. and C. Traxler. 2012. "Nudges at the Dentist." IZA Discussion Paper 6699.

Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, Jeremy Tobacman, and Stephen
Weinberg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model: Calibration, Simulation, and Em-
pirical Evaluation.”The Journal of Economic Perspectives 15:47-68.

Ariely D, Wertenbroch K. 2002. "Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: Self-Control
by Precommitment." Psychological Science, 13, 219–224.

Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, Charles Sprenger. 2013. "Working Over Time: Dynamic
Inconsistency in Real E¤ort Tasks". NBER Working Paper 18734.


                                             19
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel. 2009. "Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-
Theoretic Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics," Quarterly Journal of Economics
124:51-104.

Bernheim, Douglas, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov. 2011. "The Welfare Economics of
Default Options: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis of 401(K) Plans." NBER Working
Paper No. 17587.

Cadena, Ximena and Antionette Schoar. 2011. "Remembering to Pay? Reminders vs. Fi-
nancial Incentives for Loan Payments". NBER Working Paper 17020.

Carroll, Gabriel, James Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
"Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124,1639-1674.

Damgaard, Mette and Christina Gravert. 2014. "Now or Never! The E¤ect of Deadlines on
Charitable Giving: Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment." Aarhus University Working
Paper.

Della Vigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2006. “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”Amer-
ican Economic Review 96:694-719.

Ericson, Keith M. 2011. "Forgetting We Forget: Overcon…dence and Memory." Journal of
the European Economic Association, 9(1):43-60.

Ericson, Keith M. 2014. "When Consumers Do Not Make an Active Decision: Dynamic
Default Rules and their Equilibrium E¤ects." NBER Working Paper 20127.

Frederick, Shane, George Loewenstein and Ted O’Donoghue. 2002. "Time Discounting and
Time Preference: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature, 40: 351-401.

Gilbert, Ben and Joshua Gra¤ Zivin. 2013. "Dynamic Salience with Intermittent Billing:
Evidence from Smart Electricity Meters." NBER Working Paper 19510.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi. 2004. “Tax Incidence when Individuals are Time-
Inconsistent: The Case of Cigarette Excise Taxes.”Journal of Public Economics, 88(9–10):
1959–87.

Guy, R. Hocking J, Wand H, Stott S, Ali H, and Kaldor J. 2012. "How e¤ective are short
message service reminders at increasing clinic attendance? A meta-analysis and systematic
review." Health Services Research 47(2): 614-32.



                                           20
Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi. 2010. "Exploiting Naïvete about Self-Control in the
Credit Market" American Economic Review 100:2279-2303.

Holman, J. and F. Zaidi. "The Economics of Prospective Memory." Working Paper.

Karlan, Dean, Margaret McConnell, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010.
"Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Saving." NBER Working Paper No.
16205.

Kirby, Kris N. 1997. “Bidding on the future: Evidence against normative discounting of
delayed rewards.”Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 126:54-70.

Laibson, David. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, May 1997, 112 (2) 443-477.

Letzler, Robert and Joshua Taso¤. 2013. "Everyone Believes in Redemption: Nudges and
Overoptimism in Costly Task Completion." SSRN Working Paper.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
Participation and Savings Behavior.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116:1149-1187.

McClure, S., Ericson, K., Laibson, D., Loewenstein, G., and Cohen, J. 2007. "Time dis-
counting for primary rewards," Journal of Neuroscience, 27:5796-804.

McDaniel, Mark and Gilles Einstein. 2007. Prospective Memory: An Overview and Synthesis
of an Emerging Field. Sage Publications.

McDonald, Heather, Amit Garg and R. Haynes. 2002. "Interventions to Enhance Patient Ad-
herence to Medication Prescriptions." Journal of the American Medical Association 288(22):
2868-2879.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 1999a. "Doing it Now or Later," American Economic
Review, 89(1), pp. 103-124.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999b. “Incentives For Procrastinators.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114:769-816.

O’Donoghue , Ted and Matthew Rabin. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination," Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 121-160.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “Optimal Sin Taxes.”Journal of Public Eco-
nomics, 90(10-11): 1825–49

                                            21
Read, Daniel and Barbara van Leeuwen. 1998. "Predicting Hunger: The E¤ects of Appetite
and Delay on Choice." Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 76(2):189–
205.

Reis, Ricardo. 2006. "Inattentive Consumers". Journal of Monetary Economics, 53 (8), 1761-
1800

Shu, Suzanne and Ayelet Gneezy. 2010. "Procrastination of Enjoyable Experiences." Journal
of Marketing Research, 47(5): 933-944.

Taubinsky, Dmitry. 2013. "From Intentions to Actions: A Model and Experimental Evidence
of Inattentive Choice", Working Paper.




                                           22
      Supplementary Material for "On the Interaction of
        Memory and Procrastination: Implications for
                      Reminders"
                                     Keith M Marzilli Ericson


A.I    Proofs of Propositions in the Text

Proposition 1. In the no-bene…t to delay case:

       Time consistent individuals act immediately.

       A naif acts immediately if perceived memory is low enough ( ( yy cc) > ^): If the naif
       does not act immediately, they never act if there is no deadline; with a deadline, they
       procrastinate until the deadline and then act conditional on remembering.

       Sophisticates facing a deadline use a cyclical strategy, in which they plan to act at
       the deadline and every d + 1 periods before the deadline (conditional on remember-
       ing), where the maximum tolerable delay d is the lowest integer such that y c >
         ( ^)d +1 ( y c) : When the task has no deadline (T = 1), the sophisticate can either
       use a cyclical strategy acting every d + 1 periods or a mixed strategy. With the mixed
       strategy, she plans to act with probability ^ = 1c (1 y )c (1 ^ ^ ) each period she remembers.

Proof. Time consistent individuals act immediately since y c > ^ ( y c) > 0:
     The naif believes she will act tomorrow (conditional on remembering), and so compares
acting today and getting with waiting, and acts if

                                         y   c>^      ( y    c)

If this condition does not hold, the naif plans to act next period if she remembers. But next
period, she faces the same decision and chooses to delay again each period until the deadline.
At the deadline, if she remembers, she will act, since y c > 0 by the              worthwhile
assumption.
     For the sophisticate, neither "act today" nor "never act" are equilibrium strategies. The
sophisticate prefers acting today to never if y c > 0; which is true by assumption. The
sophisticate prefers acting tomorrow to acting today if ( y c) < ^ ( y c) ; which is
always true (by assumption) when ^ = 1:
     For mixed strategies with T = 1, the agent acts with probability each period, con-
ditional on remembering. The probability of action is chosen so that the agent is indi¤erent

                                                A.1
between acting today or waiting, so           is de…ned by:

             y   c =      [( y   c)]       ^ + ( ^)2 (1           ) + ( ^)3 (1   )2   + :::
                                             (1                     )
                                              X
                    =     (^ ) ( y       c)       [ ^ (1           )]t
                                                   t=0

                    =     (^ ) ( y       c)
                                              1     ^ (1     )

Giving = 1c (1 y )c (1 ^ ^ ) : Note that decreases in ^;as dd^ = 1c (1 y )c 1
                                                                            ^2
                                                                               < 0:
     Now, consider the sophisticate’s other type of strategy, a cyclical strategy. In this
strategy, the agent acts every d + 1 periods, where d is the lowest integer such that

                                     y        c>     ( )d   +1
                                                                 [ v     c]

Hence, when d = 2;the individual plans to act in period x, period x + 3, period x + 6,
etc., tolerating a maximal delay of 2 periods in between each action. Increasing memory
increases d : When there is a deadline, the sophisticate knows she will act in the last period.
She therefore acts every d periods beforehand.

Proposition 2. In the no-bene…t to delay case, the e¤ects of memory are as follows:

     Changing memory       or perceived memory ^ has no e¤ect on time-consistent individuals.

     Increasing memory without changing beliefs ^ raises the welfare of naifs (weakly) and
     sophisticates (strictly).

     Raising ^ holding …xed weakly lowers the welfare of naifs and strictly lowers the
     welfare of sophisticates playing non-degenerate mixed strategies.

     Increasing memory while maintaining calibrated beliefs (^ = ) lowers the welfare
     of sophisticates playing non-degenerate mixed strategies by lowering ; but has an am-
     biguous e¤ect on naifs. Increasing memory raises welfare if the naif was originally
     procrastinating, but decreases welfare if doing so enables procrastination by a naif who
     originally acted at the start.

Proof. Time consistent individuals act immediately in this case, so memory is irrelevant.
     If the naif acts immediately, her welfare is y c;while if she delays, her welfare is
 T T
      ( y c) ; so acting immediately is optimal. Holding beliefs …xed, the naif’s strategy
will not change. Hence, increasing holding ^ constant has no e¤ect if the agent was going to
act immediately, and increases welfare if she procrastinated until the deadline by increasing

                                                     A.2
the probability she remembers at that point. Increasing ^ either has no e¤ect, or leads the
naif to delay action, thereby lowering welfare.
     For the naif, increasing memory while maintaining calibrated beliefs (^ = ) has one
of two e¤ects on welfare. By increasing ^, the agent may choose to delay instead of acting
immediately, lowering welfare. But if the agent was going to delay originally, increasing
raises the probability she will remember, increasing welfare.
     For the sophisticate, de…ne at as the (unconditional) probability the agent acts in t:

                           t            t
                at =   ^       (1     ^)    =     ^   Pr(remember) Pr (not acted yetjremember)

                                           t
and analogously, let a^t = ^ ^t (1      ^ ) be the perceived probability the agent acts in period
                                                                P
t: The ex ante welfare of the sophisticate EUS = ( y c) t=0 t at :Note that at depends on
both (and hence perceived memory) but also on actual memory : Holding beliefs …xed,
increasing increases the probability of remembering each period, raising welfare.
     Imposing ^ = so beliefs always stay calibrated, we have at = a             ^t ;and EUS = y c
                                                 P
since is de…ned by y c = ^ ( y c) 1                t=0 a
                                                        t
                                                          ^t :Then it is easy to see that increasing
memory leads to lower welfare when beliefs remain calibrated, as dEU          d
                                                                                 S
                                                                                     < 0: This results
because while increasing from the lower probability of action ( decreases in ^). Note that
increasing ^ holding …xed decreases ; and dEU       d
                                                      S
                                                        > 0; so increasing overcon…dence lowers
welfare.
     Finally, for cyclical strategies, welfare results are sensitive to where the cycle starts.
                                                                                             dci
Lemma 2. Time consistent, naive, and sophisticated individuals all have                      d^
                                                                                                   < 0 : increasing
perceived memory ability lowers action cuto¤s and enables delay.

Proof. For time-consistent individuals, note

                                    dcT C                                   d
                                          =           EVT^C (c+1 )     ^       EVT^C < 0
                                     d^                                     d^
                                            dcN         dcT C
as   d
     d^
        EVT^C   > 0: For naifs, then         d^
                                                  =      d^
                                                                < 0: For sophisticates, we have

                                    dcs                                     d
(A1)                                    =             EVS^ (c+1 )       ^      EVS^ (c+1 )
                                    d^                                      d^

Now, we need to examine the second term, as it is not yet guaranteed that d^           d
                                                                                         EVS^ > 0: Recall
         R c
EVS^ = 0 ( y c) dF (c) + (1 F (c )) ^EVS^ ; so taking the derivative and rearranging
                [( y c ) ^EVS^ ]f (c ) dcd^ +(1 F (c )) EVS^
      d
gives d^ EVS^ =            [1 (1 F (c )) ^]
                                                             : Substituting back into the equation above



                                                                A.3
gives
                                         h                                     i
dcs                                          ( y       c)             ^EVS^ (c) f (c ) dc
                                                                                       d^
                                                                                          + (1   F (c )) EVS^ (c)
        =             EVS            ^
d^                                                                        [1 (1 F (c )) ^]
                  2             h                                          i      3
dcs                                 ( y           c)            ^EVS^  (c) f (c )          1 F (c )
        =         41 +      ^                                                     5 1+^                             EVS (c+1 )
d^                                           [1    (1            F (c )) ^]             1 (1 F (c )) ^

            dcs
and so      d^
                  < 0; since ( y              c)            ^EVS^ (c) > 0 by the de…nition of c :

Proposition 3. Suppose individuals originally held calibrated beliefs about memory (^ = <
1): Then introduce overcon…dence by holding …xed but increasing ^: For time consistent
individuals, introducing overcon…dence about memory has no …rst order welfare e¤ect. For
present-biased individuals, both naive and sophisticated, introducing overcon…dence about
memory leads to a …rst order welfare loss.

Proof. For each type i; we have welfare recursively de…ned:


                                                   Z       ci
                                EUi =                           ( y    c) dF (c) + [1 F (ci )] EUi
                                                       0
                                                                                Z ci
                                                                     1
                                EUi =                                                ( y c) dF (c)
                                                       1           [1 F (ci )] 0

      Then,
                       d                                          1                                         dci
                          EUi j =                                           [( y    ci )   ^EUi ] f (ci )
                       d^         1                             [1 F (ci )]                                 d^
Note that by the envelope theorem, [( y cT C )        ^EUT C ] = 0;and thus, time-consistent
                                                                      d
individuals do not have a …rst-order welfare loss from changes in ^ : d^ EUT C j = 0: However,
for a naive individual, [( y cN )      EUN ] > 0 since by the de…nition of cN ; cN = y
                                                                                  dc
^ EVT C . We have cN > cN ; and EUN < EVT^C = EUT C : From Lemma 1, d^N < 0 ;and
        ^             1

      d
thus d^ EUi j < 0:
     For sophisticates, we have [( y cS )       EUS ] > 0: Recall, that when beliefs are cor-
rect, sophisticates have EUS = EVS ; and note that by the de…nition of cS ; we have again
                                                                                     dc
0 =      y 1 cS      ^ EVS^ : The interior is positive, and Lemma 1 indicates d^S < 0;so
d
d^
   EUS   (c) j < 0:

Proposition 4. Suppose individuals have calibrated beliefs (^ = ): Improving memory while
maintaining accurate beliefs raises the welfare of time consistent individuals. Doing so has an


                                                                           A.4
ambiguous e¤ect on the welfare of present-biased individuals, both naive and sophisticated:
the e¤ect is negative if the probability of action in a period F (ci ) is high enough and is
positive if is close to 1. Increasing memory alone (holding beliefs constant) has a …rst
order positive e¤ect on the welfare of all types.

Proof. First, take the time-consistent agent and see that
                       Z   cT C
d                d                                        d
   EUT C j^=   =                  ( y     c) dF (c) +        [1       F (cT C )]   EUT C
d^               d^    0                                  d^
                                  1                                                             dcT C
               =                                   [( y      cT C )      ^EUT C ] f (cT C )           + [1         F (cT C )] EUT C
                   1        [1        F (cT C )]                                                 d^

Note that at the margin, the individual is indi¤erent between continuing and acting, so
( y cT C ) = ^EVT C (c) and EVT C (c) = EUT C ; we have

                       d                             1      F (cT C )
(A2)                      EUT C j^= =                                   EUT C > 0
                       d^             1                   [1 F (cT C )]

                                                                                          [1    F (cT C )]
which has a …rst order positive e¤ect. Also note that dd EUT C j^ =                                              EUT C > 0;
                                                                                      1        [1   F (cT C )]
so increasing memory holding beliefs constant increases welfare.
     Now, take a naive present-biased agent. Then

 d                          1                                                 dcN
    EUN j^= =                                [( y     cN )            EUN ]       f (cN ) + [1            F (cN )] EUN
 d^           1        [1         F (cN )]                                     d^

From the previous proposition, we know the …rst term in the brackets is negative. The
second is positive. As F (cN ) ! 1; the negative term dominates, and increasing memory
reduces welfare. But as lim !1 [( y cN )       EUN ] = 0; the positive term dominates.
    Finally, holding beliefs constant and increasing memory improves welfare, as

                                  d            [1            F (cN )] EUN
                                    EUN j^ =                              > 0:
                                  d          1               [1 F (cN )]

    The same logic applies for the sophisticated present-biased agent.

Proposition 5. The welfare loss to a time consistent agent with ^ = is limited by the cost
w of writing. She will write if w < wT C where wT C   EVT1C ^ EVT^C : If she ever writes,
she will write immediately.




                                                          A.5
Proof. The agent’s cuto¤ strategy will depend on whether it is optimal to write

                                                                1
                                     If write          y     EVt+1  w
                       c (!) =
                                     If not write      y      EVt+1
                                =    y     max      EVT1C     w ;   EVT C

It is immediately apparent that if it is ever optimal to write, it is optimal to write immediately
(or act immediately): ( EVT1C w) > ^EVT C is necessary and su¢ cient for both.

Proposition 6. Naifs will plan to write tomorrow whenever a time consistent agent would
write. When wT C < w < wT C ; a naif will never write it down, but always plan to do so the
next day. If w < wT C ; then a naif will write it down today.

Proof. A naif plans to act like a time-consistent individual in the future, so plans to write
tomorrow (conditional on not acting tomorrow) so long as ( EVT1C w) > ^EVT C . Assume
this is the case, so that w < wT C : Now, suppose the naif does not act this period. Her
condition for writing is then:

                                       EVT1C     w>        ^EVT C

and so wN =        EVT1C    ^ EVT^C = wT C

Proposition 7. Suppose sophisticates would like to commit to write tomorrow: There is a
range of costs of writing such that either 1) sophisticates will play a mixed strategy in which
they will write with some probability each period or 2) sophisticates will play a cyclical
strategy in which they write every d periods.

Proof. Suppose the sophisticate prefers wring now to never, so that:

                                                                w
                                    EVS1       EVS (never) >

where I denote the continuation value without the option to write in the future as EVS (never) :
Under the following condition, the sophisticate would prefer writing tomorrow (if they did
not act) over writing today:

                                                                    w
                                EVS1        EVS (tomorrow) <

where EVS (tomorrow)indicates the continuation value under the strategy of writing tomor-



                                                 A.6
row given that they do not act. Now, there is a range such that

                                                                                w
                                      EVS1           EVS (never) >                  > EVS1                EVS (tomorrow)

so long as EVS (never) < EVS (tomorrow) : But this must be true. Write c1 = y                                                                EVS1
w;and c2 = y      EVS ; so
                                                            Z    c1
                     EVS (tomorrow) =                                 ( y       c) dF (c) + [1            F (c1 )]   EVS1        w
                                                             0
                                                            Z    c2
                                 EVS (never) =                        ( y       c) dF (c) + [1            F (c2 )]   EVS (never)
                                                             0


and since the individual prefers writing now to never, EVS (never) < EVS (tomorrow) :Hence,
such a range exists.
     In this range, "act never" is not an equilibrium, and "act always" is not an equilibrium.
I solve for the mixed strategy equilibrium. Sophisticates choose the probability of acting
each period (conditional on remembering), such that they are indi¤erent between acting and
not:

                                                                                        j       1
(A3)                                                            EVS1            EVS         =       w

                     j
where EVS                    is the continuation value under the strategy : Now, we have
                         Z       cS                                                 h                                                    i
           j                                                                                                                         j
EVS              =                    ( y     c) dF (c) + [1           F (c )]                  w+   EVS1    + (1        )   EVS
                             0
                                                                        Z cS
                                               1
                 =                                                           ( y             c) dF (c) + [1          F (c )]         w + EVS1
                          1           [1    F (c )] (1          )           0


Choosing                 to satisfy Equation A3, we get
 Z    cS
                                                                                                                                             w
           ( y           c) dF (c) + [1               F (c )]          w + EVS1                                                          =       + EVS1
  0                                                                                             1    [1     F (c )] (1       )
                                                                                                                                             w
                                                                                            C + [1         F]    w + EVS1                =       + EVS1
                                                 1     [1       F ] (1          )
                     R cS
where C =                0
                                 ( y        c) dF (c) : Solving for                 gives

                                                 (    EVS1        w) (1 (1 F (c )) )                             ( C)
                                             =
                                                                (1 F (c )) (w (1  ))



                                                                                A.7
A.II   De…nitions: Perception-Perfect Strategies
                                                                 n                       o
De…nition 2. Given ^ 1; ^ 1; and ; a set of beliefs               S^t ; S^t+1 ; S^t+2 ::: is dynamically
consistent if:
                                  ^ i S^ ; ^ ; ^ for all and
1) for all S^t ; s^t = arg maxa2A W
2) for all S^t and S^t with t < t0 ; s^t =; s^t for all > t0 :
                        0                      0



where W^ i = u + ^ P1           m m
                                 ^ u +m
                        m=1


De…nition 3. A Perception Perfect Strategy is S         ; ^ ; ^ = st        ; ^ ; ^ ; st+1   ; ^ ; ^ ; ::
such that there exists dynamically consistent beliefs S^ ^ ; ^ such that st = arg maxa2A Wt a; S^ ^ ; ^
8t:




                                               A.8
