NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROOTS OF GENDER INEQUALITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Seema Jayachandran
Working Paper 20380
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20380

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

Forthcoming at the Annual Review of Economics doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115404.
I thank Rebecca Dizon-Ross, Pascaline Dupas, Claudia Goldin, and Adriana Lleras-Muney for very
helpful comments. Pom Chirakijja, Yana Gallen, Lydia Kim, and Suanna Oh provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Seema Jayachandran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries
Seema Jayachandran
NBER Working Paper No. 20380
August 2014
JEL No. J16,O10,O14,O15
ABSTRACT
Is the high degree of gender inequality in developing countries—in education, personal autonomy,
and more—explained by underdevelopment itself? Or do the societies that are poor today hold certain
cultural views that lead to gender inequality? This article discusses several mechanisms through which,
as countries grow, gender gaps narrow. I argue that while much of the GDP/gender-inequality relationship
can be explained by the process of development, society-specific factors are also at play: Many countries
that are poor today have cultural norms that exacerbate favoritism toward males. Norms such as patrilocality
and concern for women's "purity" help explain the male-skewed sex ratio in India and China and low
female employment in India, the Middle East, and North Africa, for example. I also discuss why the
sex ratio has become more male-skewed with development. Finally, I lay out some policy approaches
to address gender inequality.

Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu

1

Introduction
Gender gaps favoring males—in education, health, personal autonomy, and more—are

systematically larger in poor countries than in rich countries. This article explores the
root causes of gender inequality in poor countries. Is the higher level of gender inequality
explained by underdevelopment itself? Or do the countries that are poor today have certain
characteristics and cultural beliefs that lead to the larger gender gaps?
I begin by documenting some basic facts about how gender inequality correlates with
the level of economic development. I then discuss several mechanisms through which the
process of economic development theoretically could improve the relative outcomes of women
and review recent evidence on these mechanisms.
I argue that while much of the relationship between development and gender inequality
can be explained by the process of development, society-specific factors are also at play. The
countries that are poor today, or at least some of them, have cultural features that exacerbate
favoritism toward males. Being poor is insufficient to explain parents’ strong desire to have
a son in China and India, for example.
I then discuss in greater detail the problem of the male-skewed sex ratio at birth, which
differs from most other manifestations of gender bias in that it has been intensifying, not
lessening, with economic development. Finally, I lay out some policy approaches to accelerate
the narrowing of gender gaps.
Note that the article’s focus is the causes rather than effects of gender inequality, and
thus I do not review the literature on the reverse direction of causality, that is, how gender
inequality hinders economic development.1 Nonetheless, much of the discussion hints at
inefficiencies that result from constricted opportunities for women and girls.

2

More gender inequality in poor countries: Some facts
Poor countries by no means have a monopoly on gender inequality. Men earn more than

women in essentially all societies. However, disparities in health, education, and bargaining
power within marriage tend to be larger in countries with low GDP per capita.
1

See Duflo (2012) on the bidirectional relationship between women’s empowerment and development and
Doepke et al. (2012) on the link between legal rights for women and development.

1

2.1

Education and health
Figure 1(a) shows the ratio of the male and female college enrollment rates plotted

against GDP per capita for the several countries included in the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) data set. The relationship is downward-sloping: The male bias
in college-going falls (and in fact evaporates) as GDP increases. Although the correlation
cannot be interpreted as a causal relationship, it is strong: In a univariate regression of the
college gender ratio on log GDP per capita, the R2 is 0.44, equivalent to a correlation of 0.66.
A negative relationship between the schooling gender gap and GDP is also seen for primary
and secondary school enrollment. (See Appendix Figure 1, available online. The appendix
also describes the data in more detail.)
As with many of the cross-country patterns I show, the college-GDP relationship mirrors
the time-series pattern seen within many countries as their economies grow. The male to
female ratio of college enrollment in the United States has declined steadily since 1950, falling
below parity by 1980 and continuing to decline since then (Goldin et al., 2006).2
In Figure 1(a), the data points for China and India are labeled. These two countries
are given special attention both because they are large—together they are home to over one
third of the world population—and because they are infamous for their strong son preference.
Interestingly, in terms of school enrollment, neither China nor India is an outlier.
Turning to health, in general women have a longer life expectancy than men, but this
female advantage is somewhat smaller in poor countries, as shown in Figure 1(b). The
pattern is not explained by the disease composition varying with the level of development;
even for a given cause of death, women have higher age-adjusted mortality relative to men
in poor countries than in rich ones (Anderson and Ray, 2010). Most sub-Saharan African
countries are above the best-fit line in Figure 1(b); the HIV/AIDS epidemic has hit Africa
hard and decreased female life expectancy disproportionately.

2.2

Employment
Figure 2(a) plots the ratio of the male and female labor force participation rates versus

GDP per capita. The correlation is essentially zero. India stands out for the underrepresentation of women in the labor force; men are three times as likely as women to be working.
Female labor force participation is also abnormally low in the Middle East and North Africa.
2

In contrast, secondary school enrollment was higher among females than males in the historical U.S.;
the U.S. was exceptional in its mass expansion of secondary school in the early twentieth century (Goldin
and Katz, 2009).

2

Even though actual female labor force participation is not systematically higher in rich
countries, attitudes about women in the labor force are more progressive in rich countries.
Figure 2(b) uses the World Values Survey (WVS), a set of nationally representative surveys
fielded to both men and women; I use Wave 5, conducted between 2004 and 2009, because
India has not been surveyed in the more recent Wave 6. One of the survey questions asked
respondents if they agree or disagree with the statement, “On the whole, men make better
business executives than women do.” The poorer the country, the more frequently respondents agreed with the statement. Because these are stated attitudes, one caveat is that the
pattern could partly reflect a greater degree of political correctness in rich countries.

2.3

Gender-based violence
While there are no reliable data on the incidence of gender-based violence to make

cross-country comparisons, attitudes toward gender-based violence vary systematically with
economic development. One can see this using data from the Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS), which are nationally representative surveys of women age 15 to 49. One of
the DHS questions asked respondents whether and when a husband is justified in beating his
wife. The variable shown on the vertical axis in Figure 3(a) is the proportion of respondents
who said that a husband beating his wife is justified if she goes out without telling him
or argues with him. Average tolerance for gender-based violence varies considerably across
countries, from less than 1 percent to over 85 percent, but tends to be higher in poor
countries. (Note that the DHS is only fielded in low- and middle-income countries, so the
range of GDP per capita examined here is narrower than in the earlier figures. Unfortunately,
there is no DHS for China.)

2.4

Decision-making power within marriage
An aspect of gender inequality that receives a great deal of attention from academics

and policymakers is decision-making power within the household. A woman’s say in household decisions is one aspect of her well-being and thus an end in itself, but the keen interest
in female empowerment is in large part because it is believed to be a means of improving children’s outcomes (Duflo, 2012). The model in the background is of a non-unitary household,
that is, a household as a collective of individuals with different preferences who vary in how
much they influence the household’s decisions (Browning et al., 1994). Figure 3(b) depicts
one measure of decision-making power, self-reports by female respondents in the DHS about
whether they have say in household decisions about making large purchases. The poorer the
3

country, the less likely women are to influence these spending decisions. A similar pattern
is seen for decision-making in other spheres such as whether to visit family and friends.
The income gradient seen across countries also holds within countries. The DHS computes a country-specific household wealth index. Women above the median wealth level for
their country have more decision-making power and less tolerance for gender-based violence
than those with below-median wealth (see Appendix Table 1).3

2.5

Freedom of choice and life satisfaction
The GDP gradient in women’s welfare is also seen starkly in responses to a WVS

question about one’s sense of control over one’s life; respondents were asked to rate “how
much freedom of choice and control you feel you have over the way your life turns out.” Figure
4(a) shows the ratio of men’s to women’s responses: Women in developing countries report
having relatively less control over their lives than those in developed countries. There is
particularly little freedom of choice for women in India, the Middle East, and North Africa.
These are also the places with very low female labor force participation. The correlation
between a country’s male-female gap in freedom of control and its male-female gap in labor
force participation is 0.59.
Another WVS question asks, “All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life
as a whole these days?” Women’s life satisfaction, relative to men’s, is positively correlated
with economic development, as seen in Figure 4(b). Two caveats, however, are that the
relationship is weaker when using a related question on happiness, and there is no relationship
between the gender gap in life satisfaction and GDP in the Wave 6 World Values Surveys
that have been completed so far (see Appendix Figure 2).

3

Economic underdevelopment as a cause of gender
inequality
As just shown, women in developing countries fare worse relative to men compared

to women in developed countries on a variety of measures ranging from college enrollment
to control over one’s life. In this section, I discuss mechanisms through which economic
development itself is the explanation for the positive correlation between gender equality
3

A similar exercise is not possible with the WDI data because they are national aggregates. The WVS
data include an objective measure of household income only for a select set of mainly high-income countries;
the WVS outcomes I compare across countries do not vary systematically by household income within country
for this subsample.

4

and GDP per capita, that is, reasons that the correlation could reflect economic development
causing gender equality. In examining “economic development” as the explanation, I view
the following characteristics as some of the defining features of economic development: high
household income, better physical infrastructure, more advanced technology, a larger share
of the economy from services, and lower fertility. In section 4, I then consider explanations
that appeal to cultural differences in today’s poor countries, although the effect of these
factors is in many cases compounded by poverty. Of course not all mechanisms and pieces
of evidence fit neatly into this development-versus-culture taxonomy. However, despite its
imperfections, this way of organizing the discussion helps shed light on whether the process
of development will eradicate gender inequality.

3.1

Brawn-based production
As countries grow, the sectoral mix shifts away from agriculture and manufacturing to-

ward services. In the cross section today, the correlation between a country’s share of GDP
from services and its log GDP per capita is 0.52. This sectoral transition over the course
of development offers one explanation for the worse outcomes for women seen in developing countries. Agriculture and manufacturing generally require more physical strength, or
“brawn,” than services, and men have a comparative advantage in tasks requiring brawn.
Thus, relative female labor productivity might increase with development.
Galor and Weil (1996) offer a theoretical model of this phenomenon. In their model,
there are physically-intensive tasks and mentally-intensive tasks, and capital raises the relative returns to mentally-intensive tasks. Women have a comparative advantage in mentallyintensive tasks. The process of development entails a growing capital stock and thus reduces
the female-male wage gap, which in turn causes female labor force participation (FLFP) to
increase. Moreover, there is a positive feedback loop; a higher female wage reduces fertility
because the opportunity cost of having children has risen, which pushes up the capital-labor
ratio further, accelerating growth.
Lower labor productivity is a potential explanation of not just patterns of FLFP or
earnings, but also gender gaps in other outcomes that are influenced by earnings potential.
For example, if the main payoff of becoming educated is that one earns a higher wage in
the labor market, then men’s advantage in labor force participation could lead parents to
invest more in boys’ education. Agriculture, even though more brawn-based than other
sectors, has significant returns to schooling (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1996). If men specialize
in brawn-based occupations and women in brain-based occupations, then at early stages
5

of development boys will receive more education than girls. As brain-based sectors grow,
girls should catch up. In fact, if the returns to education are higher in brain-based than
brawn-based occupations, girls’ schooling could overtake boys’ (Pitt et al., 2012).
Doepke and Tertilt (2009) propose a mechanism through which higher returns to education, in turn, can have spillovers to gender equality in other domains. They model men
as wanting expanded legal rights for their daughters but restricted rights for their wives. A
key benefit to a man if his daughter acquires more rights vis-à-vis his son-in-law is that his
grandchildren will be given more education; in the model, women care more than men about
children’s well-being. Thus, when the returns to education increase, men are tipped toward
endorsing legal rights for women. (Fernández (2014) presents a related model in which men
face a wives-versus-daughters tradeoff, and economic development induces them to support
women’s rights; in her model, the driving forces are higher income and lower fertility.)
Some of the best evidence on the effects of gender differences in labor productivity
comes from variation within agriculture. Qian (2008) studies economic reforms in China in
the late 1970s that made growing cash crops more lucrative. She posits that women have a
comparative advantage in picking tea leaves, which are delicate and grow on short bushes,
whereas men’s height and strength give them an advantage in picking fruit from trees. Thus,
she compares the impact of the economic reforms in tea-growing regions, where female labor
productivity should have especially risen, to regions specializing in fruit orchards, where
male labor productivity should have risen most. In tea-growing regions, the reforms led to
fewer “missing girls,” consistent with families having fewer sex-selective abortions of female
fetuses or engaging in less neglect and infanticide of girls. The mechanism she puts forward
is that women’s share of household income increased, they gained bargaining power in their
families, they had weaker son preference than men, and their gender preference prevailed in
household decision-making.
Carranza (forthcoming) examines the relative demand for female labor in agriculture
within India, using variation in soil type and its suitability for deep tillage. Coarse soil with
a low density of clay is suitable for deep tillage, which uses more male labor. She finds that in
parts of India with soil suitable for deep tillage, there is lower FLFP and a more male-skewed
sex ratio, consistent with the female-bargaining-power effect highlighted by Qian (2008).
In a similar spirit, Alesina et al. (2013) use variation in how much agricultural production
plays to men’s physical advantages and examine the implications for gender inequality in
other realms. What distinguishes their work is that they use variation in the historical
division of labor centuries ago and show that it affects gender attitudes and outcomes today.
6

Specifically, they test Boserup’s (1970) hypothesis that the tools used to prepare land for
cultivation in pre-industrial times affected the returns to male versus female labor, and, in
turn, norms about gender roles. Men had a large advantage in using ploughs, which require a
great deal of upper body and grip strength to operate, while in the use of hand tools such as
hoes, women were on a more equal footing. They show that historical plough use in a region
is correlated with its current level of FLFP and current gender attitudes, such as agreement
with the statement, “On the whole, men make better political leaders than women do,”
among WVS respondents. They find similar results when they use an instrumental-variables
strategy that predicts plough use with a region’s geographic suitability for crops that lend
themselves to plough cultivation.
The type of physical tasks required is not the only factor that affects men’s versus
women’s labor productivity. Men also often have the advantage of more secure property
rights. Even if unequal property rights for women are not codified in law, many developing
countries rely on informal property rights, in which case women de facto might have weaker
rights. Goldstein and Udry (2008) show that in Ghana, people with less social and political
power in the community—notably women—face more risk that their land will be expropriated and thus are more reluctant to leave their agricultural plots fallow. This constraint
depresses soil fertility and agricultural output on women’s land.
Aizer (2010) studies changes in women’s relative earning potential in the contemporary
U.S. that arise from variation in labor demand growth in female- versus male-dominated
industries. Her evidence speaks to an additional potential benefit of women advancing in
the labor market: The narrower the gender wage gap, the less domestic violence women
suffer.
The research described above focuses on gender differences in the earnings potential from
working, but the decision whether to work also depends on non-pecuniary factors. Over the
course of development, a change in the composition of jobs as well as rising income might
affect women’s willingness (or freedom of choice) to work. Goldin (1995) documented a Ushaped cross-country relationship between economic development and FLFP, and Mammen
and Paxson (2000) also found a U-shaped relationship in a comparison of households of
varying income within India and Thailand. Goldin (1995), building on Boserup (1970),
posits that the U-shape arises because at low levels of development, the home and workplace
are closely integrated and women do unpaid work on family farms and in family businesses.
With development, production migrates to factories and firms, and women withdraw from
the labor force, especially from manual labor jobs, because of the social stigma men perceive
7

from having their wives work in such jobs. Higher wages mean that the household can
afford to forgo the woman’s earnings. This transition explains the downward part of the
U. With even higher levels of development, the female wage grows because of the sectoral
shift toward services and increased female education, which causes women to re-enter the
workforce. Job growth in occupations deemed “respectable” for women such as clerical work
also helps explain the resurgence in FLFP.4
An example of the arrival of new types of “good jobs” for women is business process
outsourcing, or BPO, (e.g., call centers), which has boomed in several cities in India and
elsewhere. Jensen (2012) uses random variation in the location of BPO recruitment drives
and job placement services to show that women who would otherwise not have worked take
BPO jobs. Moreover, the intervention raised young women’s career aspirations, led them to
enroll in computer and English training courses, and delayed their marriage and childbearing.
Meanwhile, for the younger generation, the prospect of these jobs led to a sizable increase
in school enrollment.

3.2

Labor-intensive home production
Economic development is characterized by better physical infrastructure, more advanced

technology, and higher household income. This cluster of factors means that home production
becomes more efficient and less labor-intensive with development. It takes less time to turn
on an electric furnace than to gather wood for a wood-burning stove, so electrification is one
example of an innovation that reduces home labor. Because women perform the lion’s share
of household chores, advances in home production mainly free up women’s time.
Greenwood et al. (2005) present a model to explain the rise in FLFP over the twentieth
century in the U.S. based on this mechanism. In their calibration, a narrowing gender wage
gap explains relatively little of the increase in FLFP on its own. Without technological
progress in home production, women’s time would still remain tied up at home. Thus,
key to the historical expansion of FLFP were the invention and diffusion of technologies
that reduced the time spent fetching water, lugging coal for home heating, and other such
chores. Notable advances were central heating, electricity (and the electric consumer durables
invented thereafter), and running water. Time spent on home production among prime-age
women has indeed fallen sharply in the U.S., from 47 hours per week in 1900 to 29 hours in
4

Certain jobs being deemed unsuitable for women is a cultural norm, but I discuss it in this section
because it appears to be common across societies when they are at low levels of development. Section 4
focuses on cultural factors that are specific to or stronger in the parts of the world that are currently less
developed.

8

2005 (Ramey, 2009). The cross-country pattern observed today mirrors the U.S. time trend:
The ratio of women’s to men’s time spent on home production, as well as the absolute
amount of time women spend, declines with GDP per capita (see Appendix Figure 3).
Dinkelman (2011) finds that electrification in post-apartheid South Africa increased
FLFP. She shows supporting evidence that a likely mechanism is reduced time spent on
home production, for example because of a shift away from cooking with wood and toward
electric stoves, as well as a greater endowment of productive time because of electric lights.
Coen-Pirani et al. (2010) conduct a similar analysis examining changes in the U.S. between
1960 and 1970 and find that greater ownership of household appliances is associated with
higher FLFP.
Meeks (2014) analyzes the time savings from construction of village water supply systems and shared water taps in Kyrgyzstan. Having water closer to the home led to a savings
of 3 hours per day per household on average. Likewise, in a study based in Morocco, Devoto
et al. (2012) find that acquiring a piped-water connection in the home freed up time; people used the extra time for leisure activities, not working more, and self-reported happiness
increased. In both of these contexts, men and women shared the water-collection responsibilities, so the incidence of the time savings was gender neutral. In many developing countries,
though, fetching water falls to women, so the results are suggestive that such infrastructure
advances will disproportionately free up women to work outside the home more or enjoy
more leisure.

3.3

High fertility, risky fertility
Low fertility is likely both a cause and effect of economic growth, but in any case, a

demographic transition that begins with lower mortality and proceeds to lower fertility is
part and parcel of development. The fact that the fertility rate is lower in rich countries
helps explain the smaller gender gaps in education, health, and labor market outcomes.
High fertility is partly due to high desired fertility but also to limited access to contraceptive methods to control fertility. Miller (2010) analyzes the rollout of a large-scale
family planning campaign across Colombia in the 1960s and 1970s and finds that access to
contraception delayed when women began childbearing and increased how much education
they attained, as well as their employment rate. This evidence is consistent with Goldin
and Katz’s (2002) work showing that access to oral contraceptives transformed the career
opportunities of women in the U.S., making careers such as law and medicine that require
many years of upfront investment more feasible and attractive.
9

Childbearing is not only more common in developing countries, it is also more dangerous.
For these two reasons, 99 percent of the world’s maternal mortality (deaths during or shortly
after pregnancy from causes related to the pregnancy or birth) occurs in developing countries
(World Health Organization, 2014).
Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney (2009) study a period of rapid decline in maternal
mortality in Sri Lanka in the 1940s and 1950s, brought about by medical progress and
improvements in the public health system. The reduction in maternal mortality risk led to
meaningful gains in female life expectancy. Because the years over which girls would accrue
returns to schooling rose, the incentive for them to attend school should also have risen.
Consistent with this hypothesis, the authors find that the reduction in maternal mortality
risk caused girls’ schooling to increase and accounts for one third of the narrowing of the
gender gap in education that occurred over the period.
Medical progress reduces not just maternal mortality but also maternal morbidity.
Albanesi and Olivetti (2009) argue that a reduction in complications from childbearing,
which resulted from sulfa drugs, blood banks, standardized obstetric care, and other medical
progress, improved the ability of women to work postpartum in the U.S. in the middle of the
twentieth century. In their model calibration, medical advances can quantitatively explain
the large increase in FLFP among married women of childbearing age that occurred in the
U.S. between 1920 and 1965. A second relevant innovation which they consider is infant
formula, which allowed other caregivers to be closer substitutes for mothers in infant feeding
and thus also spurred FLFP.

4

Cultural factors that cause gender inequality
When it comes to gender inequality, are the poor different from the rich only in that

they have less money? The previous section described several mechanisms that do not lean
on cultural differences between the rich and the poor, but there are also several contributors
to gender inequality that do derive from context-specific features. Lack of development
still remains relevant even when cultural factors are at play; poverty often exacerbates the
cultural forces that lead to favoritism toward males.5
5

Note that I am not dichotomizing economics and culture: Most of the cultural institutions I discuss create
economic incentives to favor males. Cultural norms are also sometimes the legacy of historical economic forces
in the society.

10

4.1

Patrilocality
Many cultures practice patrilocality whereby a married couple lives near or with the

husband’s parents. When a woman gets married, she essentially ceases to be a member of
her birth family and joins her husband’s family. Under this system, parents potentially reap
more of the returns to investments in a son’s health and education because he will remain a
part of their family, whereas a daughter will physically and financially leave the household
upon marriage. Co-residence of adult sons and elderly parents is much more common in Asia,
the Middle East, and North Africa than in Europe, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Americas
(Ebenstein, 2014).
Within India, the northern region has a much stronger patrilocal (and patrilineal) system
than the south, which is a leading explanation for why gender inequality is more pronounced
in the north (Dyson and Moore, 1983). For example, Chakraborty and Kim (2010) examine
the 1901 Indian Census and find that the sex ratio was less male-skewed in the south, a
pattern that continues to hold today. More generally, Ebenstein (2014) shows that the maleto-female sex ratio is positively correlated with the rate of co-residence between adult sons
and their parents both across and within countries.
If parents fully internalized their daughters’ returns to nutrition, health care, and schooling, then patrilocality would not necessarily cause gender gaps in these inputs. In practice,
though, the longer duration that parents will co-reside and pool financial resources with their
sons seems to cause them to invest disproportionately in sons. For example, parents are more
likely to seek medical care for a sick son than sick daughter. In one study, 405 parents in
India who had been advised that their child needed surgery to correct a congenital heart condition were followed up one year later; 70 percent of the boys but only 44 percent of the girls
had undergone surgery (Ramakrishnan et al., 2011). The financial mindset about investing
in daughters is encapsulated in an often quoted Indian saying that “raising a daughter is
like watering your neighbors’ garden.” This sentiment is echoed in a Chinese proverb that
describes raising a daughter as “ploughing someone else’s field.”
Poverty could exacerbate the tendency to invest more in sons than daughters. Suppose
the net returns to surgery are positive for both boys and girls but higher for boys. If a family is
liquidity-constrained, they might seek medical care only for their son, but with more available
resources, they would seek care for both their son and daughter. (The same reasoning could
apply if parents invest more in boys because boys have higher labor market returns to health,
and not just when the gender gap is due to cultural practices.) Consistent with the idea that

11

poverty can widen the gender gap in investment, Rose (1999) found that favorable rainfall
in rural India increased girls’ survival more than boys’. Theoretically, parents’ marginal
spending need not always benefit the disadvantaged group, however (Kanbur and Haddad,
1994). Oster (2009) reports that better access to health care initially widens the gender gap
in vaccinations in India, but further improvements close the gender gap.

4.2

Old-age support from sons
Closely linked to patrilocality is the fact that sons traditionally provide old-age support

for their parents in societies such as China and India. Ebenstein and Leung (2010) investigate
this old-age support norm as a reason for the desire to have sons in China. When the
Chinese government instituted the Rural Old-Age Pension Program, parents now had a
better substitute for old-age support from sons, and thus their desire to have a son should
have abated. The authors show several patterns in the data consistent with this hypothesized
effect. Households without sons are more likely to participate in the pension program (and
also to have more savings). In addition, having access to the pension program is associated
with a less skewed sex ratio.
Here one again sees how culture and development interact. With the rollout of the
pension, the cultural norm that sons not daughters support parents did not change, but its
implications for the desire to have a son and the skewed sex ratio did change. When a formal
institution for retirement savings arose, the informal method of relying on sons became less
important, and therefore this force driving son preference became less relevant.

4.3

Dowry system
In some but not all societies where a woman joins her husband’s family upon marriage,

there is also a dowry system through which parents make a payment to the couple or groom
at the time of marriage. Historically the daughter held property rights over this money;
dowry was a pre-mortem inheritance from her parents. In this original formulation, the
dowry system was intended to improve the financial well-being of females. However, the
system has evolved so that today the groom usually has property rights over the money.
Dowry has morphed into the price of a groom (Anderson, 2007).
Most of the evidence on the impacts of the dowry system on women’s welfare is anecdotal. The anecdotal evidence points to the dowry system causing pro-male bias. The prospect
of paying dowry is often cited as a key factor in parents’ desire to have sons rather than
daughters in India, for example (Arnold et al., 1998; Das Gupta et al., 2003). The financial
12

burden of dowry indeed seems to loom large in prospective parents’ minds. Kusum (1993)
describes a billboard that was put up when prenatal sex-diagnostic tests were just arriving
in India; a new clinic in the city of Amristar urged parents to “Invest Rs. 500 now, save
Rs. 50,000 later.” The 500 rupees today was for an ultrasound test, which would tell the
parents if their fetus was female; the 50,000 rupees later—which was obvious enough that
it did not need to be spelled out on the billboard—was the dowry the parents would save if
they aborted the female fetus.
Having to pay a dowry for a daughter’s marriage should decrease the desire to have
daughters but should not necessarily reduce investments in daughters. In principle, parents
could recoup their investment in their daughter’s health and education in the form of lower
dowry demands or a higher quality son-in-law. However, this idealized market solution where
parents invest in their daughter’s human capital and the groom later compensates them for
the investment does not seem to work in practice, perhaps because investments are not fully
observable by the groom. In addition, parents have reason to care more about the quality
of their daughters-in-law than their sons-in-law because daughters-in-law will live with them
under patrilocality and raise their heirs under patrilineality. Besides reducing human capital
investments, the dowry system also results in newly married women sometimes being the
victim of violence or, worse, “dowry deaths” as punishment for the dowry amount being
deemed inadequate by the groom (Bloch and Rao, 2002).

4.4

Patrilineality
In a patrilineal system, names and property pass to the next generation through male

descendants. This system puts sons on a higher footing than daughters, and the specific
feature of land inheritance is especially likely to have effects on gender gaps. For example,
in India because widows traditionally do not inherit their husbands’ ancestral property, they
rely on their sons as their conduit for holding onto the family property and maintaining their
standard of living in widowhood. This consideration might be one reason that the desire to
have sons is not appreciably different between women and men.
Under the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, sons shared the right to inherit ancestral property in India. In the 1980s and 1990s, the law was amended in four states to make daughters’
status equal to sons’. The reforms had some bite: In the sample that Deininger et al. (2013)
analyze, 8 percent of daughters whose fathers died before the reforms inherited land; the
proportion increased to 16 percent among those whose father died after the reforms. (About
70 percent of fathers owned land; the fraction of sons who inherited land remained steady
13

at 70 percent before and after the reforms.) As a result of the law changes, women’s age
of marriage rose, consistent with their having more bargaining power within the family and
financial independence (Deininger et al., 2013). The reforms also increased girls’ schooling,
presumably because their mothers were more empowered in the household or because education and asset ownership are complements (Deininger et al., 2013; Roy, 2013). However,
the legal reforms also seem to have had some negative consequences for women. Anderson
and Genicot (2014) find that they led to a rise in suicides, which they conjecture is due to
a backlash effect whereby the increase in female bargaining power sparked marital conflict.

4.5

Role of sons in religious rituals
In certain belief systems, such as Confucianism in China and Hinduism in India, sons

play a special role. Confucianism encourages the patrilineal and patrilocal system in place
in China, Vietnam, and elsewhere. But another part of the special role of sons is in rituals.
Ancestor worship within Confucianism involves rituals where a son plays an essential part.
Similarly, son preference is mentioned in the Vedas, the ancient Hindu texts. In addition,
in Hindu societies, it is supposed to be a son who lights a deceased person’s funeral pyre
and brings him or her salvation. Hindu kinship norms are adhered to more strictly among
upper castes than lower castes (Mandelbaum, 1970), and Chakraborty and Kim (2010), in
their analysis of the 1901 Indian Census, find a more skewed sex ratio for upper castes than
lower castes.
The funeral-pyre underpinning of son preference specifically generates a strong desire for
one son (with further sons perhaps serving as insurance in case the first son predeceases his
parents). Other reasons for son preference such as wanting someone to carry on the family
name or widows wanting to retain family land also make the first son especially valuable.
Consistent with this idea, Jayachandran (2014) finds that parents in India strongly want to
have one son and, once they have one son, prefer a balanced gender ratio, more or less.

4.6

Desire to protect female safety and “purity”
Concern for women’s and girls’ safety and “purity” constrains their physical mobility in

many developing countries. It is difficult to say how much of the limited mobility is out of
genuine concern for women’s welfare, aimed at protecting them from harassment and sexual
violence, and how much is simply a way to stifle female autonomy. In a cross-country study
of mate preferences, men put more weight on their spouse’s sexual inexperience at marriage
than on physical appearance in India, China, Indonesia, Taiwan, and Iran, while the opposite
14

prioritization was seen in each of the 24 European, North American, South American, and
sub-Saharan African countries studied (Buss, 1989). Restrictions on female mobility often
seem largely aimed at keeping unmarried women chaste and married women faithful. In any
case, they are a proximate cause of reduced female schooling and career opportunities.
One reason parents cite for not educating their daughters is the distance to school.
Burde and Linden (2013) evaluate a school-building initiative in Afghanistan and find that
having a school located within one’s village itself matters much more for girls’ enrollment; a
village school essentially closes the otherwise-large gender gap in enrollment. Muralidharan
and Prakash (2013) show that a program that gave girls bicycles to travel to school in India
similarly had a sizable impact on girls’ school participation. These results suggest that better
infrastructure, which comes with economic development, could offset some of the effect that
social constraints on girls’ mobility have on their education.6
Besides distance to school, parents might also want their daughters segregated from
male peers or teachers. Kim et al. (1999) evaluate a program in the Pakistani city of Quetta
that subsidized the creation of neighborhood private schools in part to meet parents’ demand
for single-sex schools for their daughters. Similarly, the construction of sex-segregated school
toilets boosted adolescent girls’ enrollment in India (Adukia, 2014).
In a setting where the genders are socially segregated, the benefits of having a samegender teacher might be especially large. Muralidharan and Sheth (2013) find large samegender effects on test scores for both boys and girls in India. But girls lose out on the samegender benefit as they progress because there are fewer female teachers at higher grades; the
gender mismatch can explain 10 to 20 percent of the negative trend in girls’ test scores as
they progress to higher grades.
Another consideration is that parents feel pressure to marry off their daughters early
in societies where female chastity is prized by men, which leads to early school dropout.
Field and Ambrus (2008) estimate that, in Bangladesh, for every year an adolescent girl’s
marriage is delayed, she completes an additional 0.22 years of schooling.
The risks associated with female mobility—both objective risk and socially constructed
risk to family honor—might also explain the very low FLFP in India, the Middle East, and
North Africa seen in Figure 2(a). One of the tenets of the Hindu caste system is that women
should be protected from “pollution,” which includes men outside their families. Disallowing
6

One explanation for the female advantage in high school enrollment but disadvantage in college enrollment in the U.S. in the early twentieth century is that college was further from home (Goldin and Katz,
2009). Thus, distance to school mattering more for females is not unique to today’s developing countries.

15

women from working outside the home is one way of maintaining their purity (Chen, 1995).
Because these restrictions apply more stringently to upper caste women in India, lower caste
women often have more professional flexibility and autonomy (Field et al., 2010, 2014; Luke
and Munshi, 2011).
Female seclusion (purdah) is also an important tenet of Islam, and Muslim women
resemble Hindu women in their low labor force participation and low self-reported freedom
of choice. A notable contrast is that many of the norms that underlie Hindu parents’ desire
for sons, such as dowry and bequests only to sons, are weaker or non-existent among Muslims.
Correspondingly, within India the sex ratio at birth and child survival exhibit less pro-male
bias among Muslims than Hindus (Borooah and Iyer, 2005).

4.7

Persistence of gender norms when economic conditions change
One type of evidence that gender gaps do not simply reflect the current economic

environment—that culture also matters—is their persistence even when the economic environment changes. Complementing Alesina et al.’s (2013) work on the long-run persistence
of gender norms, recent work has shown that gender norms are sticky in the shorter run,
e.g., from one generation to the next. Using the U.S. Census for 2000 and U.S. birth records,
respectively, Almond and Edlund (2008) and Abrevaya (2009) find evidence of missing girls
among U.S. residents of East Asian and South Asian origin. The male-skewed sex ratio is
concentrated at higher parity and in cases when all the older siblings are girls, consistent
with couples having sex-selective abortions when they are trying to have a son but conceive
a daughter. If the preference for sons were driven entirely by the local economic environment, we would not expect it to be manifest among those who have immigrated to a wealthy
country. Many of the cultural practices such as dowry and non-employment of women are
abandoned upon immigration, so the economic incentives to prefer sons should be less strong
for the immigrant communities. Their continued son preference suggests that gender-related
practices are embodied in preferences or beliefs that might have a long half-life.
Fernández and Fogli (2006) also study immigrants to the U.S. and find that a woman’s
fertility is predicted by her mother’s fertility and by the average fertility in her country
of origin. Fernández (2007) shows that, similarly, a woman’s labor force participation is
correlated with the average behavior in her country of origin. Fernández et al. (2004) find
that if a mother works, her son’s wife is more likely to work, further evidence that gender gaps
in behavior at least partly reflect gender norms that are passed along from parents to children.
These findings indicate that gender-related behaviors depend on cultural background and
16

not just the economic environment one faces.

5

Sex imbalance at birth
A particularly troubling form of gender bias is the sex imbalance at birth. Sen (1990)

famously highlighted this problem of missing women, which he found to be concentrated in
East and South Asia. The dearth of females materializes before birth and in early childhood
but continues over the entire lifespan, as emphasized by Anderson and Ray (2010).
The sex imbalance at birth is noteworthy because it has become much worse over the
past fifty years in several countries. Figure 5 plots the sex ratio at birth for China and India;
in both countries, it has increased sharply in recent decades. The most recent estimates
(from 2012) are that 116 boys are born for every 100 girls in China, and 111 boys for every
100 girls in India. The natural sex ratio is in the range of 103 to 106.
Figure 6(a) plots the sex ratio at birth across countries. Two features stand out. First,
mirroring the fact that the sex ratio has worsened over time in China and India, the sex
ratio is worse in more developed countries. Second, India and China are outliers, with
exceptionally male-skewed sex ratios.

5.1

Distinction between desire for sons and higher investment in
sons
Parents’ favoritism toward boys encompasses both wanting to have sons more than

daughters and choosing to invest more in sons than daughters. These two dimensions of
favoritism often go hand-in-hand, but they are not identical.
Conceptually, parents could have a preference over their number of sons ns and daughters
nd that is distinct from their preference over the average quality of each, qs and qd . For
example, parents might have a preference for sons over daughters but value the quality of
both the same. Their utility function u(ns , nd , qs , qd ) would reduce to u(ns , nd , q). With
this utility function, they could still have a strong desire to have a son, represented by
∂u/∂ns > ∂u/∂nd at ns = nd = 0.
There are at least two important differences between the quantity and quality dimensions of son preference. First, the fact that India and China are large outliers for the sex
ratio at birth but not for investment outcomes like schooling is prima facie evidence of a
distinction between the two dimensions. More generally, there is stronger regional variation
in the sex ratio at birth, with African countries generally exhibiting less skewed sex ratios at
17

birth (conditional on GDP per capita) and Asia exhibiting more skewed ratios, while gender
gaps in human capital exhibit less of this geographic clustering.
Second, while today’s rich countries were historically similar to developing countries
today in terms of generally having higher human capital investments in males than females,
they did not exhibit as strong a desire to have sons as seen today in many developing
countries. I find that historically in the U.S., the sex ratio of last births (SRLB) was not
skewed toward males. A male-skewed SRLB is a useful measure of the desire to have sons. A
couple who wants to have a son but whose first children are girls will often continue beyond
their originally intended family size to try again for a son. This fertility stopping behavior
will mean that last-born children are disproportionately male. A skewed sex ratio of last
births occurs even without infanticide, neglect, or sex-selective abortions—behaviors that
lead to a skewed population sex ratio, or sex ratio of all births. The SRLB is the better
metric to compare son preference in the historical U.S. and modern developing countries
because the technology in use today to manipulate the population sex ratio (e.g., ultrasound
tests) was not available in the nineteenth century, while son-biased stopping behavior is
feasible as long as there are contraceptive methods to control total fertility.
India exhibits a strongly skewed SRLB. Using the 1992 DHS, I find that the SRLB was
1.34, that is, 1.34 boys for every 1 girl among the youngest surviving children of mothers.
The calculation restricts the sample to cases where the youngest child is age 10 or older, or
born before 1982, both because using earlier birth cohorts limits the likelihood of prenatal sex
determination (ultrasound machines were scarce in India until the mid-1980s) and because
this sample of women is likely to have completed their fertility.7,8
The U.S. in 1809 had the same PPP-adjusted GDP per capita as India in 1992. However,
contraception availability was limited, so I use a later U.S. census, specifically 1860, as a more
appropriate comparison group. Making the same sample restrictions as above, the SRLB in
the U.S. in 1860 was 1.04—not male skewed at all.9 This lack of son-biased fertility stopping
7

Sex-selective abortions occur disproportionately at last births, which makes the SRLB more skewed. In
the 2005 DHS for India, the SRLB is 1.48. Declining desired fertility likely pushed the SRLB higher too;
couples who want a small number of children will often fail to have a son naturally within that number.
8
I also limit the sample to cases where the youngest child is below age 15 and resides with the mother for
consistency with the U.S. analysis; for the U.S. analysis, I use children below age 15 because older children
who have left the household cannot be matched to their mother in the census. Conversely, in the U.S.
analysis, I limit the sample to mothers age 49 and younger for consistency with the DHS sampling rule. The
results are very similar when I vary these restrictions.
9
I repeat the exercise with the 1900 Census because desired total fertility affects whether families need
to try again for a son, and the U.S. fertility rate in 1900 was comparable to India’s rate of 3.7 in 1992. The
SRLB in the 1900 U.S. census was 1.02. The child mortality rate is higher for males than females, which

18

behavior is evidence that, historically, parents in the U.S. did not have a strong desire for
sons. In contrast, during this same time period, the U.S. did exhibit other gender gaps that
resemble what is seen in developing countries today such as a smaller female advantage in life
expectancy and low FLFP, especially among married women (Preston, 1976; Goldin, 1986).
The two differences above suggest that while economic development could go a long way
in explaining the gender gap in human capital investment, it does considerably less well in
explaining the preference over the number of sons versus daughters. The desire to have a son
appears to have strong cultural roots and thus might be slow to fade even as the economies
of countries like India and China grow rapidly.
Interestingly, one way the quantity and quality dimensions of gender bias are entangled
is that the desire to have sons can cause gender gaps in investments even if parents derive the
same utility from boys’ and girls’ quality. For example, son-biased stopping behavior means
that girls will tend to grow up in larger families than boys (Yamaguchi, 1989; Clark, 2000;
Jensen, 2003). Given fixed financial resources, girls will thus be raised in families that have
fewer resources to spend on each child. In addition, Jayachandran and Kuziemko (2011)
show that because women in India want to and are more likely to become pregnant again
after a daughter is born, they stop breastfeeding girls sooner to regain their fecundity or
as a result of the new pregnancy. Daughters will be breastfed for a shorter duration than
boys, which is likely detrimental to their health, even without parents having an explicit
preference to provide more health inputs to sons.

5.2

Distinction between desire for sons and sex imbalance
As seen in Figure 6(a), the sex ratio is less skewed in poorer countries. In contrast,

the desire to have more sons than daughters is more intense in poorer countries, as shown
in Figure 6(b). The latter figure is based on a DHS question that asked respondents about
their ideal number of sons and daughters. The sex imbalance at birth is an aspect of gender
inequality that seems to be aggravated by development even though the desire to have sons
fades with development.
One reason that the sex imbalance is worsening, even though son preference is not, is
technological innovation. Infanticide and neglect of infant girls have long been (proximate)
causes of missing women, but the ability to ascertain the sex of a fetus has given rise to
sex-selective abortions and dramatically exacerbated the problem of the skewed sex ratio.
Chen et al. (2013) estimate that about half of the increase in the sex imbalance in China is
likely explains why the sex ratio of children was slightly lower than the natural sex ratio of births.

19

explained by access to ultrasound. Lin et al. (2014) find that this technological advance also
played a large role in driving the skewed sex ratio in Taiwan.
A second factor behind the worsening sex ratio is declining fertility. For example,
conventional wisdom is that the extremely skewed sex ratio in China is due to the One Child
Policy; constrained to have only one (or two) children, couples use sex-selective abortions
to ensure that they have at least one son. Consistent with this idea, in the parts of China
where the penalties for violating the One Child Policy were more onerous, the sex ratio was
more imbalanced (Ebenstein, 2010).
Jayachandran (2014) shows that the desired sex ratio in India is more male-skewed at
low fertility levels. Individuals express a strong preference to have at least one son, not
a general preference to always have sons rather than daughters. When parents want to
have three or four children, the likelihood of naturally ending up with no sons is relatively
small, but this undesired scenario becomes more likely when couples want to have two or
even just one child. Therefore, as couples’ desired family size gets smaller, for example
because of a higher female wage which raises the opportunity cost of having children, they
are more likely to resort to sex-selective abortions in order to obtain their desired son. The
conceptual upshot is that the sex ratio is not a measure of son preference per se; it is the
realization of one’s son preference combined with one’s family-size preference (Jayachandran,
2014). Figure 6 conveys the message that son preference—the desire for sons—might decline
with development, but the problem of the sex imbalance at birth appears to worsen with
development, at least over a certain range.

6

Policy approaches to reduce gender bias
The existence of culturally-rooted gender norms means that even when India and China

advance to today’s level of U.S. GDP per capita, they might not advance in terms of their
desire to have sons, the decision-making power of women, and so forth. Eliminating gender
inequality might require explicit policy intervention. Moreover, one might not want to wait
patiently as the problem of gender inequality resolves itself via economic growth.
One type of gender-progressive policy is granting legal rights to women. A powerful
example of this tool is India’s move to reserve political seats for women. A fraction of seats
at various levels of government are, by mandate, held by women. The most direct impact
of the law change on women’s welfare has been to close the gap in women’s representation;
female leaders implement policies that better reflect the policy preferences of their female

20

constituents (Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004). Moreover, this reform has begun to reshape
attitudes toward women as leaders (Beaman et al., 2009) and raised the aspirations of and
long-term investments in girls (Beaman et al., 2012).
A limitation of legal reforms is that enforcement is often weak. For example, the legal
reform granting women rights to ancestral land in India that was described earlier has some
bite, but it is far from universally enforced. Similarly, bans on prenatal sex determination,
dowry, and child marriage are often minimally enforced.
A second policy tool is financial incentives for parents to invest in or have girls. For example, many states in India offer incentives to have daughters (Anukriti, 2013). In addition,
many conditional cash transfer programs such as Progresa/Oportunidades in Mexico give a
larger financial incentive to educate girls than boys, responding to the higher dropout rate
of girls (Schultz, 2004).
Another approach is to shift household financial resources to mothers based on the
hypothesis that more influence in the household for women will help break the cycle of gender
discrimination because women have less pro-boy bias than men do. There are several pieces
of evidence that when women control a larger share of household income, girls’ outcomes
improve (Thomas, 1990; Duflo, 2003).
An important caveat to this approach is that the differences between men and women
in their gender attitudes are sometimes surprisingly small, or even go in the counterintuitive
direction. In India, tolerance for gender-based violence (based on the DHS question depicted
in Figure 3(a)) is 37 percent among women and 33 percent among men. (The survey was also
fielded to men in India.) Similarly, when asked about their ideal sex composition of children,
20 percent of women and 19 percent of men wanted strictly more sons than daughters.
In other cases, women do state more progressive gender attitudes than men but not by a
wide margin. For a WVS question about whether a university education is more important
for boys than girls, in China 23 percent of men and 18 percent of women agree with the
statement. The similar gender attitudes of men and women imply that more decision-making
power for mothers might not necessarily translate into significantly better treatment of girls.
Why aren’t women’s attitudes more progressive? Their views might be shaped by
practical concerns. For example, women gain status in the household and enjoy greater
well-being once they give birth to a son (Li and Wu, 2011; Milazzo, 2014). In addition, the
lack of role models for women means that they might simply fail to realize that equality for
women is possible (Beaman et al., 2012).
Thus, another policy approach is to try to change women’s attitudes, whether by creat21

ing a cadre of role models or by other means. Despite not having this explicit goal, commercial television appears to have reshaped women’s views, for example about having a smaller
family size, in Brazil and India (La Ferrara et al., 2012; Jensen and Oster, 2009). Changing
men’s attitudes might be equally important. On the one hand, mothers’ gender attitudes
appear to be more influential than those of fathers in shaping children’s gender views (Dhar
et al., 2014). On the other hand, fathers typically have more say in the household about
decisions affecting girls, such as how much to spend on their education.

7

Conclusion
This article showed that gender gaps in several domains are large in developing coun-

tries. Should we expect these gender gaps to shrink and disappear over time? I laid out
several mechanisms through which, as countries grow, women’s lot should improve. First, a
sectoral shift away from agriculture toward services occurs. Second, technological advances
reduce the time needed for household chores. Third, the frequency and risk of childbearing
declines. Each of these factors increases women’s participation in the labor force, which in
turn increases human capital investment in girls and women’s personal autonomy.
However, I also described certain cultural practices that could make gender inequality
in today’s poor countries persist even in the face of economic growth, such as patrilocality
and male-centered funeral rituals. These cultural norms help explain the extremely maleskewed sex ratio in India and China, for example. Similarly, the anomalously low female
labor force participation rate in India, the Middle East, and North Africa is likely rooted in
the high value these cultures place on women’s “purity.” The cultural institutions favoring
males might themselves fade naturally with economic modernization, enabling gender gaps
to close, but there is also scope for policymakers to expedite the process.

22

Summary points
• Along several dimensions, there is greater gender inequality in poor countries than in
rich ones.
• Three key elements of the development process increase women’s participation in the
labor force, which in turn increases human capital investment in girls and women’s
personal autonomy: growth of the services sector, technological advances in home
production, and reduced risk and frequency of childbearing.
• In many poor countries, the desire for sons and constricted opportunities for women
are exacerbated by cultural practices and norms.
• India, the Middle East, and North Africa stand out for their very low female employment and freedom of choice for women, which appear to be rooted in these societies’
concern for women’s “purity.”
• The extremely male-skewed sex ratio at birth in India and China is rooted in cultural
practices that create a strong desire to have at least one son, such as patrilocality,
patrilineality, and religious rituals performed by sons.
• The quantity and quality dimensions of son preference—that is, the desire for sons and
higher human capital investment in sons—have important differences.
• The skewed sex ratio at birth has been getting worse with economic development due
to the advent of prenatal sex-diagnostic technologies and declining desired fertility.
• While gender inequality in developing countries will likely diminish with economic
growth, policymakers have several options to hasten the process.

23

Literature cited
Abrevaya, J. (2009): “Are There Missing Girls in the United States? Evidence from Birth
Data,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1–34.
Adukia, A. (2014): “Sanitation and Education,” Working paper, University of Chicago.
Aizer, A. (2010): “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence,” American Economic
Review, 100, 1847–1859.
Albanesi, S. and C. Olivetti (2009): “Gender Roles and Medical Progress,” Working
Paper 14873, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469–530.
Almond, D. and L. Edlund (2008): “Son-Biased Sex Ratios in the 2000 United States
Census,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 5681–5682.
Anderson, S. (2007): “The Economics of Dowry and Brideprice,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21, 151–174.
Anderson, S. and G. Genicot (2014): “Suicide and Property Rights in India,” Working
Paper 19978, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Anderson, S. and D. Ray (2010): “Missing Women: Age and Disease,” Review of Economic Studies, 77, 1262–1300.
Anukriti, S. (2013): “The Fertility-Sex Ratio Trade-off: Unintended Consequences of
Financial Incentives,” Working paper, Boston College.
Arnold, F., M. K. Choe, and T. Roy (1998): “Son Preference, the Family-Building
Process and Child Mortality in India,” Population Studies, 52, 301–315.
Beaman, L., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, R. Pande, and P. Topalova (2009):
“Powerful Women: Does Exposure Reduce Bias?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124,
1497–1540.
——— (2012): “Female Leadership Raises Aspirations and Educational Attainment for Girls:
A Policy Experiment in India,” Science, 335, 582–586.
Bloch, F. and V. Rao (2002): “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case Study of
Dowry Violence in Rural India,” American Economic Review, 92, 1029–1043.
Borooah, V. K. and S. Iyer (2005): “Religion, Literacy, and the Female-to-Male Ratio,”
Economic and Political Weekly, 40, pp. 419–427.
Boserup, E. (1970): Woman’s Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen and
Unwin Ltd.

24

Browning, M., F. Bourguignon, P. A. Chiappori, and V. Lechene (1994): “Income and Outcomes: A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1067–1096.
Burde, D. and L. L. Linden (2013): “Bringing Education to Afghan Girls: A Randomized Controlled Trial of Village-Based Schools,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 5, 27–40.
Buss, D. M. (1989): “Sex Differences in Human Mate Preferences: Evolutionary Hypotheses Tested in 37 Cultures,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12, 1–14.
Carranza, E. (forthcoming): “Soil Endowments, Female Labor Force Participation, and
the Demographic Deficit of Women in India,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Chakraborty, T. and S. Kim (2010): “Kinship Institutions and Sex Ratios in India,”
Demography, 47, 989–1012.
Chattopadhyay, R. and E. Duflo (2004): “Women as Policy Makers: Evidence from
a Nationwide Randomized Experiment in India,” Econometrica, 72, 1409–1443.
Chen, M. (1995): “A Matter of Survival: Women’s Right to Employment in India and
Bangladeshh,” in Women, Culture and Development, ed. by M. Nussbaum and J. Glover,
Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.
Chen, Y., H. Li, and M. Lingsheng (2013): “Prenatal Sex Selection and Missing Girls
in China: Evidence from the Diffusion of Diagnostic Ultrasound,” Journal of Human
Resources, 48, 36–70.
Clark, S. (2000): “Son Preference and Sex Composition of Children: Evidence from India,”
Demography, 37, 95–108.
Coen-Pirani, D., A. León, and S. Lugauer (2010): “The Effect of Household Appliances on Female Labor Force Participation: Evidence From Microdata,” Labour Economics, 17, 503–513.
Das Gupta, M., J. Zhenghua, L. Bohua, X. Zhenming, W. Chung, and B. HwaOk (2003): “Why Is Son Preference So Persistent in East and South Asia? A CrossCountry Study of China, India and the Republic of Korea,” Journal of Development
Studies, 40, 153–187.
Deininger, K., A. Goyal, and H. Nagarajan (2013): “Women’s Inheritance Rights
and Intergenerational Transmission of Resources in India,” Journal of Human Resources,
48, 114–141.
Devoto, F., E. Duflo, P. Dupas, W. Pariente, and V. Pons (2012): “Happiness on
Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco,” American Economic Journal: Economic
Policy, 4, 68–99.

25

Dhar, D., T. Jain, and S. Jayachandran (2014): “The Intergenerational Transmission
of Gender Attitudes: Evidence from India,” Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Dinkelman, T. (2011): “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence from South Africa,” The American Economic Review, 101, 3078–3108.
Doepke, M. and M. Tertilt (2009): “Women’s Liberation: What’s in It for Men?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1541–1591.
Doepke, M., M. Tertilt, and A. Voena (2012): “The Economics and Politics of
Women’s Rights,” Annual Review of Economics, 4.
Duflo, E. (2003): “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pension and IntraHousehold Allocation in South Africa,” World Bank Economic Review, 17.
——— (2012): “Women Empowerment and Economic Development,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 50, 1051–1079.
Dyson, T. and M. Moore (1983): “On Kinship Structure, Female Autonomy, and Demographic Behavior in India,” Population and Development Review, 9, 35–60.
Ebenstein, A. (2010): “The “Missing Girls” of China and the Unintended Consequences
of the One Child Policy,” Journal of Human Resources, 45, 87–115.
——— (2014): “Patrilocality and Missing Women,” Working paper, Hebrew University.
Ebenstein, A. and S. Leung (2010): “Son Preference and Access to Social Insurance:
Evidence From China’s Rural Pension Program,” Population and Development Review,
36, 47–70.
Fernández, R. (2007): “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 5, 305–332.
——— (2014): “Women’s Rights and Development,” Journal of Economic Growth, 19, 37–
80.
Fernández, R. and A. Fogli (2006): “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family Experience,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 552–561.
Fernández, R., A. Fogli, and C. Olivetti (2004): “Mothers and Sons: Preference
Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119,
1249–1299.
Field, E. and A. Ambrus (2008): “Early Marriage, Age of Menarche, and Female Schooling Attainment in Bangladesh,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 881–930.
Field, E., S. Jayachandran, and R. Pande (2010): “Do Traditional Institutions Constrain Female Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India,”
American Economic Review, 100, 125–129.
26

Field, E., S. Jayachandran, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2014): “Friends at Work: Can
Peer Support Stimulate Female Entrepreneurship?” Mimeo, Northwestern University.
Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1996): “Technical Change and Human-Capital
Returns and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution,” American Economic
Review, 86, 931–53.
Galor, O. and D. N. Weil (1996): “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 86, 374–87.
Goldin, C. (1986): “The Female Labor Force and American Economic Growth, 18901980,” in Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, ed. by S. Engerman and
R. Gallman, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— (1995): “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development and
Economic History,” in Investment in Women’s Human Capital and Economic Development, ed. by T. P. Schultz, University of Chicago Press.
Goldin, C. and L. F. Katz (2002): “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 730–770.
Goldin, C., L. F. Katz, and I. Kuziemko (2006): “The Homecoming of American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
133–156.
Goldin, C. D. and L. F. Katz (2009): The Race Between Education and Technology,
Harvard University Press.
Goldstein, M. and C. Udry (2008): “The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural
Investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 116, 981–1022.
Greenwood, J., A. Seshadri, and M. Yorukoglu (2005): “Engines of Liberation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 72, 109–133.
Jayachandran, S. (2014): “Fertility Decline and Missing Women,” Working Paper 20272,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jayachandran, S. and I. Kuziemko (2011): “Why Do Mothers Breastfeed Girls Less
Than Boys?: Evidence and Implications for Child Health in India,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 126, 1485–1538.
Jayachandran, S. and A. Lleras-Muney (2009): “Life Expectancy and Human Capital Investments: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 349–397.
Jensen, R. (2003): “Equal Treatment, Unequal Outcomes? Generating Sex Inequality
Through Fertility Behavior,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
——— (2012): “Do Labor Market Opportunities Affect Young Women’s Work and Family
Decisions? Experimental Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
27

Jensen, R. and E. Oster (2009): “The Power of TV: Cable Television and Women’s
Status in India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124, 1057–1094.
Kanbur, R. and L. Haddad (1994): “Are Better Off Households More Unequal or Less
Unequal?” Oxford Economic Papers, 445–458.
Kim, J., H. Alderman, and P. F. Orazem (1999): “Can Private School Subsidies
Increase Enrollment for the Poor? The Quetta Urban Fellowship Program,” The World
Bank Economic Review, 13, 443–465.
Kusum (1993): “The Use Of Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques for Sex Selection: The Indian
Scene,” Bioethics, 7, 149–165.
La Ferrara, E., A. Chong, and S. Duryea (2012): “Soap Operas and Fertility:
Evidence from Brazil,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4, 1–31.
Li, L. and X. Wu (2011): “Gender of Children, Bargaining Power, and Intrahousehold
Resource Allocation in China,” Journal of Human Resources, 46, 295–316.
Lin, M.-J., J.-T. Liu, and N. Qian (2014): “More Missing Women, Fewer Dying Girls:
The Impact of Abortion on Sex Ratios at Birth and Excess Female Mortality in Taiwan,”
Journal of European Economic Association, 12.
Luke, N. and K. Munshi (2011): “Women as Agents of Change: Female Income and
Mobility in India,” Journal of Development Economics, 94, 1–17.
Mammen, K. and C. Paxson (2000): “Women’s Work and Economic Development,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 141–164.
Mandelbaum, D. G. (1970): Society in India, Volumes 1 and 2, Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
Meeks, R. (2014): “Water Works: The Economic Impact of Water Infrastructure,” Mimeo,
University of Michigan.
Milazzo, A. (2014): “Why Are Adult Women Missing? Son Preference and Maternal
Survival in India,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6802, World Bank.
Miller, G. (2010): “Contraception as Development? New Evidence from Family Planning
in Colombia,” The Economic Journal, 120, 709–736.
Muralidharan, K. and N. Prakash (2013): “Cycling to School: Increasing Secondary
School Enrollment for Girls in India,” Working Paper 19305, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Muralidharan, K. and K. Sheth (2013): “Bridging Education Gender Gaps in Developing Countries: The Role of Female Teachers,” Working Paper 19341, National Bureau
of Economic Research.

28

Oster, E. (2009): “Does Increased Access Increase Equality? Gender and Child Health
Investments in India,” Journal of Development Economics, 89, 62–76.
Pitt, M. M., M. R. Rosenzweig, and M. N. Hassan (2012): “Human Capital Investment and the Gender Division of Labor in a Brawn-Based Economy,” American Economic
Review, 102, 3531–3560.
Preston, S. H. (1976): Mortality Patterns in National Populations, New York: Academic
Press.
Qian, N. (2008): “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The Effect of Sex-Specific
Earnings on Sex Imbalance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123.
Ramakrishnan, S., R. Khera, S. Jain, A. Saxena, S. Kailash, G. Karthikeyan,
S. S. Kothari, R. Juneja, B. Bhargava, M. Kalaivani, M. Mehta, V. K. Bahl,
and B. Airan (2011): “Gender Differences in the Utilisation of Surgery for Congenital
Heart Disease in India,” Heart, 97, 1920–1925.
Ramey, V. A. (2009): “Time Spent in Home Production in the Twentieth-Century United
States: New Estimates from Old Data,” Journal of Economic History, 69, 1–47.
Rose, E. (1999): “Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female Mortality in Rural India,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81, 41–49.
Roy, S. (2013): “Empowering Women: Inheritance Rights and Female Education in India,”
Mimeo, Warwick University.
Schultz, T. P. (2004): “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa
Poverty Program,” Journal of Development Economics, 74, 199 – 250, new Research on
Education in Developing Economies.
Sen, A. (1990): “More Than 100 Million Women Are Missing,” New York Review of Books,
37.
Thomas, D. (1990): “Intra-household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach,”
Journal of Human Resources, 25, 635–664.
World Health Organization (2014): “Maternal Mortality. Fact Sheet No. 348,”
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/.
Yamaguchi, K. (1989): “A Formal Theory for Male-Preferring Stopping Rules of Childbearing: Sex Differences in Birth Order and in the Number of Siblings,” Demography, 26,
451–465.

29

2

3

4

R2=0.435

India

1

China

0

Ratio of male to female tertiary enrollment rate

Figure 1: Gender gaps in education and life expectancy

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

64000
Sub-Saharan Africa

1

R2=0.056

China

.9

.95

India

.85

Ratio of male to female life expectancy

1.05

(a) College enrollment rate (M/F ratio)

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

64000
Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Life expectancy (M/F ratio)
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value in the year the outcome (vertical-axis variable) is
measured, expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars; the data source is the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators (WDI). Outcome data are from WDI. In this and subsequent figures, the circle size for each
country is proportional to its population (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured, and the line
shown is the best (unweighted) linear fit.

30

Ratio of male to female labor force participation
rate
1
2
3
4
5

Figure 2: Gender gaps in labor market outcomes
R2=0.000

India

China

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

64000

Middle East & N. Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

Agree that men make better business executives
than women do
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

(a) Labor force participation rate (M/F ratio)

R2=0.343
India

China

7
Americas

8

9
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

10

Middle East & N. Africa

11
Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Agree: Men make better business executives than women
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from (a) WDI and (b) World Values Survey (WVS),
wave 5.

31

Figure 3: Attitudes toward gender-based violence and female decision-making power

.6
.2

.4

India

0

Agrees that wife beating is justified

.8

R2=0.187

500

1000

Americas

2000
4000
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

8000

Middle East & N. Africa

16000

Sub-Saharan Africa

Respondent has no say in decisions on large
household purchases
0
.2
.4
.6
.8

(a) Agree: Wife beating is justified

R2=0.104

India

500
Americas

1000

2000
4000
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

8000

Middle East & N. Africa

16000

Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Woman does not have say in large household purchases
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).

32

Ratio of male to female freedom of choice &
control over life
.5
1
1.5
2

Figure 4: Gender gaps in control over one’s life and life satisfaction
R2=0.137

India

China

7
Americas

8

9
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

10

Middle East & N. Africa

11
Sub-Saharan Africa

1.6
1.4

R2=0.104

1.2

India

.8

1

China

.6

Ratio of male to female satisfication with life

(a) Freedom of choice and control over one’s life (M/F ratio)

7
Americas

8

9
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

10

11
Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Life satisfaction (M/F ratio)
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from WVS, wave 5. The outcome is the male-female
ratio in proportion of respondents who give an answer of 9 or 10 on a scale of 1 to 10, where a higher
number indicates (a) more freedom and (b) more satisfaction.

33

1.05

Male to female sex ratio at birth
1.1
1.15

1.2

Figure 5: Sex ratio at birth in China and India, 1962 to 2012

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
China

Notes: Data source is WDI.

34

India

2010

Figure 6: Sex ratio at birth and desire for sons

1.15

China

1.05

1.1

India

1

Male to female sex ratio at birth

R2=0.055

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

64000

Middle East & N. Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

.3

.4

R2=0.087

.2

India

.1

Wants strictly more sons than daughters

.5

(a) Male-female sex ratio at birth

500
Americas

1000

2000
4000
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

8000

Middle East & N. Africa

16000

Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Desire for more sons than daughters
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from (a) WDI and (b) DHS.

35

Appendix
Main data sources
Three main cross-country data sources are used: the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS),
the World Values Survey (WVS), and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI).
The DHS data are the most recent standard DHS (Phase V or VI) for the 54 countries surveyed
between 2005 and 2012; 80% of the countries have data from 2008 or later. The DHS is only
carried out in developing countries or countries receiving US foreign aid. There is no DHS for
China. In Wave 5 of the WVS, 57 countries were surveyed from 2005 to 2009. WDI compiles data
from various sources such as the United Nations, World Health Organization, U.S. Census Bureau,
and individual census reports. The database provides population and GDP per capita data in
addition to other country-level development, gender, and health indicators for 214 countries. Of
these countries, recent GDP data is missing for 24, which are thus excluded from the analysis. The
final WDI sample comprises 190 countries.

Geographic categorization
Appendix Tables 2 and 3 list the country data sets used from each data source, organized
by five geographic regions: the Americas, Asia & Oceania, Europe, Middle East & North Africa,
and Sub-Saharan Africa. Regional categories are based on the World Health Organization’s six
regions, with minor modifications. Specifically, the WHO Western Pacific countries are combined
with its South-East Asia countries to create a larger Asia & Oceania region, where Pakistan is
included. Algeria is categorized under the Middle East & North Africa region, which is renamed
from “Eastern Mediterranean,” while Sudan is categorized as Sub-Saharan Africa. Bermuda and
Puerto Rico are added into the Americas and Kosovo into Europe.

GDP and population data
Population and GDP data are from WDI. WDI reports midyear estimates of total population,
which includes all current residents of the country regardless of legal status, with the exception of
non-permanent refugees. Log GDP is calculated using PPP-adjusted GDP per capita in constant
2011 US dollars. For the analysis using DHS and WVS data, GDP and population data are
survey-year specific. Several surveys extended over two consecutive years in which case GDP and
population are averaged for the two years. For WDI outcomes, the most recent available data
between 2009-2013 are used and matched to GDP and population for that year. Countries missing
GDP data for the relevant year are excluded from the sample.

Variable definition: DHS
DHS data are from the Birth Recode, Individual (women’s) Recode, and Household Recode
data sets. Variables are coded so that higher values indicate greater inequality or discrimination
against women.
Gender-based violence
Women answered yes or no in agreement or disagreement to five
scenarios that justified a husband beating his wife. Of these five scenarios, two are used to construct
the gender-based violence variable: (1) “Wife beating is justified if she goes out without telling
him”; and (2) “Wife beating is justified if she argues with him.” Of women who responded to both
questions, those who answered “Yes” to either question are considered to agree that wife beating
is justified and are coded as 1. Women who answered “No” or “Dont know” to both questions are
coded as 0. Data from the men’s sample for India is also used for this outcome.

36

Desire for sons Women were asked about the ideal number of children they would like to have,
and then asked to specify the number of boys, girls, or either sex they would ideally like within
this number. A small number of women who provided inconsistent answers between the specific
genders and the total number of children are excluded from the analysis. If the ideal number of
boys is strictly greater than the ideal number of girls, then the respondent is coded as wanting
more sons than daughters. Data from the men’s sample for India is also used for this outcome.
Decision-making power The DHS surveys asked women about who in their household has
the final say on a variety of decisions. As this question is only asked to married women in most
countries, the sample is restricted to women who are currently married. For “the final say on
making large household purchases,” women who answered “respondent alone,” “respondent and
husband/partner” or “respondent and other person” are considered as having a say in decisions
on large household purchases and are coded as a 0. Those who responded with “husband/partner
alone,” “someone else” or “other” to this question are considered as having no say and are coded
as 1. Responses to “the final say on visits to family or relatives” are coded in the same way.
Sex ratio of last births The DHS asked all mothers the birth order of all their living and
deceased children. The sex ratio of last births (SRLB) is the ratio of the number of boys to girls
among mothers’ youngest living child age 10 or older, excluding twins and other multiple births.
This statistic is calculated for the 1992-3 Indian DHS (NFHS-1) and the most recent Indian 2005-6
DHS (NFHS-3).
Wealth index The DHS constructs a country and survey-year specific wealth index based on
household assets, access to water, sanitation facilities, and other dwelling characteristics.

Variable definition: WVS
All ratios are calculated as the average male response divided by the average female response
by country, and all other outcomes are averaged by country. A higher value indicates greater inequality or discrimination against women.
Business executives This variable is an indicator for agreement with the statement, “On the
whole, men make better business executives than women do.” Responses that are “Strongly agree”
or “Agree” are coded as 1, while “Disagree” and “Strongly disagree” are coded as 0.
University education Respondents were asked how strongly they agreed or disagreed with the
statement, “A university education is more important for a boy than for a girl.” Responses of
“Strongly agree or “Agree” are coded as 1, while “Disagree” and “Strongly disagree” are coded as
0.
Freedom of choice Respondents were asked to indicate “how much freedom of choice and control you feel you have over the way your life turns out” on a scale of 0 to 10, with 0 representing
“no choice at all” and 10 meaning “a great deal of choice.” A response of 9 or 10 is coded as 1, or
as having freedom of choice, while anything lower is coded as 0.
Life satisfaction Respondents were asked to use a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 representing “completely dissatisfied” and 10 representing “completely satisfied” to answer the question, “All things
considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole these days?” A 9 or a 10 is coded as
1 and indicates satisfaction with life, while any response below 9 is coded as 0. For this question,
the 52 surveys completed in Wave 6 of the WVS (2010 to 2014) are also used.
Happiness This variable is constructed based on the question, “Taking all things together,
would you say you are: (1) Very happy (2) Rather happy (3) Not very happy (4) Not at all
happy?” Participants who responded “Very happy” or “Rather happy” are coded as 1, while “Not

37

very happy” and “Not at all happy” are coded as 0.

Variable definitions: WDI
When available, the most recent (2013) data for each country is used. If data from 2013 are
missing, 2012 data is used, and so on, until 2009. Several countries nonetheless have missing data
for certain indicators. The number of available countries for each indicator is specified below.
School enrollment rate Data on primary, secondary, and tertiary school enrollment rates include public and private schools and are from UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Out of the 190
countries in the sample, 164 have data available for primary enrollment; 156 for secondary enrollment; and 141 for tertiary enrollment. The reported variable is the proportion of relevant-age boys
enrolled in school divided by the proportion of relevant-age girls enrolled.
Life expectancy WDI defines life expectancy at birth as “the number of years a newborn
infant would live if prevailing patterns of mortality at the time of its birth were to stay the same
throughout its life.” The statistics have been compiled from multiple sources including the UN
Population Division, the U.S. Census Bureau and census reports. Life expectancy for females and
males is used to create the life expectancy ratio for each country. Seven countries in the sample
are missing data for life expectancy.
Labor force participation The underlying data source is the International Labor Organization
(ILO), which compiles the data from population censuses and labor force surveys. ILO defines
the labor force as people ages 15 or older who are “economically active” and excludes “persons
occupied solely in domestic duties in their own households exclusively.” An important limitation of
the labor force participation data is that “the extent to which family workers, particularly women,
who assist in family enterprises are included among the enumerated economically active population
varies considerably from one country to another.” The variable used in the analysis is the labor
force participation rate of males divided by the labor force participation rate of females. Fifteen
countries are missing this variable.
Sex ratio The male to female sex ratio at birth is from the UN Population Division and is
calculated as the ratio of the number of male births to female births. Nine countries are missing
data on the sex ratio at birth.
Percent of GDP from services Services as a percent of GDP is from the World Bank and the
OECD. “Services” as defined by divisions 50-99 of the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) includes “value added in wholesale and retail trade (including hotels and restaurants),
transport, and government, financial, professional, and personal services such as education, health
care, and real estate services.” Twenty countries do not have services data available.

U.S. Census
The sex ratio of last births is calculated using the public-use 1% sample for the 1860 U.S. Census
of Population and 5% sample for the 1900 U.S. Census of Population, available from IPUMS. The
sample is restricted to women whose youngest child is age 10 to 15. The restriction to age 10 or
older is to increase the likelihood that the woman has completed her fertility and for consistency
with the Indian DHS analysis which is restricted to cohorts born before prenatal sex-diagnostic
tests were widely available. The restriction to age 15 or younger is because older children who are
no longer in the household cannot be matched to their mother. The sample is also restricted to
women age 49 and younger to match the sample inclusion criteria that the DHS uses. The sex
ratio of last births is the ratio of boys to girls among the last-born surviving children, excluding
stepchildren and multiple births.

38

Other data sources
Home production Data on home production for men and women age 15 to 64 come from
the OECD Time Use Survey Database, which compiles data from national time use surveys. The
sample includes 29 countries, with a focus on OECD member countries. China, India, and South
Africa are included by the OECD for comparison. The surveys were conducted between 1999 and
2011, with the majority from 2005 onwards. The measure of home production used is the “unpaid
work” category and includes hours spent per day on routine housework, shopping, care for household
members (including child care and adult care), and travel related to household activities. Following
Ramey’s (2009) definition of home production, care for non-household members and volunteer work
are excluded.
Men’s preference for spouse’s chastity at marriage Buss (1989) asked respondents to rate how
important or desirable 18 characteristics were in terms of choosing a mate. The four-point scale
ran from 3 (“indispensable”) to 0 (“irrelevant or unimportant”). Two of the characteristics were
“Physically attractive” and “Chastity: no previous experience in sexual intercourse.”

39

1.6
1.2

1.4

R2=0.107

China

1

India

.8

Ratio of male to female primary enrollment rate

Appendix Figure 1: Gender gaps in primary and secondary school enrollment

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

64000
Sub-Saharan Africa

2.5
1.5

2

R2=0.207

India

1

China

.5

Ratio of male to female secondary enrollment rate

(a) Primary education enrollment (M/F ratio)

1000
Americas

4000
16000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

64000
Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Secondary education enrollment (M/F ratio)
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from WDI.

40

Ratio of male to female happiness (very/quite
happy)
.8
.9
1
1.1

Appendix Figure 2: Gender gaps in happiness and (Wave 6) life satisfaction
R2=0.055

India
China

7

8

Americas

9
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

10

Middle East & N. Africa

11
Sub-Saharan Africa

1.5

R2=0.002

.5

1

China

0

Ratio of male to female satisfication with life

(a) Self-reported happiness (M/F ratio)

7

8
Americas

9
10
GDP per capita (log scale)

Asia & Oceania

Europe

Middle East & N. Africa

11

12

Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Life satisfaction (M/F ratio), Wave 6 sample
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from (a) WVS, wave 5 and (b) WVS, wave 6.

41

8

R2=0.375

4

6

India

2

China

0

Ratio of female to male time spent on home
production

Appendix Figure 3: Time spent on home production

2000

6000
20000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Americas

Asia & Oceania

Europe

60000

Sub-Saharan Africa

6

R2=0.267

4

5

India

3

China

2

Women's hours per day spent on home production

(a) Time spent on home production (Female-male ratio)

2000

6000
20000
GDP per capita (log scale)
Americas

Asia & Oceania

Europe

60000

Sub-Saharan Africa

(b) Women’s time spent on home production
Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value (from WDI) in the year the outcome is measured,
expressed in 2011 U.S. dollars. Outcome data are from the OECD Time Use Survey Database.

42

Appendix Table 1: Within-country comparisons of DHS gender outcomes

Agrees that wife beating is
justified
Has no say in decisions on large
household purchases
Has no say in decisions on
visiting family or relatives

Below median
wealth index

Above median
wealth index

Below=Above
p-value

0.393
[0.229]
0.401
[0.206]
0.312
[0.184]

0.292
[0.212]
0.335
[0.196]
0.250
[0.169]

0.020
0.092
0.070

Notes. The sample comprises women in 54 DHS surveys. Households are classified according to whether
they are above or below a sample-specific (i.e., country-specific) household wealth index. The wealth index
is constructed by the DHS using principal component analysis of several asset ownership and dwelling
characteristic variables. The first two columns report the mean response with the standard deviation in
brackets for the two subsamples. The p-value for the equality of means is reported in the third column.

43

Appendix Table 2: DHS and WVS samples

WVS Wave 5 Sample
(2004-09)

DHS Sample
Americas
Bolivia
2008
Colombia
2010
Dominican Republic
2007
Guyana
2009
Haiti
2012
Honduras
2011-12

44

Asia & Oceania
Bangladesh
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Ukraine

2011
2010
2005-06
2012
2009
2011
2012-13
2008

2008-09
2010
2006
2012
2005
2012
2007

Middle East & N. Africa
Egypt
2008
Jordan
2012

Sub-Saharan Africa
Burkina Faso
Benin
Burundi
Cameroon
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Cote dIvoire
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome & Principe
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Swaziland
Tanzania
Timor-Leste
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2010
2011-12
2010
2011
2007
2011-12
2011-12
2011
2012
2008
2012
2008-09
2009
2007
2008-09
2010
2006
2011
2006-07
2012
2008
2010
2008-09
2010-11
2008
2006-07
2010
2009-10
2011
2007
2010-11

Americas
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Guatemala
Mexico
Peru
Trinidad & Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Asia & Oceania
Australia
China
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Japan
South Korea
Malaysia
New Zealand
Viet Nam
Thailand
Europe
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany

Great Britain
Hungary
Italy
Moldova
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
Ukraine
Middle East & N. Africa
Egypt
Ethiopia
Ghana
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Morocco
Sub-Saharan Africa
Burkina Faso
Mali
Rwanda
South Africa
Zambia

Appendix Table 3: WDI sample
Americas
Aruba
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bermuda
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Puerto Rico
St. Kitts & Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad & Tobago
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Asia & Oceania
Australia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
Hong Kong, China
India
Indonesia

Japan
Kiribati
Korea, Rep.
Laos
Macao (China)
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
Mongolia
Nepal
New Zealand
Pakistan
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Viet Nam
Europe
Albania
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia & Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy

45

Kazakhstan
Kosovo
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malta
Moldova
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uzbekistan
Middle East & N. Africa
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Morocco
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
West Bank and Gaza
Yemen

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cabo Verde
Central African Rep.
Chad
Comoros
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep
Cote d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guine-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome & Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

