                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DID BANK DISTRESS STIFLE INNOVATION DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION?

                                           Ramana Nanda
                                           Tom Nicholas

                                        Working Paper 20392
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20392


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




We are grateful to Shai Bernstein, Mark Carlson, Iain Cockburn, Ronnie Chatterji, Mihir Desai, Charles
Eesley, Joan Farre-Mensa, Price Fishback, Naomi Hausman, Rick Hornbeck, Bill Kerr, Josh Lerner,
Matt Marx, David Mowery, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, Gary Richardson, Jonathan Rose, Antoinette
Schoar, Chris Woodruff, Nicolas Ziebarth and seminar participants at the NBER Productivity Lunch,
the Federal Reserve Board, the All-UC Economic History Group Conference on Science, Intellectual
Property, and Innovation at UC Berkeley, the University of Iowa (Tippie) and the Queen's University
of Belfast for helpful comments. We thank the Division of Research and Faculty Development at Harvard
Business School for funding. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Ramana Nanda and Tom Nicholas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Did Bank Distress Stifle Innovation During the Great Depression?
Ramana Nanda and Tom Nicholas
NBER Working Paper No. 20392
August 2014
JEL No. G21,N22,O30

                                             ABSTRACT

We find a negative relationship between bank distress and the level, quality and trajectory of firm-level
innovation during the Great Depression, particularly for R&D firms operating in capital intensive
industries. However, we also show that because a sufficient number of R&D intensive firms were
located in counties with lower levels of bank distress, or were operating in less capital intensive
industries, the negative effects were mitigated in aggregate. Although Depression era bank distress
was associated with the stifling of innovation, our results also help to explain why technological
development was still robust following one of the largest shocks in the history of the U.S. banking
system.


Ramana Nanda
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 317
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
rnanda@hbs.edu

Tom Nicholas
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
tnicholas@hbs.edu
I    Introduction
There is increasing evidence linking the health of the financial sector to outcomes in the
real economy (King and Levine, 1993; Jayaratne and Strahan 1996; Rajan and Zingales,
1998; Black and Strahan, 2002). Studies of the recent financial crisis have shown that when
bank lending dries up, shocks to the availability of credit can constrain resource allocation
and severely depress firm-level investment (e.g., Kashyap et al., 1994; Paravisini, 2008;
Campello et al., 2010; Ivashina and Scharfstein, 2010; Lemmon and Roberts, 2010). Fewer
studies, however, have examined the link between the health of the financial sector and
technological development, which is an important gap in our understanding given that
innovation acts as a main driver of the real economy through its impact on aggregate
output and productivity growth.1
    The Great Depression provides a useful context for such a study.2 Richardson (2007,
2008) finds that 5,189 banks failed from January 1st 1929 through February 28th 1933,
which would have had a strong impact on access to capital through the bank lending
channel (e.g., Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Temin, 1976; Bernanke, 1983; White, 1984;
Wicker, 1996; Calomiris and Mason, 1997, 2003; Grossman, 2010; Graham, Hazarika and
Narasimhan, 2011; Carlson and Rose, 2011). Yet, despite this level of bank distress,
aggregate productivity statistics show that the 1930s was the most innovative decade of
the twentieth century (Field, 2003, 2011). Although productivity dropped from 1929 to
1933 and output fell precipitously (between the peak in August 1929, and the trough of
May 1933 real GDP fell by 39 percent), industries like chemicals, television and radio
experienced fundamental phases of innovation (Bernstein, 1989; Szostak, 1995). During
the 1930s the automobile sector experienced one of the most important technical break-
through periods in its history (Raff and Trajtenberg, 1997).
    If the health of the financial sector is so critical to the functioning of the real economy,
how can it be reconciled that technological development continued to advance rapidly
   1
     Brown, Fazzari and Petersen (2009) analyze the effects of finance on R&D during the 1990s,
Atanassov, Nanda and Seru (2007) examine the nature of bank vs. equity finance and the nature of
firm innovation, and Hall and Lerner (2010) survey the literature more generally
   2
     Analogously, in their study of corporate governance and corporate performance, Graham, Hazarika
and Narasimhan (2011) argue that the Depression “can be viewed as an exogenous event at the firm level
and hence provides an ideal setting to test our predictions in a ‘before-and-after’ comparison.”



                                                  2
despite a disrupted financial system? Although prior work on this period has extensively
examined the causes of the financial crises, little work has been done on identifying the
impact of bank distress on innovation at the firm-level. Bernanke (1983) implies the
effect should be large given that bank failures destroyed information capital, leading
to higher financial intermediation costs in establishing contracts between lenders and
borrowers. More recently, Richardson and Troost (2009) find a strong link between bank
credit contraction and declines in wholesale trade and Mladjan (2011) connects bank
distress with falls in output, especially in sectors such as rubber that depended heavily
on access to capital. On the other hand, using a general equilibrium framework, Cole
and Ohanian (2000, 2004) assert that “banking shocks account for a small fraction of the
Great Depression.” Their preferred explanation for the duration of the 1930s downturn is
the negative impact of New Deal cartelization and labor law policies.
   We use novel micro-data on corporate R&D to examine the link between financial
sector distress and technological development. Two features of the data allow us to move
beyond the aggregate analysis of productivity growth in the 1930s to study whether, and
if so how, firm-level innovation was impacted by the banking crises. First, we are able to
create a firm-level panel of corporate innovation, by matching patent and patent citation
records from the U.S. patent office to individual firms included in the National Research
Council’s (NRC) direct correspondence surveys of industrial research labs. These surveys
have comprehensive coverage of the corporate R&D sector, spanning R&D labs by large
public firms such as DuPont and General Electric, but also including small, private firms
that were involved in innovation (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998; Nicholas, 2011). Our data
thus provides us with close to the universe of corporate R&D patenting over the period
we study. Although the NRC surveys were not undertaken each year, firms included in
these surveys can be matched to patent records to create an annual panel of innovation.
Importantly, the panel spans the period 1920 to 1938, so we can examine innovation
before, during and after the banking crises.
   Second, we use information on the physical address of each firm in our dataset to
establish the county in which they were located and we link these data to county-level
data on banking in the United States from 1920 to 1936, as compiled by the FDIC. This


                                               3
dataset contains information on end-of-year deposits in all banks, the number of active
banks and the number of suspensions for all banks, national banks and state banks for
all counties, other than those in Wyoming.3
       We exploit cross-county variation in the severity of bank distress faced by the firms
in order to understand the extent to which bank distress in a firm’s local banking market
impacted the level and trajectory of corporate innovation. Restrictions on the banking
sector at the time meant that banks could not branch across state lines and were often
made up of unit banks. Only in California was there any extensive branching outside the
bank’s home office city (Carlson and Mitchener, 2009). Hence, a significant portion of
firm borrowing came from local banks, even for large, publicly-traded corporations.
       Our empirical strategy has three parts. First, we use difference-in-differences specifica-
tions to examine the quantity, quality and novelty of patenting by private firms relative to
publicly traded corporations in the periods before and after the bank failures. Consistent
with the view that rising costs of financial intermediation especially harm smaller enter-
prises (Bernanke, 1983; Kerr and Nanda, 2009), we find that private firms in our post
period experienced declines in R&D output relative to publicly traded firms. Patents
fell by 27 percent relative to publicly traded firms, citations by 45 percent and average
citations per patent by 23 percent. We also show that firms shifted the trajectory of inno-
vation to more incremental activities. We use two measures of patent novelty - originality
and generality - which identify patents starting a citation trail and patents affecting a
broad set of subsequent patent classes respectively. We also find a negative impact in
our post-period on these measures. To the extent that patents with high originality and
generality scores are characteristic of radical inventions, this suggests that bank distress
was associated with a shift away from high-risk R&D projects for private firms relative
to publicly traded firms.
       Although Friedman and Schwatrz (1963) argued that bank failures were driven pri-
marily by panics, an important concern with the estimates in the first part of our analysis
is that they may be confounded by demand shocks which caused private firms to patent
   3
    As noted by Calomiris and Mason (2003, p.1643), Wyoming is excluded from the FDIC data. Under
the dual banking system, state banks fell under the regulatory system of state banking departments while
national banks were regulated by the Office of the Comptroller of Currency.



                                                   4
less and banks to suspend more. The second part of our analysis therefore focuses only
on publicly traded firms. We exploit the fact that public firms that sold into a national
market would have been subjected to similar aggregate demand shocks while restrictions
on bank branching at the time implied that they still relied on local banks for some of
their financing needs. This allows us to control for aggregate demand fluctuations using
industry and year fixed effects, while still comparing firms that were based in more ver-
sus less stressed counties. Furthermore, we examine whether the difference in innovation
across more versus less stressed counties was driven by firms operating in sectors with
different capital requirements. When running our regressions on firms that were more or
less dependent on external finance, we show that the negative effect of bank distress on
innovation is dominated by the heavily dependent firms and additionally that the effect
of bank distress on R&D output is statistically insignificant for firms operating in less
capital intensive industries. The differential effects we find by capital requirements helps
to explain why bank distress would have stifled innovation for only a subset of R&D firms
during the 1930s. Indeed, we find the aggregate effect of bank stress on innovation by
publicly traded firms to be weak.
   Third, we present robustness checks on the results from the second part of our analysis
and attempt to isolate mechanisms. We draw on the literature documenting a strong
relationship between a community’s social structure and its susceptibility to bank panics
to construct an instrument for bank distress. Specifically, we measure the cohesiveness
or fragmentation of the social structure of each county using data from the 1906 Census
of Religious Bodies to separate out the supply side effect of bank distress from aggregate
demand shocks. Our results support the hypothesis that bank distress negatively affected
innovation. Next we use county-by-year fixed effects to show that time-varying differences
across more versus less distressed counties do not confound our results. Finally, we use
data on firm-level R&D employment and the number of laboratories operated to show that
our results are not being driven by bank distress only indirectly leading to a reduction in
innovation through its effect on input usage.
   Overall, our findings indicate that bank distress during the Great Depression was
associated with a large reduction in the level and quality of innovation by the firms that


                                             5
were most affected. Our patent novelty measures also suggest that firms in distressed
counties were considerably more conservative in the innovation they pursued and the
types of R&D projects that were undertaken. Crucially, however, we also show that the
localized nature of the bank failures meant that a sufficient fraction of the most active
patenting firms were located in counties with relatively low bank suspension rates, or
were operating in industries that were less dependent on external finance. Our dynamic
specifications show that even the worse hit firms were beginning to catch up with their less
hit counterparts in terms of innovation by the end of the 1930s. In aggregate, therefore,
we are able to reconcile two previously contradictory views of the Great Depression: one
where the banking crisis should have impacted real activity such as firm-level innovation
and another where important advancements took place in innovation across a number of
industrial sectors at a time of unprecedented distress to the U.S. financial system.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides a his-
torical background to banking, finance and technological development during the Great
Depression in order to outline our strategy for identifying the effect of banking sector dis-
tress on innovation. Section three describes the NRC R&D firm data, patent and citations
data and FDIC bank data. Section four presents the empirical framework and results.
Section five reports the results from our robustness checks and Section six discusses our
findings and concludes in light of aggregate evidence on innovation during the 1930s.


II      Bank Distress and Financing Innovation
In the literature on the financing of innovation it is well-established that the propensity of
firms to undertake R&D depends on their ability to satisfy current capital expenditures
and to borrow in the future to meet potentially large adjustment costs (e.g., Levine, 2005;
Hall and Lerner, 2010). Although not all firms would have borrowed to directly finance
their innovation activities in the 1930s, R&D would have been impacted by disruption
to the banking sector that prevented firms from smoothing out expenditures in the face
of a large liquidity shock. Even firms that were not directly financing their innovation
through bank debt would have been impacted, as internal cash flows were diverted to
fund more “essential” activities by firms unable to access sufficient external finance. This


                                              6
was particularly true of the early twentieth century, when the widespread use of capital
markets was uncommon (Mitchener and Wheeler, 2010) and many firms relied on renew-
able short-term funds provided by banks, even to finance longer-term investment (Jacoby
and Saulnier, 1947).4
       Bernanke (2000, pp.63-64) points to a large body of contemporary evidence showing
that firms faced severe difficulties accessing working capital and finance for long-term
investments in the 1930s, even for elite firms with a track record of commercial credit.
Calomiris and Mason (2003, p.937) summarize the fundamental effect that banking sector
distress in the 1930s had on firm-level investment:


         Many firms and individuals relied on banks for credit, and as those banks
         suffered losses of capital (due to asset value declines) and contractions in
         deposits (as depositors reacted to bank weakness by withdrawing their funds),
         even borrowers with viable projects and strong balance sheets experienced a
         decrease in the effective supply of loanable funds.

       Although publicly traded firms relied on the equity markets to finance investment
during the 1920s, this conduit was severely disrupted following the stock market crash
in 1929 (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). Using data from Moody’s Investor Service Figure
1 illustrates the sharp fall in public equity and debt financing in the early 1930s, which
meant that firms would have been unable to fully substitute bank financing with capital
from public markets. Thus, bank distress would have impacted the ability of publicly
traded firms to access external finance.

II.A        Local Financing by Banks
Related literature also suggests that local bank financing mattered a great deal for the
financing activities of firms. Constraints on interstate branch-banking implied that local
banking conditions had a clear effect on local lending. For example, Calomiris and Mason
(2003) report that during the Depression years, a fall in the growth rate of bank loans
   4
     Consistent with the fact that even large publicly traded firms relied to bank financing, bank credit
is a much smaller share of overall credit in the economy today than it was during the Great Depression.
Historical Flow of Funds data from the Federal Reserve Board provide data from the mid 1940s onwards.
Bank loans accounted for about 25 percent of credit provided to non financial corporate businesses
between 1946 and 1955. In contrast, bank lending accounted for 9 percent of credit to the same class of
businesses between 2005 and 2012 (10 percent looking only from 2005-2006).



                                                   7
was associated with a substantial drop in local income growth. In a further contribution,
Ziebarth (2011) finds economically important effects of bank distress on manufacturing
activity in Mississippi. He compares establishments in districts of the state that fell
under the Atlanta Federal Reserve, which provided liquidity to mitigate bank distress,
with districts under the St. Louis Federal Reserve, which did not expand credit supply
counter-cyclically. Ziebarth estimates that this difference in policy approaches explains
around 60 percent of the fall in industrial production from 1929 to 1931.
   A prominent example of local financing affecting firm-level outcomes in our data is the
automobile industry in Detroit, which was heavily research intensive (Raff and Trajten-
berg, 1997). By 1927, 56 percent of Detroit’s economy was based on car manufacturers
and component suppliers (Curcio, 2001, p.505). When banking panics caused firms to
suspend their activities during the early 1930s, the Ford Motor Company provided ap-
proximately $12 million in loans to local banks to avert the crisis. Ford lost heavily in its
endeavors (Grant, 2005) and General Motors suffered similarly with around $19 million
in liquid assets frozen during the panics (Lumley, 2009, p.141). The other great manu-
facturer, Chrysler, relied heavily upon bank loans from Detroit banks, with $19 million
outstanding in 1933. The extent to which Chrysler suffered can be seen from estimates
of its exposure to the disruption. In April 1933, the Wall Street Journal reported:


      Chrysler’s balance sheet for March 31 discloses further declines in cash and
      its equivalent and in working capital during the quarter...[and]...the drop in
      liquid strength is due entirely to the segregation of deposits in closed or re-
      stricted banks from working capital... Chrysler’s net cash position has declined
      $10,039,611 since March 31, 1932, a decrease of which $6,520,504 was directly
      caused by the banking crisis.

   Our identification strategy exploits the fact that at least some bank financing was local
even for large, publicly traded firms. This allows us to disentangle the effects of finance
from aggregate demand shocks that were also likely to have played a role in affecting real
economic activity during this time period.




                                             8
III       The Data
III.A       Measuring Innovation
Our data are based on all firms in the National Research Council’s 1921, 1927, 1931, 1933
and 1938 editions of Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States. The NRC
began an extensive program of direct correspondence with firms operating R&D facilities
after the First World War, as part of its efforts to codify information on the location of
laboratories and scientific personnel. The NRC data cover publicly traded and private
firms so we observe close to the universe of firms in the R&D sector over this period,
absent of firm size or ownership censoring. In fact, the NRC data are considered to be
the most comprehensive guide to R&D activities for any period in U.S. history. Although
much prior research has examined innovation using the NRC surveys, especially work
by Mowery (1995, 2005), Mowery and Rosenberg (e.g., 1989, 1998) and by MacGarvie
and Furman (2007, 2009), our novel micro data stems from the fact that we match the
underlying firm-level data recorded in the NRC to other key datasets.
      We first match the database of NRC firms to firm-level assignees in U.S. patent data.5
It is thus possible to create an annual proxy for R&D activity for each firm. Although
the relationship between R&D and patenting is not exact, Griliches (1990) finds a close
temporal correlation between R&D expenditure and patents so changes in inputs and
outputs should be correlated. Our patent data are measured as of their application date
so we have a close association between the timing of patents and the timing of R&D.6 Of
course, not all inventions are patented and the propensity to patent varies strongly across
industries (for example, higher in areas like machinery and machine tools than the food
industry). But an advantage of our data is that the propensity to patent was very high
by modern standards so historical patent metrics should be an economically meaningful
measure of innovation. In addition, since industry-specific differences in the propensity
to patent remained constant during the 1920s and the 1930s (Nicholas, 2011) our use of
industry fixed effects appropriately controls for these time invariant differences.
      An increase in distress to the financing environment for firms could lead to a fall
  5
    This part of the data construction process is explained in more detail in Nicholas (2011).
  6
    Other proxies of R&D such as the employment of research personnel are available from the NRC
surveys, albeit in the years when the surveys of the labs were undertaken.


                                               9
in the quantity, quality and novelty of patenting, if firms were forced to innovate in a
manner constrained by access to external finance. To examine patent quality, we use
citations to patents granted between 1947 and 2008 to adjust patents according to their
technological significance. Following Trajtenberg (1990), the idea of using citations to
adjust patent counts for quality is common in the literature. Kogan et. al., (2012)
construct a useful alternative indicator of patent quality by looking at the stock market
reaction to patents for the time period 1926 to 2010. Their measure is strongly correlated
with citations. Our citations dataset includes almost 43 million forward citations to
patents granted since 1836 in the population of patents granted between February 1947,
when citations were first officially incorporated into patent documents, and September
2008 (Nicholas, 2010). Furthermore, the patent citation trail allows us to calculate patent
novelty measures - originality and generality. Because originality is typically constructed
using backward citations (but these are unavailable in our data because our citations start
in 1947) we use a proxy measure that codes a patent as 1 if it is the originating patent
in a citation trail and 0 if earlier patents are cited. Generality measures the range (by
USPTO 3-digit classes) of later generations of inventions that benefit from an early patent
so it can be thought of as an indicator of a patent’s future scope.7 Both originality and
generality measures can be used to determine the extent to which firms were being risky
or conservative in their pursuit of R&D.
       We also geocode the address of each firm in the dataset, in order to determine the
county in which it was located. For firms operating multiple R&D labs in different ge-
ographies, we set the location of the firm’s headquarter.8 We then matched the county
in which the firm was based to county-level bank data from the FDIC. An attractive
property of the FDIC data is that it covers all banks, not just banks that were members
of the Federal Reserve System. Failure rates were much higher for nonmember banks and
the change in the loans on their balance sheets also fell more sharply during the 1930s
(Wicker, 1996, p.15). Consequently, we are able to create an accurate measure of distress
to the local banking market where the firm was based.
   7
     Generality is defined as one minus the Herfindahl index of patent citations by 3-digit class. We use
the bias-adjusted measure of generality described in Hall (2005).
   8
     16 percent of firms in the NRC data operated multiple labs. One example is General Electric where
the main center of R&D was Schenectady in upstate New York.


                                                   10
      Finally, we identify a set of firm and industry-specific measures that serve as important
covariates in our regressions. We sort firms into industries using descriptions of the
R&D activity they undertook. Also, we code publicly traded firms as those listed in the
Commercial and Financial Chronicle, which tracked stocks traded on any exchange in the
United States, not just the NYSE.
      Descriptive statistics for our data are reported in Table I for the firms that we use in
our empirical analysis. Of the 2,777 firms listed in the NRC volumes we excluded those
without full information on R&D activity. We also excluded firms whose first entry in
both the NRC survey and the patent data was after 1931. This is to ensure that our
difference-in-differences specifications use firms that existed both before and after our
event year so that our results are not confounded by entry and exit.
      It can be seen that the 2,064 firms in our sample accounted for over 140,000 patents
from 1920 to 1938.9 Table I highlights that although publicly traded firms accounted for
13 percent of firms, they accounted for 45 percent of patents. The propensity to patent
was also higher for publicly traded firms, with around 60 percent of all firms in the NRC
data patenting compared to a propensity to patent of almost 90 percent for NRC firms
listed on the public markets (Nicholas, 2011). Publicly traded firms patented more, so
they accounted for more citations, but the average number of citations per patent was also
higher, suggesting that these firms also produced higher quality innovations on average.
They also tended to produce patents with higher average originality and generality scores
so the impact of their citations on subsequent patents was both stronger and broader.
      The industry distribution of NRC firms mirrors trends in innovation during the early
twentieth century. Electricity became a dominant R&D-based industry with the electri-
fication of homes and manufacturing establishments (David, 1990, Atkeson and Kehoe,
2007), while the chemicals industry also flourished in an environment of knowledge dif-
fusion and rapid technological change (Mokyr, 2002; Murmann, 2003). Machinery, auto-
mobiles and communications also rank as industries of particular significance during the
1920s and the Depression years (Bernstein, 1989; Szostak, 1995).
  9
      Since the 1921 survey was conducted during 1920 we also include this year in our analysis.




                                                    11
III.B        Measuring County-Level Bank Distress
The principal explanation for the widespread bank failures of the 1930s was developed
by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) who argued that bank failures were driven largely by
banking panics that led to the widespread failures of otherwise healthy banks.10 They
document that the most extreme failures for banks occurred in a window of time between
1930 and 1933. In particular, they identified four panics: in the Fall of 1930, the Spring
of 1931, the Fall of 1931 and the first quarter of 1933 which culminated in Roosevelt’s
decision to declare a national banking holiday in March 1933. Data from Banking and
Monetary Statistics is consistent with this view, showing that the volume of loans fell by
half during this three year period.
       To measure bank distress, we use FDIC county-level data on banks in the United States
between 1920 and 1936 and the first Friedman-Schwartz crisis in 1930 to establish an event
date for observing pre- and post-period differences in banking sector distress. While the
FDIC data treat failures and suspensions synonymously (and the two are distinct because
suspended banks could subsequently re-open), Calomiris and Mason (2000) argue that this
issue does not make a substantive difference when identifying bank distress empirically.
We rely on distinguishing counties that were differentially affected by bank distress, so we
calculated a bank distress intensity score for each county c, scaling the number of bank
suspensions between 1930 and 1933 by the number of banks in existence in 1929.

                                              t=1933
                                                P
                                                       SU SP EN SION Sc,t
                                              t=1930
                          DIST RESSc =
                                                       BAN KSc,   1929



       Figure 2A shows the geographic distribution of high fail and low fail counties across
the United States, coding counties with above median bank distress as high stress, and
those below as low stress. It illustrates the broad spatial pattern of distress with some
concentration in Midwestern counties. Failures were initially highly concentrated in rural
  10
     In their view, panic and contagion exogenously caused failures and banks failed because they were
illiquid as opposed to being insolvent. Others, however, have argued that insolvencies played a much
larger role in explaining the pattern of bank failures (Temin, 1976; White, 1984; Calomiris and Mason,
1997, 2003). Bringing together both sides of the debate, Bordo and Landon-Lane (2010) find a crucial
role for methodology. Studies using macro data tend to find illiquidity effects. Those using micro data
tend to find evidence in support of insolvency.


                                                  12
communities as a consequence of negative shocks to agriculture, but as the banking crisis
deepened, urban areas became more affected (Wicker, 1996, p.7). Brocker and Hanes
(2012) show that cities experiencing the largest run ups in real estate prices during the
early-to-mid 1920s also suffered the greatest declines during the 1930s. If lower real estate
values depressed demand or mortgage defaults led to declines in credit supply, this would
be another potential source of spatial heterogeneity in bank distress.
   Figure 2B shows the corresponding location of firms in our data, revealing a strong
preponderance of R&D activity in manufacturing areas of the North East. Despite some
level of spatial concentration, however, it can be seen from both figures that there is
evidence of sufficient variation in the extent of bank failures across counties where R&D
firms were located to make this an attractive source of data to exploit for identification.


IV      Estimation Strategy and Main Results
IV.A      Reverse Causality and Sorting
Assuming the Friedman-Schwartz view of banking panics is correct, banks failed because
of panic disturbances rather than weaknesses in bank fundamentals. Banks, they ar-
gue, were illiquid not insolvent and therefore with exogenous panics our estimates should
approximate the true effect of bank sector distress on innovation. Even Calomiris and
Mason (2003), who show that variation in local demand conditions may have played a
role in local bank failures, find that the lagged liabilities of failed businesses that were
borrowing from banks do not predict bank failures. Extrapolating from their results to
ours suggests that the performance of R&D firms in our dataset is unlikely to be a source
of endogeneity when explaining bank sector stress.
   Nevertheless, we provide additional evidence to show that reverse causality is not a
serious concern. We estimate in Appendix Table I that the level of bank finance by publicly
traded R&D firms in our dataset was around 2 to 3 percent of banks’ outstanding loans,
implying that, on average, the poor performance of any individual publicly traded firm
would not have led to the bank failures in their local county. At the same time we also
identify in Appendix Table II a strong effect of bank distress on the balance sheets of
publicly traded firms. For NRC firms that we were able to trace in Moody’s Manual of


                                             13
Industrials, we find a one standard deviation change in our bank distress intensity score
(specified as a normalized mean zero standard deviation one variable) is associated with
a 4 percent decline in notes payable and bank loans and an 8 percent decline in cash in
the post-period. Our evidence implies that, on average, NRC firms could not have caused
banks to suspend their operations in local markets, but that bank distress in local markets
did negatively affect the financial position of R&D firms.
   We also rule out that more productive firms in our dataset were systematically more
likely to “sort” on “better” counties and therefore locate in counties that ultimately
experienced fewer bank failures. Figure 3A plots firm patenting between 1921 and 1929
against the severity of the bank distress between 1930 and 1933. It shows that there is no
systematic relationship between the innovation of firms in the pre-period with the level
of bank failures experienced by counties in the post-period. In Figure 3B, we use firm
sales as a non-innovation measure of firm performance. This data is less comprehensive
than the patenting data we have due to limitations on what firms reported to Moody’s.
But again, we find no evidence that weaker firms were systematically sorting into counties
that later experienced more bank failures.
   In the following sections we report three main sets of results. First, we compare
innovation by private firms to public firms, since we would expect private firms to be
impacted more by rising costs of bank intermediation than public firms. We view these
results as being largely descriptive evidence that is consistent with bank distress stifling
innovation, since it is likely that our comparison of private and public firms would be
confounded by the effects of local aggregate demand shocks that might disproportionately
hit private firms. The second and third sets of results, which we view as the core of our
analysis, focus only on publicly traded firms. We maintain that publicly traded firms sold
into national markets and therefore faced similar aggregate demand within industries,
but the local nature of bank financing at the time implied that the degree of bank stress
they faced varied by the county in which they were located. For these firms we can
disentangle the effect of bank stress on innovation from the confounding role of aggregate
demand. If our hypothesized channel is the reason for our findings rather than omitted
variables, we should expect to see stronger results for those firms operating in industries


                                             14
more dependent on external finance. Hence, we examine whether firms engaged in R&D in
more capital intensive industries were disproportionately influenced by bank distress. We
use Rajan and Zingales’ (1998) measures to categorize firms in our dataset as being more,
or less, dependent on external finance (Appendix Table III provides the concordance we
use to map the Rajan and Zingales industries to the ones in our data) .

IV.B      Private Firms versus Publicly Traded Firms
To frame our first set of results, Figure 4A plots an index of patenting per firm, grouped
by public and private firms. Note that the growth in patenting by public and private firms
is relatively similar until 1930 after which there is divergence. The trend in patenting by
public firms flattens in the 1930s, whereas patenting by private firms falls over this period,
with the divergence in patenting between the two groups of firms being particularly sharp
in the period 1930 to 1933, which experienced the most dramatic bank distress.
   In order to examine this relationship in a multivariate context, we use differences-in-
differences. Table II reports coefficients from the following OLS specification:


 Log(P AT EN T S)f,t = β1 P RIV AT Ef + β2 P RIV AT Ef × P OSTt + φc + τt + ψi +  (1)


   Here, Log(P AT EN T S)f,t is the log-transformed patents granted to firm f measured
as of the application year t. The parameters φc , τt and ψi correspond to county, year
and industry fixed effects, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
Our main variable of interest is P RIV AT Ef × P OSTt the interaction between a dummy
variable coded unity for private firms and a dummy variable coded unity for the post-
period. The coefficient β2 , or more specifically [exp(β2 )−1]× 100, measures the percentage
change in patenting by private firms, relative to public firms, in the post-period.
   Column (1) of Table II shows that private firms experienced a 27 percent relative
decline in the number of patents filed in the post-period. While column (1) is estimated
across all firms in our sample, regardless of whether or not they patented, column (2)
restricts the sample to firms that had patented at least once in the sample period. As can
be seen from column (2) of Table II, the coefficient is almost identical, implying the results
are not due to compositional differences across counties where more actively patenting

                                             15
firms were based.
      In columns (3) and (4) of Table II, we estimate specifications with citations measures
as a dependent variable. We use total citations to patents per firm year and average
citations per patent per firm year to proxy for patent quality.11 Total citations to all
patents filed by private firms in the post-period were 45 percent lower relative to the
citation difference between private and public firm patenting in the pre-period. If firms
cut back on marginal patents, we might expect average citations per patent to stay the
same or even rise. On the other hand, if firms undertook less radical and novel R&D,
and focused instead on incremental innovation, we would expect citations per patent to
fall. As can be seen from column (4), citations per patent by private firms fell by about
23 percent in the post-period relative to the pre-period, suggesting that firms undertook
more incremental innovations during the 1930s.
      In columns (5) and (6) we further investigate the hypothesis that private firms may
have been undertaking less radical innovation, by using measures of the originality and
generality of the patents they filed. Columns (5) and (6) reveal that patents filed by
private firms were systematically less original and had a systematically lower impact
on subsequent innovation. Table II therefore provides consistent evidence, using several
distinct measures, that innovation by private firms was both lower and less novel during
the Depression era.

IV.C         Focusing on Publicly Traded Firms
Given that the Great Depression was associated with a reduction in aggregate demand,
one explanation for the results in Table II is that non-financial factors could have affected
private firms more than publicly traded firms. If this was the case, the descriptive patterns
we outline in Table II could not be attributed to bank distress per se. Therefore, we focus
on publicly traded firms to disentangle the role of aggregate demand from the effect of the
credit shock. Both private and public firms relied heavily on their local banking markets
for access to a supply of R&D capital, but publicly traded firms were more likely to sell
their products into national markets. We therefore exploit the fact that public firms in
the same industry faced the same shocks to aggregate demand but a differential effect on
 11
      Citations refer to the cumulative citations (1947 to 2008) to patents filed by firm f it year t.


                                                      16
their access to finance, depending on the degree of bank distress in the county in which
they were located. In doing so, we can use cross-sectional differences in bank suspension
rates across counties to examine how the severity of the shock to bank finance faced by
the publicly traded firms impacted their rate and trajectory of innovation.
   Figure 4B plots the raw data of patenting for public firms located in more versus less
distressed counties, as an illustration of our main finding. It shows that firms located in
more distressed counties experienced a sharp decline in patenting in the post-1929 period
relative to those located in less distressed counties. As in Figure 4A, the bulk of the
difference in these two samples is driven by changes that occurred in the 1930 to 1933
period, which was when the vast majority of bank failures occurred. In order to probe
the data further, we use the following specification:


             Log(P AT EN T S)f,t = γ1 ST RESSc × P OSTt + φc + τt + ψi +                  (2)

   Here, we keep the same set of fixed effects as before, but we introduce ST RESSc ×
P OSTt as the main variable of interest. That is, we interact our cross-sectional measure
of bank distress at the county-level with a P OST dummy variable that takes a value
of unity from 1930 onwards. County fixed effects capture systematic differences in the
lending environment across counties (such as number, or the competitive environment of
banks, as well as the main effect of bank distress) that may affect access to finance for
firms. Year fixed effects and industry fixed effects control for systematic differences in loan
characteristics and fluctuations in aggregate demand that might vary systematically across
these industry types or across years. Our estimations therefore examine whether publicly-
traded firms located in counties that experienced higher levels of bank distress experienced
greater declines in innovation compared to those located in less-stressed counties. For ease
of interpretation we normalize our bank distress intensity score to have zero mean and
unit standard deviation.
   Column (1) of Table III shows that publicly-traded firms in counties with higher
levels of bank distress were less likely to patent in the post-1929 period relative to those
located in less distressed counties. The coefficient implies that a one standard deviation
increase in the number of bank suspensions was associated with a 7 percent decline in the

                                              17
rate of patenting by firms in the post period. For our other measures, patent citations,
originality and generality, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the trajectory of innovation
by publicly-traded firms was any different in the post-period than the pre-period.
       In order to test for confounding trend influences, we also estimate time varying effects
of bank distress by interacting our normalized bank distress intensity score with a set
of year dummies measured relative to a base year of 1929. The coefficients from these
regressions and their confidence intervals are plotted in Figures 5A and 5B. Before the
Friedman-Schwartz bank panic window, all the coefficients are statistically insignificant
from zero at the customary level, whereas they drop noticeably for patents and citations
during the post-period. The time varying predictors suggest causation ran from bank
distress to observed declines in the level of R&D output, but they also highlight that the
effects were concentrated during the early years of the Great Depression.

IV.D         The Role of External Finance
To probe the results further, we examine whether there are differential effects for firms
operating in more versus less capital intensive industries. From a substantive perspective,
this helps to isolate the channel through which we believe bank distress might have affected
innovation and it also improves the robustness of our identification. For example, it is still
possible that other more local factors such as the presence of skilled scientists, institutions
such as universities or agglomerative forces might affect both county-level fundamentals
and innovative output. Firms located in more distressed counties may have faced tougher
labor markets with respect to hiring and retaining talented scientists compared to those
located in less distressed counties.
       Table IV suggests that the effect of banking sector distress on technological develop-
ment we have observed so far was especially severe and only pertinent for firms operating
in capital intensive industries. We use the same specifications from Table III, but parti-
tioned by firms in industries that were more or less dependent on external finance and we
test for significant differences between the coefficients using Wald tests.12
  12
     We establish a concordance between industries in which the NRC firms were active and those reported
by Rajan and Zingales (1998). Although the Rajan-Zingales external finance dependence measures pertain
to firms from the 1980s, we follow the intuition, as well as Mitchener and Wheelock (2010), and assume
persistence across time. In support of this assumption, we verified that the correlation between these
measures and a proxy measure for firms in our data during the 1920s and 1930s is strong. Rajan and


                                                  18
    Column (1) of Panel A shows that the decline in patenting for firms that depended
on external finance was 19 percent lower in the post period for a one standard deviation
increase in bank distress. On the other hand, for firms in industries less dependent
on external finance, the difference between firms in more versus less distressed counties
is economically much smaller and not statistically different from zero. Wald tests of
the coefficients across high and low dependence firms indicate statistically significant
differences at the customary levels. We find the same pattern of results in panels that
use citations counts and citation counts per patent as dependent variables, implying that
bank distress had an effect on the quality of technological development.
    Additionally, we find that high finance dependence firms in worse hit counties pro-
duced significantly less novel patents by their originality and generality scores, which we
interpret as evidence that the presence of bank distress was particularly detrimental to
firms engaging in high-risk R&D projects. While the coefficients in Table III imply the
aggregate effects of bank distress on publicly traded firms was economically limited, Table
IV highlights that effects are considerably stronger when considering differences between
firms in capital intensive and less capital intensive industries.13 For firms in capital in-
tensive industries we find strong evidence of substantial declines in the quantity, quality
and the novelty of their patenting.


V      Robustness Checks and Mechanisms
V.A       Instrumental Variables
Our identification thus far has been based on the premise that publicly traded firms sold
into national markets and hence would have faced similar aggregate demand shocks but
Zingales calculate the level of dependence using capital expenditures minus cash flow from operations
over capital expenditures, while we use bank notes payable over fixed assets. This proxy measure, which
we constructed by tracing all the firms listed in the NRC surveys that were also listed in Moody’s Manual
of Industrials, has a correlation coefficient with the Rajan-Zingales measure of 0.28 across all sectors.
  13
     In Appendix Table IV, we replicate the results from Table IV using our proxy variable outlined in
column (3) of Appendix Table II. Appendix Table 3 shows that we get consistent results using a measure
of external finance dependence based on the contemporaneous period. We see that the pattern of fewer
patents that are incremental continues to be prevalent in industries more dependent on external finance,
although the results from the Wald tests are slightly weaker for the citation measures.
   Firms’ reliance only on bank finance during this period is clearly endogenous. Appendix Table IV is
therefore meant only to provide suggestive evidence that is consistent with the patterns from the Rajan
and Zingales measure, which in turn is exogenous to the sample of firms in our analysis.



                                                   19
depended on financing that was impacted by local shocks in credit supply. A concern with
our results is that variation in aggregate demand shocks may still have impacted some
firms and banks more than others, in a way that led firms in more stressed counties to be
systematically less likely to innovate. Although segmenting our sample by more versus less
capital intensive industries does help to address this particular issue, we present another
test, using instrumental variables to separate out the supply side effect of bank distress
from aggregate demand shocks.
    Our strategy is based on the literature that documents a strong relationship between a
community’s social structure and the propensity to drive banking panics.14 The basic in-
tuition is that more fragmented communities are less likely to trust each other, and hence
may be more likely to propagate a bank run through simultaneous bank withdrawals in
the face of a perceived liquidity crisis. In order to derive a measure of the cohesiveness or
fragmentation of the social structure in a county, we draw on data from the 1906 Census
of Religious Bodies, one of the most complete censuses ever conducted on religious entities
in the United States.15 This census provides county level data on the membership at one
of ninety one different religious denominations. Church descriptions highlight fragmenta-
tion by immigrant status (e.g., Armenian, Greek, German, Polish churches among many
others), religion (e.g. Japanese Buddhist or Jewish churches) as well as race (e.g., African
Methodist church). Our instrument is based on (one minus) a county-level Herfindahl
index of religious concentration using the share of the county’s population that is affili-
ated with each of these religious organizations. Thus, it represents a measure of religious
fragmentation in each county.
    The exclusion restriction requires that religious fragmentation in 1906 did not affect
the rate or trajectory of patenting by the firms in our sample, other than through the
impact on bank stress in the post period. This premise is supported by the fact that we
  14
     For example, Kelly and O Grada (2000) find that the social networks of Irish immigrants to New
York played a crucial role in the panics of 1854 and 1857. As they put it, “[d]epositors from one set of
counties tended to close their accounts in both panics, while otherwise identical individuals from other
counties tended to stay with the bank” (p. 1123). Iyer and Puri (2004) find that “[s]ocial networks
matter - if other people in a depositor’s network run, the depositor is more likely to run” (p. 1416).
  15
     Surveys were conducted in 1906 and at ten year intervals until 1936. The 1936 census is generally
regarded to be seriously incomplete. There are also issues in the 1916 and 1926 surveys, where the
definition of “church membership” was often manipulated to inflate membership rates (Christiano, 1984).
For our purposes we view the 1906 survey as being the most reliable.


                                                  20
find no correlation between our measure of fragmentation and the level of firm patenting
in the pre-period. We therefore estimate two stage least squares regressions, where bank
stress in a county is instrumented with the degree of religious fragmentation in that county.
Column (1) of Table V reports the result of the first stage regression:


                 ST RESSc × P OSTt = θ1 F RAGc × P OSTt + φc + τt + ψi +                             (3)

       where the set of fixed effects is the same as in equation (2) above. Since we include
county fixed effects in all our specifications, we instrument for the interaction between
bank distress and the post-period. We do this using an interaction between our index of
religious concentration and the post-period dummy.
       Column (1) of Table V documents a strong positive first stage relationship between
the degree of fragmentation in the county and county level bank stress in the post period.
The partial R-squared of F RAGc × P OSTt is 0.09 and the F statistic is 11.32.
       Columns (2) to (7) report the results of two stage least squares regressions where the
dependent variable is regressed on the predicted values of ST RESSc ×P OSTt derived from
the first stage, along with the full set of fixed effects, as in Table IV. For both patenting
and citations to firm’s patents, we show the instrumented effect of bank distress in the
full sample, and in the sub-samples of industries that are more versus less dependent on
external finance. Consistent with the findings in Table III, we find moderate effects of
bank distress on innovation in aggregate and consistent with Table IV the results are
much stronger in capital intensive industries compared to those in less capital intensive
industries. Our regressions using originality and generality as dependent variables follow
a similar pattern although the point estimates are imprecisely estimated and do not have
statistical significance.16
       Overall, our findings when instrumenting for bank distress provide further evidence
to suggest that local shocks to the supply of capital, as opposed to demand-side factors,
had a substantive impact on innovation for firms in more capital intensive sectors.
  16
    For industries with high dependence on external finance, the coefficients and standard errors (in
parentheses) are -0.081 (0.106) for originality and -0.052 (0.065) for generality. For industries with low
dependence on external finance, the coefficients and standard errors are 0.025 (0.029) for originality and
0.005 (0.027) for generality.



                                                   21
V.B      County-by-year Fixed Effects
To further reinforce our main result in Tables IV and V, we address concerns that time-
varying differences across more versus less distressed counties may still account for our
results. For example, more distressed counties may react to crises differently from less
distressed counties in a manner that interacts with capital intensive firms. We attempt
to rule out any time-varying confounding effects at the county-level by exploiting a triple
differences estimator that uses county-by-year fixed effects. It takes the following form:


 Log(P AT EN T S)f,t = δ1 HDEPi × ST RESSc × P OSTt + δ2 HDEPi × ST RESSc

                         + δ3 HDEPi × P OSTt + (φc × τt ) + ψi +                         (4)


   We use the same set of dependent variables, but we specify a variable for our normal-
ized bank distress score interacted with the post-period dummy and a dummy variable
coded unity for firms active in capital intensive industries. Our county-by-year fixed ef-
fects, (φc × τt ), absorb any fixed or time-varying differences across counties, including the
main effect of ST RESSc and the interaction of ST RESSc × P OSTt . Our main variable
of interest, HDEPi × ST RESSc × P OSTt examines if firms in capital intensive industries
experienced a greater decline in innovation in more stressed counties in the post-period.
   While this more demanding specification reduces the number of “effective” observa-
tions because we are identifying off firms operating in the same county in the same year
but in more versus less capital intensive industries, the results in Table VI again show
strong evidence of the link between financial sector disruption and innovation. Coefficients
on the triple interaction term in Table V show that firms in capital intensive industries
experienced a 25 percent drop in patents, and a 14 percent drop in citations per patent
in the post-period relative to otherwise equivalent firms in the same county in less cap-
ital intensive industries. Furthermore, the effects on originality and generality are large
relative to the sample means shown in Table I.

V.C      R&D Inputs and Mechanisms
Next, we illuminate the mechanisms that plausibly account for our results. We have
argued that bank distress not only impacted the rate, but also the trajectory, of innovation

                                             22
meaning that firms in distressed counties were more conservative in the innovation they
pursued and the types of R&D projects they undertook. The large negative effect of bank
distress we find on citations to patents and especially on our measures of patent originality
and generality is consistent with firms cutting back on exploration around radically new
innovations in favor of incremental technologies (e.g., Chava et. al., 2012).
       To test for supporting evidence for this interpretation of our findings we examine the
extent to which bank distress impacted innovation through the use of R&D inputs versus
a change in the way in which inputs were deployed.17 Although the NRC surveys provide
only periodic information on R&D inputs, we can use data on the number of research
workers and research laboratories as alternate dependent variables. The results in Table
VII show that among publicly traded firms there is some indication of a decline in research
employment and research laboratories, particularly among firms operating in more capital
intensive industries. However, the declines are not as strong, or as precisely estimated,
as the declines we observe in both the rate and the trajectory of patenting. Notably,
Wald tests for the difference in coefficients for firms in more versus less capital intensive
industries are not statistically significant.
       Finally, we also show in Appendix V that our main results for citations per patent and
for our measures of originality and generality continue to hold even when we condition on
firms’ use of R&D inputs. Although this evidence is suggestive, since the level of inputs is
clearly endogenous, it does highlight that the trajectory of innovation was different when
considering input variation.


VI         Discussion and Conclusion
The Great Depression witnessed unprecedented distress to the U.S. banking system, so
it serves as a useful environment for understanding linkages between finance and real
economic outcomes. Thousands of banks either failed, or suspended their operations
within a short time period, putting enormous stress on firms that depended on external
  17
     This question is related to the controversial literature on labor hoarding. Bernanke and Parkinson
(1991) make the case for labor hoarding as an explanation for the pro-cyclicality of labor productivity
where firms hoard labor during downturns in order to avoid high short-run adjustment costs. If labor
hoarding applied to R&D firms during the Depression years we would expect that adjustment to the
effects of bank distress would be more clearly observable on output margins (i.e., through patents) rather
than input margins (i.e., through research employment).

                                                   23
finance. After the 1929 stock market crash, firms were limited in their ability to raise
public equity and debt finance, so the reliance on cash flows and bank-financing was much
greater than it had been during the 1920s. Moreover, branch banking regulations meant
that the experience of local banks was closely tied to the circumstances of firms at the
county-level.
   We have provided new data on finance and innovation for a period that we still know
very little about and we have used an empirical framework that establishes a relationship
between the effect of local bank distress and the inventive activities of R&D firms. Our
results contribute to the growing literature relating the financing environment to firm-
level innovation and to the literature examining how the structure and provision of finance
during the Great Depression affected the performance of the economy. We find negative
effects of bank distress on innovation, especially for firms operating in industries that were
more dependent on external finance. We also find that bank distress negatively impacted
the type of R&D undertaken, with a shift away from risky and towards more conservative
projects in highly distressed counties. This suggests that the real effects of the financial
sector are not restricted to the level of firm innovation, but can have an immediate and
longer run effect on the trajectory of innovation that firms choose to undertake.
   Despite finding an effect of bank distress, our results also help to shed light on accounts
suggesting that some firms could access capital during this time. For example, the chem-
icals industry giant, DuPont, invested over $1 million on R&D between 1931 and 1934
in research designed to commercialize the science of new synthetic fibers (Scherer, 1984,
p.4). By 1937, 40 percent of DuPont’s sales came from products that did not exist before
1929 (DuPont, Annual Report, 1937, pp.12-13). Other accounts of technological activity
during this period find that R&D employment increased almost threefold between 1933
and 1940 (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1998), while according to Field (2003, 2011) the pro-
ductivity statistics imply that many firms continued to expand R&D even though access
to external finance was severely constrained.
   Two aspects of our analysis help to reconcile the negative and positive effects. First,
publicly traded firms conducted a large share of overall innovation in this period, and
furthermore, it was only R&D firms operating in capital intensive industries in the most


                                             24
stressed counties that seemed to have been disproportionately affected. Importantly, we do
not find a statistically significant association between bank sector distress and innovation
for firms with lower levels of capital requirements. Of the 2,064 firms that we use in our
empirical analysis, 46 percent were located in counties with above median bank distress,
but only 13 percent were also active in capital intensive industries.
   Second, Figures 4A, 4B, 5A and 5B show that the effect of bank stress on innovation
was strongest in the years immediately after the collapse of the banking sector but the
effects attenuated as the Depression years progressed. Figures 5A and 5B suggest that the
quantity and quality of patenting by firms operating in more stressed counties approached
the level of those in less stressed counties by the end of the decade. Larger, publicly traded
firms may have been able to recover from the effects of bank distress by tapping into the
public markets by the late 1930s.
   Both of these factors have implications for our understanding of the Great Depression.
While we have identified a negative relationship between bank distress and innovation, we
can also explain why the worst financial crisis in U.S. history did not inhibit productivity
growth from technological change as much as might have been expected.




                                             25
References
Atanassov, Julian, Vikram K. Nanda & Amit Seru. 2007. “Finance and Innovation: The
    Case of Publicly Traded Firms.” Ross School of Business Paper.
Atkeson, Andrew & Patrick J. Kehoe. 2007. “Modeling the Transition to a New Economy:
    Lessons from Two Technological Revolutions.” American Economic Review 97(1):64–
    88.
Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation
    of the Great Depression.” American Economic Review 77(3):257–276.
Bernanke, Ben & Martin L. Parkinson. 1991. “Procyclical Labor Productivity and Com-
    peting Theories of the Business Cycle: Some Evidence from Interwar US Manufac-
    turing Industries.” Journal of Political Economy 99(3):439–59.
Bernstein, Michael A. 1989. “The Great Depression: Delayed Recovery and Economic
    Change in America, 1929-1939.” Cambridge, Cambridge University Press .
Black, Sandra E. & Phillip E. Strahan. 2002. “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Avail-
    ability.” Journal of Finance 57:2807–2833.
Bordo, Michael D. & Charles L. Evans. 1995. “Labor Productivity during the Great
    Depression.” Economics Letters 47(1):41–45.
Bordo, Michael D. & John Landon-Lane. 2010. “The Lessons from the Banking Panics in
    the United States in the 1930s for the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008.” NBER Working
    Paper .
Brocker, Michael & Christopher Hanes. 2012. “The 1920s American Real Estate Boom
    and the Downturn of the Great Depression: Evidence from City Cross Sections.”
    NBER Working Paper.
Brown, James R., Steven M. Fazzari & Bruce C. Petersen. 2009. “Financing Innovation
    and Growth: Cash Flow, External Equity and the 1990s R&D Boom.” Journal of
    Finance 64(1):151–185.
Calomiris, Charles & Joseph Mason. 1997. “Contagion and Bank Failures During the
    Great Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic.” American Economic
    Review 87(5):863–883.
Calomiris, Charles & Joseph Mason. 2003. “Fundamentals, Panics and Bank Distress
    During the Depression.” American Economic Review 93(5):1615–1647.
Campello, Murillo, Erasmo Giambona, John R. Graham & Campbell R. Harvey. 2010.
   “Liquidity Management and Corporate Investment During a Financial Crisis.” Duke
   Working Paper .
Carlson, Mark A. & Jonathan D. Rose. 2011. “Credit Availability and the Collapse of
     the Banking Sector in the 1930s.” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics
     Discussion Series.
Carlson, Mark & Kris Mitchener. 2009. “Branch Banking as a Device for Discipline: Com-
     petition and Bank Survivorship during the Great Depression.” Journal of Political
     Economy 117(2):165–210.
Census Bureau. 1906. “United States Census of Religious Bodies, County File, 1906.”
    Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.

                                          26
Chava, Sudheer, Alexander Oettl, Ajay Subramanian & Krishnamurthy Subramanian.
    2012. “Banking Deregulation and Innovation.” Journal of Financial Economics,
    forthcoming pp. 341–370.
Christiano, Kevin. 1984. “Numbering Israel: The U.S. Census and Religious Organiza-
    tions.” Social Science History 8(4):341–370.
Curcio, Vincent. 2001. Chrysler: The Life and and Times of an Automotive Genius. New
    York: Oxford University Press.
David, Paul. 1990. “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the
    Modern Productivity Paradox.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings
    80(2):355–361.
Eddy, George. 1937. “Security Issues and Real Investment in 1929.” Review of Economics
    and Statistics 19(2):79–91.
Field, Alexander. 2003. “The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Twentieth
     Century.” American Economic Review 93(4):1399–1413.
Field, Alexander. 2011. A Great Leap Forward: 1930s Depression and US Economic
     Growth. Yale: Yale University Press.
Friedman, Milton & Anna Jacobson Schwartz. 1963. A Monetary History of the United
     States, 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Graham, John R., Sonali Hazarika & Krishnamoorthy Narasimhan. 2011. “Corporate
    Governance, Debt, and Investment Policy during the Great Depression.” Manage-
    ment Science 57(12):2083–2100.
Grant, Tina. 2005. International Directory of Company Histories. Vol. 64.
Griliches, Zvi. 1990. “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey.” Journal of
     Economic Literature 28(4):1661–1707.
Grossman, Richard. 2010. Unsettled Account: The Evolution of Banking in the Industrial
    World since 1800. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Hall, Bronwyn. 2005. “Note on the Bias in the Herfindahl Based on Count Data.” Revue
     d’Economie Industrielle 110:149–156.
Hall, Bronwyn & Josh Lerner. 2010. Financing Innovation. In Handbook of the Economics
     of Innovation, ed. Bronwyn H. Hall & Nathan. Rosenberg. Netherlands: Elsevier
     pp. 609–639.
Ivashina, Victoria & David S. Scharfstein. 2010. “Bank Lending During the Financial
     Crisis of 2008.” Journal of Financial Economics 97(3):319–338.
Iyer, Rajkamal & Manju Puri. 2012. “Understanding Bank Runs: The Impor-
     tance of Depositor-Bank Relationships and Networks.” American Economic Review
     102(4):1414–1445.
Jacoby, Neil H. & Raymond J. Saulnier. 1981. Business Finance and Banking. New York:
    National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jayaratne, Jith. & Philip E. Strahan. 1996. “The Finance Growth Nexus: Evidence from
    Bank Branch Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics no 3:639–670.


                                          27
Kashyap, Anil K., Owen Lamont & Jeremy Stein. 1994. “Credit Conditions and the
    Cyclical Behavior of Inventories.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(3):565–92.
Kelly, Morgan & Cormac O Grada. 2000. “Market Contagion: Evidence from the Panics
     of 1854 and 1857.” American Economic Review 90(5):1110–1124.
Kerr, William R. & Ramana Nanda. 2009. “Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregu-
    lations, Financing Constraints, and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Eco-
    nomics 94(1):124–149.
King, Robert G. & Ross Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be
    Right.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 3:717–37.
Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru & Noah Stoffman. 2012. “Technological
    Innovation, Resource Allocation, and Growth.” NBER Working Paper.
Lemmon, Michael & Michael R. Roberts. 2010. “The Response of Corporate Financ-
   ing and Investment to Changes in the Supply of Credit.” Journal of Financial and
   Quantitative Analysis 45(3):555–587.
Lumley, Darwyn H. 2009. Breaking the Banks in Motor City: The Auto Industry, the
   1933 Detroit Banking Crisis and the Start of the New Deal. New York: McFarland.
MacGarvie, Megan & Jeffrey L. Furman. 2007. “Academic Science and the Birth of
   Industrial Research Laboratories in the US Pharmaceutical Industry.” Journal of
   Economic Behavior and Organization 63(4):756–776.
MacGarvie, Megan & Jeffrey L. Furman. 2009. “Academic Collaboration and Organiza-
   tional Innovation: the Development of Research Capabilities in the US Pharmaceu-
   tical Industry, 1927-1946.” Industrial and Corporate Change 18(5):929–961.
Mitchener, Kris & David Wheelock. 2010. “Does the Structure of Banking Matter for
    Economic Growth? Evidence from US State Banking Markets.” NBER Working
    Paper.
Mladjan, Mrdjan. 2011. “Accelerating into the Abyss: Financial Dependence and the
    Great Depression.” Universitat Pompeu Fabra Working Paper.
Mokyr, Joel. 2002. The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy.
   Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mowery, David. 1995. The Boundaries of the US Firm in Research and Development.
   In Coordination and Information: Historical Perspectives on the Organization of
   Enterprise, ed. Naomi Lamoreaux & Daniel Raff. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press pp. 147–182.
Mowery, David. 2005. “Development of Industrial Research in US Manufacturing.” Amer-
   ican Economic Review 80(2):345–349.
Mowery, David & Nathan Rosenberg. 1998. Paths of Innovation: Technological Change
   in Twentieth Century America. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University
   Press.
Murmann, Johann Peter. 2003. Knowledge and Competitive Advantage. Technology, and
   National Institutions. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: The Coevolution of
   Firms.
National Research Council. 1921-1938. Industrial Research Laboratories of the United
    States.

                                         28
Nicholas, Tom. 2010. “The Role of Independent Invention in US Technological Develop-
    ment, 1880-1930.” Journal of Economic History (1):59–84.
Nicholas, Tom. 2011. “Did R&D Firms Used to Patent: Evidence from the First Innova-
    tion Surveys.” Journal of Economic History (4):1032–1059.
Ohanian, Lee & Harold Cole. 2001. Re-Examining the Contribution of Money and Banking
   Shocks to the US Great Depression. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. Ben
   Bernanke & Kenneth Rogoff. MIT Press pp. 183–227.
Ohanian, Lee & Harold Cole. 2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great
   Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy (4).
Paravisini, Daniel. 2008. “Local Bank Financial Constraints and Firm Access to External
    Finance.” Journal of Finance 63(5):2161–2193.
Raff, Daniel & Manuel Trajtenberg. 1997. Quality-Adjusted Prices for the American
     Automobile Industry: 1906-1940. In The Economics of New Goods, ed. Timothy F.
     Bresnahan & Robert J. Gordon. Chicago: University of Chicago Press pp. 71–108.
Rajan, Raghuram G. & Luigi Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, no 3:559–586.
Reinhart, Carmen M. & Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries
    of Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Richardson, Gary. 2007. “Categories and Causes of Bank Distress during the Great
    Depression, 1929-1933: The Illiquidity-Insolvency Debate Revisited.” Explorations
    in Economic History (4):586–607.
Richardson, Gary. 2008. “Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress
    during the Great Depression.” Research in Economic History (1):37–115.
Richardson, Gary & William Troost. 2009. “Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking
    Panics During the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal
    Reserve District Border in Mississippi, 1929 to 1933.” Journal of Political Economy
    6:1031–1073.
Scherer, F. M. 1984. Innovation and Growth: Schumpeterian Perspectives. Cambridge
    Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Szostak, Rick. 1995. Technological Innovation and the Great Depression. London: West-
     view.
Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?         New York:
    Norton.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value
     of Innovations.” Rand Journal of Economics (1):172–187.
White, Eugene. 1984. “Banking Innovation in the 1920s: The Growth of National Banks’
    Financial Services.” Business and Economic History 12.
Wicker, Elmus. 1996. The Banking Panics of the Great Depression. New York: Cambridge
    University Press.
Ziebarth, Nicolas L. 2011. “The Local Effects of Bank Failures on the Real Economy:
    Evidence from Mississippi during the Great Depression.” Northwestern University
    Working Paper.


                                          29
                                Figure 1. Moody’s Investors Service, New Issues of Stocks and Bonds

                             2500




                             2000




                             1500
           Million Dollars




                             1000




                             500




                               0
                                    1921   1922   1923   1924   1925   1926   1927   1928   1929   1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936



Notes: This figure plots data on new corporate productive issues of stocks and bonds, as reported by Moody’s
investor service in George Eddy (1937), “Security Issues and Real Investment in 1929”, Review of Economics and
Statistics, XIX, p. 91
                                 Figure 2A. The Location of Bank Failures




                                  Figure 2B. The Location of R&D Firms




Notes: Bank failures are coded as >50th percentile (dark grey) or <=50th percentile (light grey) according to the
ratio of the number of bank failures in a county 1930‐33 to the number of banks in a county in 1929. FDIC bank
data does not cover Wyoming. R&D firms are categorized at three levels: 1 firm per county (light grey); 2‐5 firms
per county (dark grey); more than 5 firms per county (black).

                                                       2
                  Figure 3. Testing for Sorting of Firms into Counties

                                         A. Patents




                                        B. Firm Sales




Notes: These figures plots our measure of county‐level bank stress against the logarithm of
mean patents per firm or citations per patent per firm during the period 1921 to 1929 to
determine if firms were sorting into counties. In Figure A  = ‐0.0024 (t = ‐0.19) R‐sq = 0.001. In
Figure B  = ‐0.004 (t = ‐0.21) R‐sq = 0.001.




                                                3
                                                                                        Figure 4. Patenting Activity and Bank Stress

                                                                                               A. Publicly Traded and Private Firms

                                                                    140
                                                                                                                                                   Friedman-Schwartz
                    Index of Mean Log Patents Per Firm (1929=100)                                                                                  Bank Panic Window


                                                                    120


                                                                    100


                                                                     80


                                                                     60


                                                                     40


                                                                     20


                                                                      0
                                                                          1920

                                                                                 1921

                                                                                        1922

                                                                                               1923

                                                                                                      1924

                                                                                                             1925

                                                                                                                     1926

                                                                                                                            1927

                                                                                                                                   1928

                                                                                                                                          1929

                                                                                                                                                 1930

                                                                                                                                                        1931

                                                                                                                                                               1932

                                                                                                                                                                      1933

                                                                                                                                                                              1934

                                                                                                                                                                                     1935

                                                                                                                                                                                            1936

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1937

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1938
                                                                                                                              Public             Private



                                                                 B. Publicly Traded Firms in High and Low Bank Stress Counties

                                                                    140
                                                                                                                                                    Friedman-Schwartz
                                                                                                                                                    Bank Panic Window
                 Index of Mean Log Patents Per Firm (1929=100)




                                                                    120


                                                                    100


                                                                     80


                                                                     60


                                                                     40


                                                                     20


                                                                      0
                                                                          1920

                                                                                 1921

                                                                                        1922

                                                                                               1923

                                                                                                      1924

                                                                                                             1925

                                                                                                                     1926

                                                                                                                            1927

                                                                                                                                   1928

                                                                                                                                          1929

                                                                                                                                                 1930

                                                                                                                                                        1931

                                                                                                                                                               1932

                                                                                                                                                                       1933

                                                                                                                                                                              1934

                                                                                                                                                                                     1935

                                                                                                                                                                                            1936

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1937

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1938




                                                                                                                    Low Stress               High Stress


Notes: These figures show patenting activity by the firms in our dataset before, during and after the Friedman
Schwartz bank panic window. Figure A compares public and private firms and Figure B publicly traded firms in high
stress (i.e. above median) and low stress (i.e. below median) counties.


                                                                                                                                   4
                                                        Figure 5. Time Varying Effects of Bank Stress:
                                                  Publicly Traded Firms in High Versus Low Stress Counties

                                                         A. Patents to Firms Patenting at Least Once

                                .1
                  Relative to Base Year = 1929
                 -.2          -.1
                                -.3       0




                                                 1920   1922   1924   1926   1928   1930   1932   1934   1936   1938



                                                        B. Citations to Firms Patenting at Least Once
                                .2
                 Relative to Base Year = 1929
                     -.2        -.4    0




                                                 1920   1922   1924   1926   1928   1930   1932   1934   1936   1938



Notes: These figures plots time varying effects based on modified specifications of the regressions in Table III.

                                                                               5
                                                               Table I
                                                        Descriptive Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics based on 2,064 firms from the 1921, 1927, 1931, 1933 and 1938 editions of the National Research
Council’s Industrial Research Laboratories of the United States . We exclude firms if they are not listed in the NRC surveys before the 1931
survey or we do not observe them patenting prior to this point in time. Data on R&D employees comes from the NRC surveys, while data on
patenting and patent citations comes from matching each firm in the NRC data to US patent data from the USPTO. Publicly traded firms are
identified by matching firms against those listed in the Commercial and Financial Chronicle , which tracked stocks traded on any exchange in
the United States.

                                                                            All firms         Publicly traded firms         Private firms
Number of firms                                                               2,064                     261                     1,803

Number of firms with patents                                                  1,094                    219                      889
Total number of patents                                                      142,859                  64,556                   78,303

Average number of anuual patents per patenting firm                             6.9                     15.5                     4.6
Average number of anuual citations per firm                                    12.2                     46.5                     7.2
Average number anuual of citations per patent                                   1.1                      2.1                     1.0
Average originality of patent [max of 1]                                        0.1                      0.3                     0.1
Average generality of patent [max of 1]                                         0.1                      0.2                     0.1

Share of patents in the electricity industry                                   24%                      31%                     19%
Share of patents in the chemicals industry                                     18%                      19%                     17%
Share of patents in the machinery industry                                      8%                       6%                     10%
Share of patents in the automobile industry                                     8%                      12%                     4%
Share of patents in the communications industry                                 8%                       8%                     8%
                                                                     Table II
                                               Innovation by Private Firms Relative to Public Firms
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm patents, citations, citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed originality and
generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the private firm dummy, the private firm post‐period interaction and the fixed effects. Column (1) reports results
for all firms in our sample. Columns (2)‐(6) restrict the estimations to firms that patented at least once over our sample period. Standard errors are clustered at the
county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                                          Sum of citations       Citations per       Generality of       Originality of
                                           Number of patents Number of patents
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                                        to all patents           patent             patents             patents
                                                    (1)                    (2)                    (3)                  (4)               (5)                  (6)
Private firm x post                             ‐0.321***              ‐0.328***             ‐0.593***             ‐0.263***           ‐0.066***           ‐0.057***
                                                  (0.048)                (0.056)               (0.076)               (0.033)             (0.012)             (0.010)
Private                                         ‐0.697***              ‐0.585***             ‐0.699***             ‐0.214***           ‐0.068***           ‐0.038***
                                                  (0.075)                (0.077)               (0.096)               (0.038)             (0.014)             (0.010)
Year fixed effects                                 Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
County fixed effects                               Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
Industry fixed effects                             Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                 Yes                Yes
Number of observations                            39,216                 26,372                26,372                26,372              26,372             26,372
Number of clusters (counties)                      348                    283                   283                   283                 283                283
                                                          Table III
                                Innovation by Public Firms in More vs. Less Stressed Counties
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm patents, citations, citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed
originality and generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank stress is
calculated as the zero‐one normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and 1933. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level.
Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                   Sum of citations to        Citations per        Generality of        Originality of
                                           Number of patents
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                   all patents                patent              patents              patents
                                                     (1)                   (2)                      (3)                (4)                   (5)

County‐level bank stress x post                   ‐0.072*                  ‐0.065                 ‐0.006               ‐0.003               ‐0.008
                                                  (0.042)                 (0.056)                (0.025)              (0.009)              (0.008)
Year fixed effects                                  Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes
County fixed effects                                Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Industry fixed effects                              Yes                     Yes                    Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Number of observations                             4,503                   4,503                  4,503                4,503                4,503
Number of clusters (counties)                        93                     93                     93                    93                   93
                                                             Table IV
                         The Bank Distress and Firm Innovation in More vs. Less Capital Intensive Industries
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm patents, citations, citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed originality and
generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank stress is calculated as the zero‐one
normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and 1933. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1
percent levels, respectively.

                                 PANEL A: FRIMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH HIGH DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N= 1,444)
                                                                             (1)                    (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                                                                            Sum of citations       Citations per       Generality of      Originality of
                                                                    Number of patents
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                                          to all patents           patent             patents            patents

(a) County‐level bank stress x post                                      ‐0.207**               ‐0.258**             ‐0.089**            ‐0.039**            ‐0.037**
                                                                          (0.102)                (0.118)              (0.039)             (0.017)             (0.012)

                                PANEL B: FIRMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH LOW DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N=3059)
(b) County‐level bank stress x post                              ‐0.008         0.023           0.032          0.014                                           0.006
                                                                (0.042)        (0.066)         (0.031)        (0.011)                                         (0.010)
                                          PANEL C: WALD TEST FOR THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PANEL A AND PANEL B
Wald test p‐value for difference between (a) and (b)                       0.074*               0.044**               0.015**            0.006***            0.005***

Year fixed effects                                                           Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
County fixed effects                                                         Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                                                                                 Table V
                                               Instrumental Variable Regressions: The Effect of Bank Distress on Innovation
This table reports results from two‐stage least squares regressions where bank stress is instrumented with the concentration of religious activity using data from the 1906 Census of Religious Bodies.
Column (1) reports details from the first stage regression. Columns (2) to (7) report the results of IV regressions where the dependent variable is log‐transformed firm patents and citations in each firm‐
year. The fragmentation of religious activity in 1906 is calculated as (1‐HHI index), based on the share of the county's population that was affiliated with one of ninety‐one different religious denominations
in the 1906 Census. A high level on this index is associated with greater religious fragmentation. Bank stress is calculated as the zero‐one normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and
1933. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)                (7)
                                                                                First Stage                            IV: Patents                                      IV: Citations to Patents
                                                                               County‐level
                                                                                                                         High               Low                                 High               Low
                                                                               bank stress x        Full sample                                             Full sample
                                                                                                                      dependence         dependence                          dependence         dependence
                                                                                   post

County‐level bank stress x post                                                                        ‐0.200*          ‐0.659**             ‐0.004           ‐0.220            ‐0.738*             ‐0.003
                                                                                                       (0.117)           (0.296)            (0.147)           (0.146)           (0.392)             (0.190)

County‐level fragmentation of religious activity in 1906 x post                  3.947***
                                                                                  (1.173)
Wald test p‐value for difference between (High) and (Low)                                                                         0.027**                                                 0.036**
Partial R‐squared in first stage                                                    0.095
F‐Statistic in first stage                                                          11.32

Year fixed effects                                                                   Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
County fixed effects                                                                 Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                               Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
Number of observations                                                              4,029               4,029             1,292             2,737              4,029             1,292              2,737
                                                                                Table VI
                   The Effect of Bank Distress on Firm Innovation in More vs. Less Capital Intensive Industries:
                                              Including County‐by‐Year Fixed Effects
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm patents, citations, citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed originality and
generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank stress is calculated as the zero‐one
normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and 1933. Column (1) reports results for all firms in our sample. Columns (2)‐(6) restrict the estimations to
firms that patented at least once over our sample period. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels,
respectively.
                                                                                       Sum of citations to      Citations per        Generality of       Originality of
                                                                Number of patents
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                                       all patents              patent              patents             patents
                                                                         (1)                   (2)                    (3)                (4)                  (5)

County level bank stress x post x high dependence                     ‐0.340**              ‐0.466***             ‐0.162***            ‐0.075***           ‐0.063***
                                                                       (0.142)                (0.170)               (0.059)              (0.026)             (0.024)

Bank stress x high dependence                                          ‐0.148                 ‐0.205                ‐0.041               ‐0.001              0.010
                                                                       (0.341)                (0.391)               (0.085)              (0.029)             (0.024)

Post x high dependence                                                  ‐0.189                 ‐0.207                ‐0.103             ‐0.055**              ‐0.022
                                                                       (0.161)                (0.189)               (0.065)              (0.027)             (0.024)
County x Year fixed effects                                              Yes                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes                Yes
Number of observations                                                  4,503                  4,503                 4,503                4,503              4,503
Number of clusters (counties)                                            93                      93                    93                  93                 93
                                                         Table VII
                                           Impact of Bank Distress on R&D Inputs

This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of the number of research workers and the number of research laboratories, regressed on
the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank stress is calculated as the share of 1929 banks that failed between 1929
and 1933. Since the main effect of bank stress is constant across time, it absorbed in the county‐level fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                       Number of research workers Number of research laboratories
                                                                     (1)                          (2)
                   PANEL A: FIRMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH HIGH DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N=220)
(a) Bank stress  post                                            ‐0.498**                      ‐0.121
                                                                   (0.242)                     (0.078)
                    PANEL B: FIRMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH LOW DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N=568)
(b) Bank stress  post                                              ‐0.109                      ‐0.057
                                                                   (0.116)                     (0.043)
                            PANEL C: WALD TEST FOR THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PANEL A AND PANEL B
Wald test p‐value for difference between (a) and (b)                               0.115                                0.420
Year fixed effects                                                                   Yes                                 Yes
County fixed effects                                                                 Yes                                  Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                               Yes                                  Yes
                                                                    Appendix Table I
                                                Estimating R&D Firms' share of Bank Lending

This table estimates the share of total bank lending in each year accounted for by NRC firms. Column 2 provides data on aggregate real bank lending in the United
States, taken from Banking and Monetary Statistics (Number 18, All Member Banks, Principal Assets and Liabilities on Call Dates 1914‐1941). Column 3 reports
the number of publicly traded NRC firms in the data in each year and column 4 reports the average value of bank debt on the balance sheet of firms for which data
is available, as reported in the Moody's Manual of Industrials . Column 5 creates aggregate measures of bank borrowing by publicly traded NRC firms, using the
estimates of individual firm‐borrrowing and the total number of R&D firms. Finally column 6 provides estimates of the share of total bank lending that is due to
NRC firms. Column 6 highlights that while there may be individual cases of an R&D firm accounting for a large share of bank lending, in general, the borrowing by
NRC firms will have been small compared to the overall lending by banks.

                                                                              Average bank debt for       Bank lending by NRC           NRC firms' share of
                         Aggregate real bank         Number of publicly
        Year                                                                     NRC firms with            firms in aggregate         aggregate bank lending
                       lending in the US ($M)         traded NRC firms
                                                                               available data ($M)               [3]x[4]                   [5]÷[2]x100

        [1]                      [2]                         [3]                        [4]                        [5]                           [6]
       1921                    17,437                         57                       7.147                       407                          2.3%
       1927                    23,361                        122                       5.041                       615                          2.6%
       1931                    24,606                        177                       2.899                       513                          2.1%
       1933                    16,902                        186                       2.775                       516                          3.1%
       1938                    15,690                        234                       2.158                       505                          3.2%
                                      Appendix Table II
                Impact of Bank Distress on Public‐Firm Finances

This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm balance sheet variables
in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank
stress is calculated as the zero‐one normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and
1933. Observations based on publicly traded firms for which balance sheet data are available in
Moody's Manual of industrials . Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at
the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                             Notes payable and bank
                                                                                      Cash
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                   debt
                                                       (1)                             (3)

Bank stress  post                                    ‐0.039**                      ‐0.080**
                                                       (0.019)                       (0.039)
Year fixed effects                                       Yes                           Yes
County fixed effects                                     Yes                           Yes
Industry fixed effects                                   Yes                           Yes
Number of observations                                  1,982                         1,982
Number of clusters (counties)                             75                            75
                                                          Appendix Table III
                               Industries More vs. Less Dependent on External Finance

This table reports the concordance we establish between the NRC firms in our sample and the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure of external
finance. Given that we are looking at publicly traded firms for the analyses that are split by industry, we focus on the RZ measure of external
finance for mature companies. In instances where we have a unquie ISIC mapping, we use the measure calculated by RZ in Table I of their
paper. In instances where we have multiple SIC codes mapped, we use the average of their measures. We classify industries as having above
median dependence on external finance if the measure reported in column (2) is greater than 0.12. Our robustness check, reported in
Appendix Table IV, classifies an industry as having above median dependence on external finance if the measure in column (3) is above 0.06

                                                                                        RZ Measure of Mature         Bank Loans Payable /
                                                                                        Company Dependence          Fixed Assets for firms in
                                                           Mapping to ISIC Code
                                                                                         on External Finance              our sample
                        Industry                           used in RZ 1998 Paper
                                                                     (1)                           (2)                          (3)

Rubber and Plastics                                                355, 356                       ‐0.12                        0.06
Food and Kindred                                                   311, 313                       ‐0.10                        0.06
Miscellaneous                                                        390                          ‐0.05                        0.05
Chemicals                                                         3511, 352                       ‐0.05                        0.05
Stone, Clay and Glass                                                362                           0.03                        0.18
Metals                                                             371, 381                        0.07                        0.06
Petroleum and Coal                                                 353, 354                        0.07                        0.03
Paper and Products                                                   341                          0.10                         0.04
Automobiles and Transportation                                    3843, 384                       0.14                         0.09
Textile Mill Products                                                321                          0.14                         0.32
Mineral Products                                                     369                           0.15                        0.08
Instruments                                                          385                           0.19                        0.03
Medical Equipment                                                    385                           0.19                          ‐
Machinery                                                            382                           0.22                        0.23
Electrical Equipment                                                 383                           0.23                        0.07
Communications                                                      3832                           0.39                        0.10
                                                        Appendix Table IV
                         The Bank Distress and Firm Innovation in More vs. Less Capital Intensive Industries
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed firm patents, citations, citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed originality and
generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction and the fixed effects. Bank stress is calculated as the zero‐one
normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and 1933. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1
percent levels, respectively.

                                 PANEL A: FRIMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH HIGH DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N= 1,501)
                                                                             (1)                    (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                                                                            Sum of citations       Citations per       Generality of      Originality of
                                                                    Number of patents
DEPENDENT VARIABLES                                                                          to all patents           patent             patents            patents

(a) County‐level bank stress x post                                      ‐0.181**               ‐0.196**               ‐0.055             ‐0.031*            ‐0.031**
                                                                          (0.086)                (0.095)              (0.034)             (0.017)             (0.013)

                                PANEL B: FIRMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH LOW DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N=3002)
(b) County‐level bank stress x post                              ‐0.018         ‐0.006          0.017          0.011                                           0.003
                                                                (0.046)        (0.070)         (0.033)        (0.012)                                         (0.010)
                                          PANEL C: WALD TEST FOR THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PANEL A AND PANEL B
Wald test p‐value for difference between (a) and (b)                       0.087*                0.104                 0.126              0.031**            0.031**

Year fixed effects                                                           Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
County fixed effects                                                         Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                       Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes
                                                   Appendix Table V
                               Trajectory of Innovation Controlling for Changes in Inputs
This table reports differences‐in‐differences results of log‐transformed citations per patent in each firm‐year or untransformed originality and
generality per patent in each firm‐year, regressed on the bank stress ‐post period interaction, measures of the number of research workers,
research labs and the fixed effects. Bank stress is calculated as the zero‐one normalized share of 1929 banks that failed between 1930 and
1933. Standard errors are clustered at the county‐level. Significance is at the * 10, ** 5 and *** 1 percent levels, respectively.

                     PANEL A: FRIMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH HIGH DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N= 1,444)
                                                                                   (1)                      (2)                      (3)

                                                                         Citations per patent Generality of patents Originality of patents
    DEPENDENT VARIABLES
(a) County‐level bank stress x post                                            ‐0.081**                 ‐0.037**                 ‐0.035***
                                                                                (0.038)                  (0.018)                   (0.012)
    Log number of research workers                                              0.060*                    0.016                   0.013*
                                                                                (0.030)                  (0.011)                  (0.007)
    Log number of research laboratories                                          0.075                   0.031                     0.026
                                                                                (0.064)                  (0.023)                  (0.023)

                      PANEL B: FIRMS IN INDUSTRIES WITH LOW DEPENDENCE ON EXTERNAL FINANCE (N=3059)

(b) County‐level bank stress x post                                              0.034                    0.015                    0.007
                                                                                (0.033)                  (0.012)                  (0.010)
    Log number of research workers                                             0.087***                 0.036***                 0.023***
                                                                                (0.026)                  (0.009)                  (0.007)
    Log number of research laboratories                                          0.089                   0.008                     0.007
                                                                                (0.070)                  (0.021)                  (0.019)
                              PANEL C: WALD TEST FOR THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PANEL A AND PANEL B
    Wald test p‐value for difference between (a) and (b)                       0.015**                  0.005***                 0.004***

    Year fixed effects                                                            Yes                      Yes                      Yes
    County fixed effects                                                          Yes                      Yes                      Yes
    Industry fixed effects                                                        Yes                      Yes                      Yes
