NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT:
EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED FIELD EXPERIMENT
Christopher Cotton
Brent R. Hickman
Joseph P. Price
Working Paper 20397
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20397

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We greatly appreciate comments from John List, Andrew Sweeting, and participants of seminars at
the University of Chicago, the 2013 meeting of the American Economic Association, the 2013 North
American summer meetings of the Econometric Society, 2014 Canadian Public Economic Group conference,
the 2015 Econometric Society World Congress, the 2015 European Meetings of the Economic Science
Association, Brigham Young University, University of Missouri-Columbia, Queen’s University, Ryerson
University, SUNY Binghampton, University of British Columbia-Okanagan, University of Guelph,
and London School of Economics. We also wish to acknowledge the outstanding research assistance
of Joe Patten, who played a crucial role in executing this project. Hickman acknowledges support for
the financial incentives in this experiment provided by a grant from the Social Sciences Division at
the University of Chicago. Cotton is grateful for financial support provided by his position as the JarislowskyDeutsch Chair in Economic and Financial Policy at Queen’s University. Cotton and Price gratefully
acknowledge partial funding from the Spencer Foundation which supported an initial pilot study that
lead to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Christopher Cotton, Brent R. Hickman, and Joseph P. Price. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Affirmative Action and Human Capital Investment: Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment
Christopher Cotton, Brent R. Hickman, and Joseph P. Price
NBER Working Paper No. 20397
August 2014, Revised Septemberr 2015
JEL No. C93,D44,D82,J15,J24
ABSTRACT
Pre-College human capital investment occurs within a competitive environment and depends on market
incentives created by Affirmative Action (AA) in college admissions. These policies affect mechanisms
for rank-order allocation of college seats, and alter the relative competition between blacks and whites.
We present a theory of AA in university admissions, showing how the effects of AA on human capital
investment differ by student ability and demographic group. We then conduct a field experiment designed
to mimic important aspects of competitive investment prior to the college market. We pay students
based on relative performance on a mathematics exam in order to test the incentive effects of AA,
and track study efforts on an online mathematics website. Consistent with theory, AA increases average
human capital investment and exam performance for the majority of disadvantaged students targeted
by the policy, by mitigating so-called "discouragement effects." The experimental evidence suggests
that AA can promote greater equality of market outcomes and narrow achievement gaps at the same
time.
Christopher Cotton
Queen's University
Department of Economics
Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6
cotton@econ.queensu.ca
Brent R. Hickman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
hickmanbr@uchicago.edu

Joseph P. Price
Department of Economics
Brigham Young University
162 FOB
Provo, UT 84602
and NBER
joseph_price@byu.edu

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

1

1. INTRODUCTION
Affirmative Action (AA) is the practice of granting preferential treatment to underrepresented demographic groups when allocating contractual, employment, or educational opportunities. In the US it was first mandated by the Kennedy Administration
in the 1960s, and has since been widely implemented in public procurement, education,
and hiring. Today, AA is a pervasive fixture of American university admissions, though
it has generated much controversy.1 AA is also widely implemented outside the United
States, from Malaysia to Northern Ireland, and in India where Reservation Law, a set of
racial and ethnic quotas, is imposed by constitutional edict.
In the US university context, the rationale for AA does not stem from concerns over
proactive discrimination. Rather, the rationale is that the university market is effectively
a competition where black and Hispanic children are at a fundamental disadvantage to
whites and Asians due to residual effects of past institutionalized discrimination. That is,
they attend lower quality schools, are less affluent, have less educated parents, and have
less access to other developmental inputs such as health care and tutoring.2 In turn,
AA is an attempt at compensating for the competitive disadvantage by giving special
consideration for race. There is a substantial empirical literature studying the effects
of AA, focusing mainly on its direct impact at the point when university placement
outcomes are determined.3
However, the literature has largely ignored the implications of AA for student behavior
prior to admissions, as they study, participate in extra curricular activities, and otherwise
invest in human capital before applying to university. For example, consider a set of students vying for admission to universities which vary by quality. Each student has 24
1

The US Supreme Court has deliberated on the legality of racial considerations in university admissions
at least five times, including the cases of Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action (2014), Fisher v.
Texas (2013), Grutter v. Bollinger (2003), Gratz v. Bollinger (2003), and Regents of the University of California
v. Bakke (1978). At the time of this writing, Fisher v. Texas (2013) had been scheduled for a second hearing
before the Court after having been remanded back to the US 5th Circuit Court.
2
Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedy’s successor, was the first American president to implement AA. In his
1965 commencement address at Howard University, Johnson articulated this idea as a motivation for AA:
“You do not take a person who, for years, has been hobbled by chains and liberate him, bring him up to the starting
line of a race and then say, ‘you are free to compete with all the others,’ and still justly believe that you have been
completely fair. Thus it is not enough just to open the gates of opportunity. All our citizens must have the ability to
walk through those gates... To this end equal opportunity is essential, but not enough, not enough. Men and women
of all races are born with the same range of abilities. But ability is not just the product of birth. Ability is stretched
or stunted by the family that you live with, and the neighborhood you live in–by the school you go to and the poverty
or the richness of your surroundings. It is the product of a hundred unseen forces playing upon the little infant, the
child, and finally the man.”
3
William G. Bowen and Derek Bok [1998], Peter Arcidiacono [2005] and Jessica S. Howell [2010], have
attempted estimation of counterfactual racial admissions profiles in a color-blind world. Linda Datcher
Loury and David Garman [1995], Richard H. Sander [2004], Mark C. Long [2008], Jesse Rothstein and
Albert H. Yoon [2008], and David L. Chambers, Timothy T. Clydesdale, William C. Kidder and Richard O.
Lempert [2005], have estimated the impact of AA on graduation rates among UR minority groups.

2

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

hours in a day and would prefer to consume time as leisure, but time is a required input
for human capital production. Since university seats are allocated according to measured human capital (HC) output (e.g., through an exam score), each student will choose
to invest some fraction of her leisure time based on her own ability, the distribution of
her competitors, and her prospects for winning a favorable outcome. Since AA alters
academic cutoffs required for admittance depending upon one’s demographic status, it
in turn shapes a student’s labor-leisure decision. Thus, some important questions arise:
is there a trade-off between fostering diversity on university campuses and human capital investment during middle and high school? Does AA increase or decrease incentives
for its beneficiaries (under-represented minorities)? How does it impact incentives for
other students? Finally, how does AA shape the racial achievement gap?
We begin the paper by presenting a model of human capital investment which is tailored toward capturing important aspects of competitive university admissions. The
model allows for predictions about the direction in which AA should impact effort and
performance distributions within each demographic group. There are two demographic
groups of students, whose learning costs systematically differ, in a competitive investment period running up to a matching game. A fixed distribution of university seats is
awarded in rank-order fashion by a centralized admissions board. The model predicts
that HC production effort will depend on a student’s relative ability. Moreover, if the
admissions board bases placement partially on demographic status, then, conditional
on a fixed ability level, investment will also differ across groups. Specifically, AA tends
to decrease HC accumulation by the highest ability minority students, while increasing
investment in HC by intermediate and low ability individuals. Students in the nonminority group respond in a largely opposite way, with the highest ability students in
this group increasing their effort and the lowest ability students decreasing it.
Overall, we find that AA has the potential to largely increase minority investment activity by mitigating so-called “discouragement effects” which arise from cost asymmetry
across demographic groups. Discouragement is a well-known phenomenon in the literature on rank-order competition. The idea is fairly simple: holding fixed gross payoffs
and one’s own productivity type, if a dominating shift in the distribution of one’s competitors occurs so that one’s own type falls further behind, eventually effort/output will
fall. This logic is independent of one’s fixed productivity type, being an artifact of the
competition one faces instead. Thus, if AA works to dampen discouragement effects for
minorities by shifting their effective competition group, it may actually increase their
willingness to re-allocate leisure time toward building HC instead. Moreover, this increase in effort happens on the region of the minority distribution where students are

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

3

most concentrated, meaning it generally leads to an increase in average investment activity. The sign of the average effect within the non-minority group is less clear-cut.
After presenting the theoretical framework, we develop a field experiment to investigate how AA shapes the labor-leisure trade-off in mathematics learning, as well as measured proficiency following a period of competitive HC investment. Our experimental
design, modeled after the theoretical framework, structures a set of short-run incentives
so as to mimic important aspects of university admissions. In our setup, cash prizes
stand in for university placement outcomes to motivate test subjects to spend leisure
time learning math.4 Students are individually randomized into two treatments for our
math competition, a “color-blind” control treatment, and an AA treatment. Our experiment involves paying middle-school-aged students based on their relative performance
on the American Mathematics Competition 8 (AMC8), a national mathematics exam, in
similar fashion as outcomes are determined on the university matching market using
college entrance exams and high school grades. In order to create a clean test of theory
on investment and discouragement effects, we use grade cohort as our demographic delimiter. This distinction mirrors some important racial disparities—our disadvantaged
students (e.g., 7th graders) have received, on average, fewer inputs into their math education relative to their counterparts (e.g., 8th graders) with substantial overlap in the
ability distribution notwithstanding—while filtering out other factors such as cultural
differences or stereotype threat that could confound the effects we seek to investigate.
In the color blind treatment, students compete against others in both grade levels
for prizes, with AMC8 score rankings determining each student’s pay-off. In the AA
(or “representative quota”) treatment, we proportionally split the overall distribution
of prizes and earmark subsets for each group, after which students compete only with
other students from their same grade. In other words, a representative quota reserved a
more favorable set of prizes for students in the lower grade, relative to what they would
receive when competing with higher grade students. And, of course, the opposite is true
for the set of prizes allocated to the higher grade students.
Because we are interested in how AA changes incentives to invest real effort into developing HC, a typical classroom experiment in which students are assigned to a treatment
immediately before completing some task is not ideal. Instead, we worked with teachers
to incorporate the experiment into the students’ schooling over a course of two weeks.
4

Our experiment covers short-run incentives spanning a matter of weeks. The longer pre-university
investment period, which spans years, is of ultimate interest to policy makers, but is difficult to study in
an environment where the researcher can experimentally create exogenous identifying variation. Thus, the
current study focuses on how AA shapes competitive market forces which drive individual labor-leisure
decisions and short-run human capital accumulation. What the magnitude of these forces might be when
students are discounting over longer periods of time, with payoffs in mind that are much larger than those
we can create, is beyond the scope of current research.

4

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

We assessed two in-class AMC8 exams separated by 2 weeks—a pre-exam to measure
baseline proficiency and a post-exam to allocate prizes and measure progress—and we
provided the students with a 10-day interim period in which they could study math
problems ahead of the final AMC8 exam. During this period we provided the students
access to a website with practice materials, and tracked their use of this site. By showing
that students in the color blind and AA treatments access the site at different rates, we
are the first experimental study to identify an effect of AA on real learning effort. We
did this in a natural classroom and home learning environment, where the free-time/
study-time trade-offs were familiar to test subjects, and mimic scenarios they face when
preparing for the competitive university admissions process during high school.
We find strong evidence that AA favorably alters labor-leisure trade-offs and measured proficiency by our disadvantaged group. Although the highest ability disadvantaged students did decrease performance as predicted by theory, this drop was very
modest, with the majority of disadvantaged students increased learning time and test
performance under AA. On average, the AA policy increased test scores among the disadvantaged group by 1/5 of a standard deviation over the course of the experiment.
While some portion of this increase may be due to greater focus or mental effort on the
day of the exam, we also show that disadvantaged students in the AA treatment are
more than twice as likely to use the practice website to prepare for the exam, spend
almost triple the amount of total time, and attempt more practice questions relative to
their counterparts in the control group. In this way, we are the first experimental paper
to show that AA policy can increase real effort exerted by its beneficiaries to acquire HC.
One might worry that these gains within the demographic group targeted by the policy come at the cost of commensurate weakening in incentives for other students, but
the data do not support this concern. We find no evidence that these gains come at the
expense of lower average investment or test scores for higher grade students. Consistent
with the theoretical model, we find suggestive evidence that the highest ability advantaged students increase performance, and lower ability advantaged students decrease
performance under AA, though these shifts are small and not statistically significant.
This suggests that, despite their gross payoffs declining due to AA, advantaged students
as a group had low enough learning costs to maintain roughly the same performance as
under color blind allocations.
The remainder of this paper has the following structure. Section 2 gives an overview
of the previous literature and explains how our contribution relates to what has been
done before. Section 3 presents a theoretical model of HC investment and university
admissions to motivate our experimental design. We also explore model predictions to
be tested in our study. Section 4 describes the structure of our field experiment in more

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

5

detail. Section 5 presents and discusses our experimental results. Section 6 concludes,
and the Appendix covers additional technical details of our study, potentially relevant
theory model extensions, and presents additional tables and graphs.
2. RELATED LITERATURE
The model which guides our experimental study is based on the more general theoretical framework in Aaron Bodoh-Creed and Brent R. Hickman [2015]. Both papers depict
a model of the university admissions market as an all-pay auction, in which students’
bids are investments in HC, and prizes are seats at different universities. We present
a simple model focusing on aspects of the market that are most readily testable using
experimental methods. Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015], on the other hand, provide
a more general theoretical model and analysis, establishing conditions under which a
rich college assignment model with AA can be represented in a more tractable form.
They begin by fleshing out a finite model, exploring how, when the number of agents
and seats is large, the analytically unruly equilibrium is well approximated by a simpler
setting where agents and university seats belong to a continuum set. For our purposes
in this paper, it is sufficient to focus only on the continuum setting; interested readers
are directed Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015] for the technical foundations behind this
modeling choice.
They derive general results concerning the properties and design of market mechanisms for college placement. In this paper, our focus is more narrow in one way and
more broad in another. First, we restrict attention to experimental comparisons between
two very simple, canonical mechanisms: a pure rank-order (color-blind) rule, and a
demographically representative quota. This allows us to assess the real-world applicability of the theoretical predictions on academic outcomes, and measure their associated
magnitudes. Second, we use our novel experimental design with on-line monitoring of
study effort to explore background phenomena—e.g., labor-leisure trade-offs—on which
the theory is silent. This allows us to confirm whether observed movements in outcomes
induced by our treatment are associated with actual learning activities (i.e., HC investment as the general framework assumes), or something less socially valuable such as
exam-day effort or purely wasteful signaling. In that sense, this paper and Bodoh-Creed
and Hickman [2015] may be seen as complementary to one another.
Our theoretical framework is also related to Stephen Coate and Glenn Loury [1993],
which shows how an AA policy can make high value jobs more-easily attainable and
can therefore reduce the incentives for minorities to undertake costly investment that
make them more qualified for such jobs. The key difference between our model—with
many-to-many matching—and theirs—with one-to-one matching—is that there is no

6

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

scarcity of high value positions in Coate and Loury’s framework. In our framework,
students compete with one another for a fixed set of heterogeneous university seats.
We show that, although AA will decrease incentives for the highest ability minorities to
invest, the opposite effect will predominate for most of them. Although our results are
consistent with Coate and Loury [1993] for the highest ability minorities, our predictions
are quite different for the overall minority population. We also test our predictions with
the experiment, and find evidence largely consistent with our theoretical model.
Previous experimental work has also tested the link between AA and effort. Examples
in the laboratory include Andrew Schotter and Keith Weigelt [1992], where asymmetry was exogenously imposed by researchers assigning cost functions to subjects, and
Anat Bracha, Alma Cohen and Lynn Conell-Price [2015] which focused on gender-based
asymmetry in quantitative problem solving. Caterina Calsamiglia, Jorg Franke and Pedro Rey-Biel [2013] conducted a related field experiment in which 10-13 year old children
compete in Sudoku puzzles in a pair-wise (one-to-one) tournament, with asymmetry
stemming from previous exposure to Sudoku. Each of these studies found that AA can
increase average performance by disadvantaged players.
Our analysis offers a number of advantages over previous experimental studies. First,
we include an investment period between assignment to a treatment group and our final
exam. During this period we monitor student time usage at home in a non-invasive
way. Ours is the first paper to do so, and it provides us with a window into individuals’ labor-leisure trade-offs in actual learning, rather than focusing solely on in-class
effort during a task. Our experimental design allows us to assess the impact of AA on
both interim investment and final outcomes. Math learning in preparation for the AMC8
exam is close to learning that enables higher performance on college entrance exams,
and therefore provides a relevant measure of HC investment. Second, our experimental
competition more closely mirrors important aspects of actual college admissions markets. It is a many-to-many competitive matching contest (with participants numbering
in the hundreds) having wide heterogeneity among both competitors and prize values.
This heterogeneity is communicated to our test subjects in simple terms, similar to how
US university applicants can compare their own standardized test score to mean scores
of students who typically enroll in their most preferred universities. By working with
test subjects’ regular teachers, using materials that were already being used as teaching
tools in their schools, and allowing for study choices at home, we are the first experiment
to create a natural setting in which test subjects are making decisions similar to those
which will lead to their ultimate college placement outcomes. Third, we intentionally
chose an experimental design to eliminate concerns about stereotype threat—our test
subjects were fairly homogeneous culturally and socioeconomically—so as to be able to

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

7

measure magnitudes of incentive effects in a clean environment. Fourth, our format also
allows for overlap in ability distributions across demographic groups, rather than assuming no overlap as previous experimental work has done. This allows us to compare
the performance distributions of students from asymmetric demographic groups to see
whether different qualitative effects at different quantiles appear, as predicted by theory.
There is also a substantial empirical literature studying AA and its impact on college
admissions. Bowen and Bok [1998] used student-level applications data to estimate the
preference given to minority students by admissions officers at elite schools. Arcidiacono [2005] and Howell [2010] estimated structural models which adjust counterfactuals
for changes in minority application behavior induced by policy shifts. A related vein of
the literature focuses on mismatching, or the idea that AA may cause damage to black
students by assigning them to academically demanding environments for which they are
unprepared. Loury and Garman [1995] and Sander [2004] present evidence supporting
mismatching. Other empirical work, such as Long [2008], Rothstein and Yoon [2008],
and Chambers et al. [2005], suggest that some mismatching may occur, but its magnitude is relatively small and is outweighed by the benefits of placing blacks into higher
quality institutions. Throughout this literature SAT—“Scholastic Aptitude Test”—scores
are used as a proxy for student ability, and assumed to be fixed. However, students’
incentives to invest in HC during middle and high school depend on admission policies they expect to face when applying to college. Test scores are therefore a function
of student ability and market incentives induced by AA. Assuming SAT scores are independent of the prevailing admissions policy may bias counterfactual estimates. Our
objective is to test this theory in a field experimental study of how students adjust their
effort (influencing their test scores) in response to changes in AA policy.
This paper contributes to a small but growing literature recognizing that admissions
policies shape incentives for pre-college HC accumulation. Bruno Ferman and Juliano
Assuncao [2011] found evidence that test scores among black Brazilian high-school
students decreased in response to an admissions quota at elite universities in Rio de
Janeiro.5 Hickman [2015] estimated a structural empirical model of the U.S. college
admissions market based on the theoretical foundation of Bodoh-Creed and Hickman
[2015]. His counterfactual analysis of admissions, investment, and welfare under alternative AA policies found evidence that AA increases the stock of minority HC overall,
5 While seemingly contradictory to our findings, our model predicts that a quota which affects all

points in the quality spectrum of universities will lead to a widening of the demographic achievement
gap among the most talented students. Ferman and Assuncao [2011] estimated a negative overall effect
of a policy change which applied only to top universities in Rio De Janeiro. Thus, the policy they study
would have predominantly impacted high-ability black students who were at less of a disadvantage to
begin with. Likewise, Brent R. Hickman [2015] estimated that AA negatively affects investment among a
small mass of the highest ability minorities in the US, even though on average the effect is positive.

8

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

and provided further comparisons between color-blind admissions, representative quotas, and American-style preference-based AA (score bonuses).
Finally, our study is also related to others concerning performance pay in primary and
secondary schools. Recent studies including Eric Bettinger [2012], Edwin Leuven, Hessel
Oosterbeek and Bas van der Klaauw [2010] and Roland Fryer [2011] found mixed results
about whether paying students can improve their effort and outcomes. Our experimental incentives are different from these in that we paid participants based on their relative
performance rather than offering a fixed wage contract. Michael Kremer, Edward Miguel
and Rebecca Thornton [2009] also studied a program awarding merit scholarships based
on relative performance, and found evidence that students respond to changing financial incentives in a competitive environment. Our experimental design has two main
differences from these studies: first, we were able to monitor outcomes and interim time
inputs; and second, our focus is not on the effectiveness of pay-for-performance per se,
but rather on differences between common relative performance incentive schemes. Finally, in a competitive setting some of a subject’s behavior may be driven by an intrinsic
desire to win, as in Christopher Cotton, Frank McIntyre and Joseph Price [2013] who presented evidence that simply framing a task as a contest can lead to better performance
by some participants. In our study, we frame a common task as two different contests,
which allows us to pick up on differences across alternative allocation mechanisms.
3. Theory
3.1. MODEL. Here we present a model of AA in competitive HC investment which will
form the basis of our experimental design. It is a special case of Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015] who developed the technical foundations of the framework presented here.
We model university admissions as a Bayesian game with a continuum of heterogeneous
students of mass 1. Each student exerts effort developing human capital (HC). A student’s relative HC output affects the quality of university she attends. The competition
between students for higher-valued outcomes is a many-player all-pay contest for a continuum of heterogeneous university seats of mass 1. Students differ in their cost of HC
accumulation, and university seats differ by quality.
Each student simultaneously chooses a level of HC accumulation, hi ≥ h, where the
quantity h represents a minimum pre-requisite for market participation, as when university applicants must first earn a high school diploma in order to be considered. Acquiring HC requires time—which could otherwise be consumed as leisure—and effort, and
is therefore thought to be costly. Students differ by their background, abilities, access to
help, and other resources that affect the rate at which time is converted into new HC. At
the individual level, these factors are summarized by a parameter θi , which determines

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

9

the marginal costs of student i’s HC accumulation. Investment entails a utility cost
c(hi ; θi ), which is strictly increasing and convex in the amount of output, or c0 (hi ; θi ) > 0
2

∂c
∂ c
and c00 (hi ; θi ) > 0 for all hi ≥ h. We also assume ∂θ
> 0 and ∂h∂θ
> 0 so that smaller
θ implies a more productive student having lower costs for a given level h, and also a
lower marginal cost of increasing output from h to h + ∆. θi is privately known to each
student, who views costs of her competitors as realizations of a random variable Θ.
There is a continuum of university seats of mass 1. We denote an individual seat by
quality level s, and model the relative masses of different seats as following distribution
FS . Throughout the paper, we shall simplify discussion by assuming FS = Uni f orm[s, s]
and [s, s] = [0, 1] so that seat quality index and quantile rank are the same, with higher s
indicating a more valuable seat. A student placing at seat si experiences benefit u(si ) =
si . Net utility of student i is

U ( s i , h i ; θ i ) = s i − c ( h i ; θ i ) .6

(1)

For simplicity here, a student’s gross match utility u(·) depends only indirectly on her
HC, through determining the quality of university to which she is admitted. In the
appendix, we explore an extension where HC directly enters match utility and students
with higher HC benefit more from admittance to high quality universities. We show
that the extended model still admits the qualitative patterns predicted by the version
described here, which is simpler and isolates phenomena that we can directly test with
our experimental design.7
3.1.1. Incorporating Demographics. Each student observably belongs to one of two mutually exclusive demographic subgroups, A and D , with δ ∈ (0, 1) being the mass of
the latter. Since costs are privately known to each individual, students view their competitors’ types in group j = A, D as realizations of a random variable Θ j with distribution Fj (θ ) and density f j (θ ) which is strictly positive on a common support [θ, θ ].
As convenient shorthand, we define the overall distribution and density as F (θ ) ≡
δFD (θ ) + (1 − δ) FA (θ ) and f (θ ) ≡ δ f D (θ ) + (1 − δ) f A (θ ).
6We restrict attention to the case where cost type θ chooses to acquire h units of human capital. In other

words, we assume U (s, h; θ ) = U (∅, 0; θ ), which guarantees that all students in our game weakly prefer to
acquire the minimum HC and attend university. Those with hi ≥ h are allocated a seat based upon their
relative HC. This means that the model is one of decisions on the intensive margin, being conditional on
market participation. The question of how AA may affect university attendance decisions on the extensive
margin is left for future research.
7Since it is difficult to directly experimentally test how h factors into gross utility, we instead focus
on a simpler model in this section of the paper. We study HC accumulation in our experiment through
direct observations of time investment into the learning process. For illustrative purposes though, in
the appendix we present some examples where gross utility is Cobb-Douglas in s and h, U (si , hi ; θi ) =
β
siα hi − θi hi . Similar qualitative patterns emerge in response to AA, relative to color-blind admissions, as
when u = si .

10

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

We assume group A is “advantaged” and group D is “disadvantaged” in that students
from D tend to find HC production more costly, on average. Formally, we assume the
distributions of ΘA and ΘD are ordered by likelihood ratio (LR) dominance, where
∂ ( f D (θ )/ f A (θ ))
> 0 for all θ ∈ [θ, θ ].
∂θ
Intuitively, LR dominance is a strong form of first-order stochastic dominance which
implies, among other things, that cost quantiles within A are all lower than the corresponding quantiles within D . Although some “disadvantaged” students have low costs
of acquiring HC, and some “advantaged” students have high costs, the average and median students in D have higher costs of producing new HC than their counterparts in
A, etc. This is how we operationalize the idea that, on average, disadvantaged students
must invest more time and effort to overcome obstacles which are (imperfectly) correlated with their demographic status. In the context of race, for example, it is well-known
that Black and Hispanic children in the United States tend to be less affluent and have
less access to crucial childhood inputs like healthcare and high-quality public education;
however, some still grow up in affluent environments which are more advantageous to
childhood learning. Note also that LR dominance implies there exists a unique point,

θe ∈ θ, θ , at which the densities f A and f D cross. This fact will become useful later
when we explore comparative statics under different allocation mechanisms.
3.1.2. Seat Allocation Rules. We consider two distinct university seat allocation rules.
Let H ∼ G ( H ) denote the human capital output of a randomly selected student, and
let Hj ∼ Gj ( Hj ) be similarly defined for a student from group j = A, D . The first seat
allocation rule is a color-blind (CB) policy, which ignores demographics when allocating
university seats. This rule assigns students to seats in pure rank-order fashion. The
mechanism determines the quantile rank of hi within the overall HC distribution and
then matches student i to a seat at the corresponding quantile rank. For example, the
75th percentile student matches with the 75th percentile university, etc. Formally, under
the color-blind rule, student i from group j receives seat assignment
cb
Scb
j ( h i ) = S ( h i ) ≡ G ( h i ), j = A, D .

(2)

A student’s allocation under the CB rule depends on her performance relative to all other
students; thus, investment behavior will not vary by demographic status.
The second seat allocation rule is a representative quota (RQ) AA policy, which reserves a similar distribution of university seats for each group, A and D , and then
allocates the seats within each group by rank ordering. By “similar distribution” we
mean that fraction δ of all seats at each point in the quality spectrum are earmarked ex

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

11

ante for group D , thus splitting the set of university seats into two subsets having mass
δ and (1 − δ), but with both subsets still following the original quality distribution FS .8
Formally, under the RQ rule, student i receives seat
rq

S j ( h i ) ≡ G j ( h i ), j = A, D .

(3)

A student’s seat assignment under the RQ policy depends only on her performance
relative to other members of her own demographic group. It splits the university admissions market into two separate contests, with identical distributions of prizes, but
different distributions of player ability. From a student’s perspective, the distinguishing
characteristic of the RQ mechanism is that it alters the distribution of one’s competitors,
while leaving all other aspects of the contest the same as under a CB rule.
3.1.3. Solution Concept: The strategic environment presented above will form the basis for our experimental design in the next section. Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015]
develop a general model of competitive HC investment which nests the framework presented here as a special case. They begin with a finite set of players and university seats,
and demonstrate existence of a unique symmetric Bayes-Nash equilibrium. They then
establish general conditions under which equilibria of the unweildy finite model can be
well approximated by the solution to a decision problem where the finite sets on both
sides of the matching market are replaced with continua.9 This solution they refer to
as an approximate equilibrium, and it lends analytic tractability to an otherwise complicated model. For the understanding we wish to develop in this paper, it suffices to limit
discussion to the continuum representation of the model.
Our main goal in this section is to illustrate qualitative model predictions which are
testable through experimental methods. The primary contribution of this paper derives
from empirical comparisons of the distributions of effort and outcomes generated under
the alternative policies CB and RQ. Thus, under each of these mechanisms we now characterize the approximate Bayes-Nash equilibrium of the game played between students
who each choose how much HC to acquire prior to execution of the school assignment
mechanism. To avoid tedious repetition, we abstract from the intricacies of the finite
8A subtle but crucial detail to note here is that our RQ policy calibrates δ to the fraction of group D

market participants, which may not be the same as the mass of that group within the population at large.
For example, South Africa mandates employment quotas for skilled professions, where quotas are pegged
to the fraction of blacks in the overall population. One problem in the implementation of this law has
been that not enough blacks exist within the skilled labor market (e.g., individuals with pre-requisite postsecondary degrees) to fill mandated quotas. Such a rule would be a more extreme version of the AA
policy studied in this paper, and may therefore entail different consequences.
9Alternatively, one may also interpret the continuum simplification as the basis of a behavioral strategy
employed by a cognitively constrained agent. Rather than tracking probabilities over all the order statistics
of large, complicated sets of competitors and seats, the agent may drastically reduce computational burden
at little cost by pretending as if she was operating within a continuous world instead of a discrete one.

12

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

game and simply refer to our derivation of the approximate equilibrium as “the equilibrium.” The interested reader is directed to Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015] for a full
exposition of the technical foundations underlying the continuum model approximation.
3.2. ANALYSIS. Let h∗ (θ ) denote the common equilibrium investment function under
the benchmark CB mechanism, and let h∗A (θ ) and h∗D (θ ) denote the group-specific in∗ , and θ ∗
vestment functions under the alternative RQ mechanism. Moreover, let θ ∗ , θA
D
denote the relevant inverses, so that θ ∗ ≡ h∗ −1 and θ j∗ ≡ h∗j −1 , j = A, D .
3.2.1. CB Allocations. Student i chooses HC to maximize her net payoff, given that other
students play according to h∗ . Equilibrium HC investment is strictly decreasing in θ, so
equation (2) can be re-written as Scb (h) = 1 − F [θ ∗ (h)], and student i’s objective as
max {(1 − F [θ ∗ (hi )]) − c(hi ; θi )} .
hi ≥ h

(4)

Taking a first-order condition (FOC), we get − f (θi )θ ∗ 0 (hi ) = c0 (hi ; θi ). In equilibrium,
θ ∗ (hi ) = θi for all i, and since h∗ is the inverse of θ ∗ , it follows that h∗ 0 (θi ) = 1/θ ∗ 0 (hi ).
Therefore, through a change of variables we can rearrange the FOC to get
h ∗ 0 ( θi ) =

− f ( θi )
, with boundary condition h∗ (θ ) = h.
i ); θ i ]

c0 [ h∗ (θ

(5)

Given the assumptions on f and c, it is easy to see that h∗ is strictly decreasing in θ.
Equation (5) allows us to compare investment under two alternative cost distributions.
Theorem 1. Consider two color blind contests, 1 and 2, which differ only by their cost distributions, and assume competition is more fierce under contest 2 in the sense that F1 LR dominates
F2 . Let θ̃ ∈ (θ, θ ) denote the unique crossing point of the density functions where f 1 (θ̃ ) = f 2 (θ̃ ).
There exists a unique interior crossing point θ̈ ∈ (θ, θ̃ ), such that h1∗ (θ ) < h2∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈
and h1∗ (θ ) > h2∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈.
A formal proof is left to the Appendix. The theorem provides useful insight into how
competition shapes incentives. It says that, holding fixed the set of all universtiy seats,
an increase in the degree of competition will cause the most able students to invest
more aggressively, increasing their HC output, and less talented students to withdraw
somewhat, decreasing their HC output. This second shift is a common feature of contests
known as the discouragement effect. The intuitive idea is that since investment costs must
be sunk before assignments are made to a set of fixed outcomes, then, holding one’s own
cost type θ fixed, if the distribution of competitors shifts so that one’s quantile rank falls
low enough, investment incentives fall. As we will see below, there is much insight to be
had from Theorem 1 when comparing alternative allocation mechanisms.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

13

3.2.2. RQ Allocations. Similarly as before, under a RQ equation (3) can be re-written as
h
i
rq
S j (h) = 1 − Fj θ j∗ (h) , j = A, D , and the objective for student i from group j is now
max
hi ≥ h

n

1−

h

Fj θ j∗ (hi )

i

o

− c ( hi ; θi ) .

(6)

Note the main difference here is that the group-specific distribution enters decision making rather than the unconditional one. That leads to the following FOC
h∗j 0 (θi ) =

− f j ( θi )
h
i , with boundary condition h∗j (θ ) = h, j = D , A.
∗
0
c h j ( θ i ); θ i

(7)

Recall our assumption that the random variable ΘD LR dominates ΘA , or in other
words, the ratio f D (θ )/ f A (θ ) is strictly increasing in θ. This implies that Θ LR dominates
ΘA , and that ΘD LR dominates Θ as well. To see why, note that
f (θ )
δ f ( θ ) + (1 − δ ) f A ( θ )
f (θ )
= D
=δ D
+ (1 − δ ),
f A (θ )
f A (θ )
f A (θ )
from which it follows that f (θ )/ f A (θ ) is strictly increasing in θ. Likewise,


f D ( θ ) −1
δ f ( θ ) + (1 − δ ) f A ( θ )
f (θ )
= D
= δ + (1 − δ ) A ,
f (θ )
f D (θ )
f D (θ )
so f D (θ )/ f (θ ) is strictly increasing in θ as well. Therefore, switching between allocation
mechanism CB—where the competition group is all students—and mechanism RQ—
where competition occurs only within one’s own group—entails an effective LR dominance shift in the distribution of competitors while holding the distribution of seats
fixed. Thus, Theorem 1 directly leads to the following corollary on HC accumulation
under an RQ rule, relative to CB.
Corollary 2. Assume FD LR dominates FA and let θ̃ ∈ (θ, θ ) denote the unique crossing point of
the cost densities where f (θ̃ ) = f A (θ̃ ) = f D (θ̃ ). Then there exist crossing points θ̈A , θ̈D ∈ (θ, θ̃ ),
such that
(i) h∗D (θ ) < h∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈D

and

h∗D (θ ) > h∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈D , and

(ii) h∗A (θ ) > h∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈A

and

h∗A (θ ) < h∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈A .

In words, the best and brightest students within group D decrease HC investment,
as competition for the top university seats becomes less intense. At the same time,
higher-cost individuals exert greater effort and increase HC accumulation, as RQ mitigates discouragement effects by placing them in a competition group where they are
less far behind the curve. For the same reasoning, the opposite effects apply to group
A. The best and brightest increase HC investment under the RQ, as competition for the

14

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

top university seats becomes more intense, and others become discouraged as they find
themselves further behind the curve in their new competition group.
Since theory predicts behavioral responses in opposite directions for students of different abilities within each group, the result above begs the question of which effect will
dominate. Once again, Theorem 1 can shed some light on the answer. Using the density
crossing point θ̃, we can partition the cost support into two subsets,
TA ≡ (θ, θ̃ )

and

TD ≡ (θ̃, θ ),

which we refer to as the typical cost sets for each group. Intuitively, Tj is the region of
the support where group j’s density is strictly higher, and therefore it is overrepresented
relative to its share in the overall population. LR dominance implies some interesting
properties for these sets. Since both densities integrate to 1, it follows that
Z
TA

[ f A (θ ) − f D (θ )] =

Z
TD

[ f D (θ ) − f A (θ )] .

In words, the degree of over-representation of group D in the high-cost set TD is the
same as the degree of over-representation of group A within the low-cost set TA .
Corollary 3. Assume the same conditions as in Corollary 2. Then under the RQ policy (relative to the CB policy), typical disadvantaged students—that is, group D students with costs

θ ∈ (θ̈D , θ̃ ] ∪ TD —exert higher effort and accumulate more HC. Moreover, if we define
d : (θ̈D , θ̃ ] ∪ TD → R as the difference on this set between group D investment under RQ
versus CB, or
d(θ ) ≡ (h∗D (θ ) − h∗ (θ )) ,
then d(θ ) is strictly positive and attains a maximum on the interval (θ̈D , θ̃ ]. Moreover, if investment costs are strictly convex in h, then d(θ ) attains its maximum on the open interval

(θ̈D , θ̃ ).
Proof: The reasoning behind this result is simple. Corollary 2 directly implies the first
part and that d tends toward zero at its endpoints but is strictly positive everywhere
else. Moreover, equation (A.2) in the proof of Theorem 1 (see appendix) establishes that
d0 (θ ) < 0 for all θ ∈ TD , meaning the difference between the two investment functions
becomes steadily wider as one moves toward the density crossing θ̃ from the left. If costs
are strictly convex, then (A.2) shows that d0 (θ ) < 0 for all θ ∈ TD ∪ θ̃, so the maximum
cannot occur at θ̃. 
Corollary 3 implies that, relative to their disadvantage in the overall population, a
disproportionate share of group D students increase HC investment. To gain an appreciation for the strength of this result, the corollary also shows that, not only do we see a
positive effect for all group D cost types in their typical set, but the improved incentives

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

15

Figure 1. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE:
Truncated Normal Cost Densities
1.4
1.3
1.2

PDFs

1.1
1
0.9

fD(θ)

0.8

f(θ)
fA(θ)

0.7
0.6

TA

0.5
0.4

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

θ

T

D

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

extend well beyond TD as well. In fact, the largest improvement of investment incentives
by type (i.e., where d attains its maximum) actually occurs on the interval (θ̈D , θ̃ ]. Thus,
the result implies an increase of investment activity for a large fraction of the disadvantaged group. It is worth noting that analogous results to the three above can be proven
in an extension of the model where h directly enters a student’s gross match utility; these
are Theorem 4 and Corollaries 5 and 6 in the Appendix.
On the other hand, the situation is less clear for the advantaged group. Although an

analogous statement can be made—that all group A cost types θ ∈ (θ̈A , θ̃ ] ∪ TD will
reduce HC output under RQ—the statement is less informative, because investment also
increases on part of the typical set TA as well. To further illustrate the intuition of model
predictions, we present three numerical examples, one below and two additional ones
in the Appendix.
3.3. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE. Here, we explicitly solve the model using functional
forms to illustrate the qualitative patterns predicted by theory. In the example, δ = 0.5
and both ΘD and ΘA follow normal distributions truncated to a common support

[θ, θ ] = [1, 2] with variance parameter σA = σD = 0.5. The mean parameters differ,
with µD = 1.75 and µA = 1.25, which ensures that the distributions are ordered by LR
dominance (see Figure 1). We specify costs as a linear function c(h; θ ) = θh, so that
the maximum distance between investment under RQ and CB occurs at the boundary
between TA and TD . Finally, we set h = 0.5; this makes type θ indifferent to market
participation when the outside option is normalized to a value of zero.
Figures 2 and 3 depict a comparison of the RQ investment functions for each group
(solid and dashed lines), as well as the common investment function for both groups
under a CB allocation rule (dotted line). For each group there is crossing point of the
investment functions, with the upper bounds of the HC distributions being different by
seat allocation rule. For the disadvantaged group, a positive mass of the top students

16

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Figure 2. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE:
Investment, CB vs AA
INVESTMENT

1.2

h* (θ)
D
*

1.1

h (θ)

1

*

hA(θ)

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

θ

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

1

1

0.9

0.9

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

RQ
CB

0.1
0
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

HUMAN CAPITAL

1.2

DISADVANTAGED
GROUP CDFs

ADVANTAGED
GROUP CDFs

Figure 3. NUMERICAL EXAMPLE:
HC Distributions, CB vs AA

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

RQ
CB

0.1
0
0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

HUMAN CAPITAL

reduce investment, while middle- and high-cost students increase it. Intuitively, the
policy aids the top students from D , but since they were already placing close to the
upper bound their outcomes cannot be commensurately improved and they rationally
reduce effort. For other students in D , the policy alleviates discouragement effects by
placing them in a competition group where their own type is not as far behind, making them more competitive for higher quality outcomes. In turn, they respond with an
increased willingness to engage in costly investment. Similar logic holds for group A,
but in reverse. A key aspect of our experiment will be to engineer this sort of counterfactual scenario, where similar ability students find themselves facing different levels
of competition for the same set of outcomes. Within this experimental counterfactual
we test whether AA leads to changes in performance distributions. We also investigate
intermediate inputs behind investment costs depicted in the model: time and effort.
4. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We built our incentives and learning exercise around the American Mathematics Competition 8 (AMC8) exam, sponsored by the Mathematical Association of America, for

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

17

students in 8th grade and below. It consists of 25 multiple choice questions (five choices
each) in 40 minutes, and the questions become progressively more difficult from start to
finish. The AMC8 is an early precursor to math competitions such as the International
Mathematical Olympiad and the Putnam. The AMC8 website explains, “[it] provides
an opportunity to apply concepts [to] high level to problems which... are designed to
challenge and offer problem solving experiences beyond those provided in... junior high
school.”

4.1. SAMPLE POPULATION. Our total sample includes 992 middle school and junior
high students from 10 schools in Utah County, Utah, including both charter schools
and regular public schools. Within these schools, participation in our study was at the
classroom level. Academically and socioeconomically, our sample population was fairly
average within the US.10 Most of our partner schools had previously participated in the
AMC8 before partnering with us for this study.
Our partner schools exhibited a high degree of racial and cultural homogeneity. Less
than 1% of students were black and only 7.5% were Hispanic, compared to nationwide
averages of 15.25% and 22.2% for blacks and Hispanics, respectively. All schools in
this study serve suburban populations. However, given that the goal of this paper is
to cleanly test theory of incentives, the demographic homogeneity in our sample may
be an advantage. We chose grade level as our demographic delimiter for groups A
and D , which ensures that they only differ in observable ways (i.e., age and grade)
but are otherwise similar. Focusing on a relatively homogeneous subject pool allows
us to largely rule out other cultural/behavioral phenomena (such as stereotype threat)
which might confound the pure incentive effects arising from our exogenous policy
variation. At the same time, however, we must recognize that AA policies typically apply
in real world settings with a number of confounding factors which we minimize in our
experiment. We discuss this point further in Section 6 where we compare achievement
gaps within our sample pool to race gaps within the US population.
10Our test subjects are drawn from a population which is somewhat more affluent than the rest of

the country, but academically comparable. Based on figures from the National Center for Education Statistics, we estimate a median household income of $59,800 for the sample population, compared to a nationwide median of $53,046 (information downloaded from http://nces.ed.gov/surveys/sdds/framework
/tables.aspx). In 2012, approximately 33% of test subjects were eligible for free or reduced-price lunch,
compared to a national average of 48%. That year our partner schools housing 5th and 6th grade subjects
(20% of our sample pool) performed significantly better than other Utah schools in terms of meeting state
math standards (approximately 91% vs 76%), while schools housing our 7th and 8th graders (80% of our
sample pool) performed slightly worse than other Utah schools (81% vs 83% meeting state standards).
Utah is a state which typically ranks at or near the median for nationally measured academic outcomes
such as NAEP scores and enrollment rates in Advanced Placement programs.

18

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

4.2. TREATMENT GROUPS AND INCENTIVES. Participants in our study first took
a practice AMC8 test from a previous year. We used this as a baseline measure of
each student’s ability. Individuals were randomized into either a control group—with a
“color-blind” competition—or an AA treatment—with a representative quota competition. Following the notational convention from the previous section, we will henceforth
refer to these treatments as CB and RQ, respectively. For treatment CB, we ran competitions involving students in two adjacent grades; that is, 7th and 8th graders competing
together, and 5th and 6th graders competing together. For each of the two age cohort
pairings, students in the lower grades (5th or 7th ) are henceforth referred to as the “disadvantaged” demographic D , and students in the higher grades (6th or 8th ) are referred
to as the “advantaged” demographic group A, since the latter are one year older and
have received one more year of mathematics education on average.11 For treatment Q,
students competed only within their own grade level, but for a proportionally equivalent
set of prizes (relative to CB), as described below. We ran separate competitions for 5th ,
6th , 7th , and 8th graders.
The top 30 percent of students within each competition group received cash prizes,
which were uniformly distributed between $4 and $34 in $2 increments. Prizes were
awarded assortatively within competition groups, according to final exam scores. For
example, 7th grade students in treatment CB needed to score within the top 30 percent
of all 7th and 8th grade students in their treatment to receive a prize. In treatment Q,
students competed against others in their own grade only, but for a representative set
of prizes. More specifically, we began with the same aggregate prize distribution as for
treatment CB, and then earmarked prizes at each different level in proportion to the
mass of lower-grade students in each age cohort pairing (note that the mass of groups A
and D were also identical across treatments CB and Q). This ensured that the moments
of the prize distribution (including the 70% mass of zeros) were the same across all
competition groups, with each one vying for the same number and variety of prizes on
a per capita basis. For example, 7th grade students in treatment Q only had to score
within the top 30 percent of 7th graders in their treatment to receive a prize. Moreover,
their distribution of prizes, conditional on winning something, was the same as for 8th
graders in treatment Q, and also the same as for all 7th /8th grade students in treatment
CB. Thus, for an advantaged or disadvantaged student of a given ability level, the only
difference across the two treatments is the distribution of one’s competitors.
11As we discuss in Section 6, the difference in average preparation between our disadvantaged and

advantaged groups likely understates difference between black and white students at the same age in the
US. Using national figures from the NAEP exam, we estimate that the 7th –8th grade gap in our sample
pool is roughly 60% of the gap between black and white 8th graders in terms of math proficiency.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

19

Each student received an information sheet describing their assigned group, how
many students from which grade(s) they would be competing against, and the score
distribution within their group based on the practice test. Students received their own
practice score back at the same time so they could see where they fit within their competition group. The sheet also contained a table describing the prize structure. We
printed information relative to each competition group on a different color of paper so
that students could visually see in their classroom that roughly half of the students were
assigned to each treatment. Altogether, there were six different groups: four groups for
the quota treatment (one for each grade) and two groups for the neutral treatment (one
for 5th /6th grade and one for 7th /8th grade). In a web appendix, we provide an example
of the information sheet given to each group.12
4.3. MATH LEARNING WEBSITE. At the bottom of the information sheet was the
url of a website we set up with practice problems drawn from five past AMC8 exams.
At 25 questions each, this made for 125 total practice problems covering six different
math subjects: Arithmetic, Algebra, Combinatorics, Geometry, Logic, and Probability.
Problems were divided into a set of 31 total quizzes. Each year, the 25 AMC8 exam
questions are numbered in increasing order of difficulty. For each of the previous five
year’s exams, the website included one quiz covering problems 1-10, a second quiz
covering problems 11-20, and a third covering problems 21-25. Test subjects were notified
that each grouping of 3 same-year quizzes were ordered by their difficulty level. We also
arranged this same battery of math problems into an additional set of 16 quizzes, each
containing 5 subject-specific math problems. These subject quizzes were also ordered by
their difficulty level.
Students could attempt each quiz as many times as they liked, or move on to additional materials they had not yet tried. After completing each quiz, our software
displayed an instructional page which reported to each student her score, the correct
answers for each problem, and step-by-step solutions published by the developers of
the AMC8. Students were provided with a web page that contained links for all of the
quizzes we offered, but in order to access the quizzes, they had to input their name,
grade, and school on the first page of the web form. This allowed us to track online
activities for each quiz session, including which students visited the website, how many
different subjects they tried, how much time they spent, how many questions they attempted, what they answered on each attempt at each question, and how much time
they spent viewing the instructional page.
12Copies of the information sheets given to test subjects are available for download at

http://home.uchicago.edu/h̃ickmanbr/uploads/CHP2014_WEB_APPENDIX.zip

20

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Within each quiz, questions were separated on different web pages in blocks of 3, 4,
or 5 questions per page, and the instructional page at the end displayed feedback for
all questions on a single page.13 Time on our website was measured at the page level,
meaning that we got a time measure for blocks of either 3, 4, or 5 questions. In order
to convert this information into a time spent per question measure, we divided each
block-level time observation by the number of questions within that block. Instructional
page times for 10-question quizzes were split into two observations a piece by dividing
by two in order to make them comparable to 5-question instructional page view times.
4.3.1. Time Measurement. One difficulty arose in that there were clear instances where
students left the website in the middle of a quiz for several hours or more. To adjust
for this problem we chose truncation points on the domains of time per question and
instructional page view time, and we replaced each observation above that point with
the appropriate student-specific censored mean.14 In selecting our truncation point we
looked for occurrences of “holes” in the support of the distribution of times per question.15 For our time per question data, this leads to a truncation point of 26.14 min/
question (the 99.35th percentile), and for instructional page views, 108.39 min/page view
(i.e., 21.68 min/solution, or the 98th percentile). In the Appendix we display a histogram
of (uncensored) time per question and instructional page view times.
At the end of the day, the time monitoring capability on our website is not perfect, and
it is impossible to directly observe work stoppages in the middle of a quiz question. In
particular, it may still be the case that smaller work stoppages occur below the truncation
points. Therefore, in terms of time per question we are effectively interpreting work
stoppages of less than 27 minutes as time which comes at a positive cost to the child.
We argue that 27 minutes is a reasonable truncation point for several reasons. First,
work stoppages for our uncensored time observations (most of which were less than 10
minutes) would serve as a poor substitute for longer, unbroken leisure spells. Second,
13Each 10-question quiz was broken into three pages with 3 questions on page one, 3 questions on page

two and 4 questions on page three. Each 5-question quiz displayed all 5 problems on a single page.
14To illustrate this rule, suppose that Tommy attempted three 5-question quizzes for a total of 15
questions. Suppose further that we observed times of 5 minutes each for seven questions, 15 minutes each
for another seven questions, and 2000 minutes for the last one. Then if the truncation point were, say
30 minutes, the last observation of 2000 is replaced by Tommy’s idiosyncratic censored mean time of 10
minutes (for all other questions he attempted). As a robustness check, we also ran our analysis by simply
dropping truncated observations instead, and results are very similar to those we present below.
15More specifically, a hole in the distribution support was defined as the minimum point at which a
full-support condition fails, which we estimated as a point where a kernel-smoothed density estimate
hit zero. The idea behind this rule is that if the type distribution has full support, then the distribution
of times per question should have full support as well since the choice of how much time to spend is
continuous. For a more complete description of our truncation point selection rule, see the Appendix.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

21

since this potential problem is the same across both treatment groups, there is no reason
to believe that our results are being aided by it.
Third, the AMC8 contains fairly challenging material that may require significant time
inputs for some students. Table 2 in the next section displays the mean and variance of
time spent per question attempt, using the censored sample of times. The most difficult
subject appears to be combinatorics, with a mean time of 2.839 minutes and a standard
deviation of 3.532. Given that the censored distribution of time per question is right
skewed, and 10 minutes (the 98th percentile of the un-censored sample) is roughly two
standard deviations above the mean for combinatorics, it is plausible that roughly 1.5%
of our sample could exist on the interval between 10 minutes and 26 minutes.
As for instructional page view times, it is informative to consider a particular student
whom we will rename “Kate” to protect her identity. Kate, a 7th grader in the quota
treatment, spent more time than anyone else on the website (after time adjustments),
averaging roughly 53 minutes per day during the study period. At 55 question attempts,
Kate was also above the 94th percentile on that dimension as well. She attempted 11
quizzes of 5 questions each, averaging 2.24 minutes per question attempt and 7.49 minutes per question on the instructional page with solutions. She spent an hour or more on
5 of her quiz attempts, each time spending the majority of her time on the instructional
page. For each of Kate’s 11 quiz attempts we see that she clicked through to the quiz
termination screen herself. Kate is an example of a student who displayed consistent
patterns of substantial time inputs into many of the quizzes she took—particularly on
the instructional page—while never having left a quiz session open overnight.

4.4. TESTING. Students took the actual AMC8 test in their regular classrooms, under
all of the normal conditions in which students around the country take the AMC8. Most
of the students in our study attended schools where participation in the AMC8 was already being offered to students by their teachers, but on a voluntary basis. The schools
that cooperated in this study administered the test to all students within each participating classroom on an opt-out basis, so that all students participated in the study,
except those whose parents proactively signed and returned an opt-out form. The study
involved two in-class exam sessions: the practice test was the AMC8 exam for the previous year, and the final exam was the AMC8 for the current year. The cash prizes were
delivered to each school shortly after the final exam, and handed out to each student
in an envelope. The outcome measures that we use in the next section include both the
effort-based measures with website data, as well as a performance-based measure using
students’ scores on the AMC8.

22

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

5. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The theoretical model predicts that some students in each demographic group will
increase their effort and HC accumulation under AA, while others in the same group
will decrease their efforts. Our empirical investigation takes the next step by testing
for the average effects of AA on effort and performance by demographic group and
estimating magnitudes. We also use a non-parametric analysis to consider the effects of
AA on the performance distributions and achievement gaps.
5.1. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS.
5.1.1. Pre- and Post-Exams. Table 1 contains descriptive statistics on AMC8 exam scores.
Roughly three quarters of our sample were 7th /8th graders. The difference between these
and our 5th /6th grade test subjects is that the latter all came from accelerated classes,
whereas the former are representative of the overall student body within their schools.
This difference is born out in the data: while 8th grade students did best on the pre-test
with an average score of 9.04, 6th graders as a group came in second at 8.12 on average.
7th and 5th grade average pre-test scores are close, at 7.58 and 7.19, respectively.16
We have also broken down test scores by two groups that we refer to as investors—
students who logged on to our website at least once during the study period—and noninvestors—those who did not. Students who did better on the pre-test were more likely
to be investors (i.e., they were more likely to use the math practice website), although
some students who did not do as well also chose to be investors, and many students
who did quite well on the pre-test chose to be non-investors. For the group of investors,
we also present summary statistics concerning their activities on the website. Investors’
times ranged between a few minutes and 8.92 hours, or an average of about 53 minutes
per day over the study period. Number of questions attempted ranged between 1 and
120, with mean and standard deviation of roughly 19 and 23, respectively. Subjects
represents the number of different subject categories a student attempted, using the
subject-specific quizzes, being about two on average.
5.1.2. Subject-Specific Practice Question times. Table 2 displays the mean and variance
of time spent per question attempt on our website, using the censored sample of nontruncated times (once again, for investors only). Some math subjects appeared more
challenging in terms of the time students took to solve problems. The most difficult
subject was combinatorics, with a mean time per question attempt of 2.839 minutes and
16The national AMC8 population in 2013 (see https://amc-reg.maa.org/reports/generalreports.aspx)

had mean and median of 10.69 and 10 out of 25, with standard deviation of 4.44. These figures illustrate the
difficulty of the exam. The AMC8 is predominantly administered through opt-in participation, whereas
our experiment was on an opt-out basis. This accounts for the lower mean among our sample pool.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

23

Table 1. STUDENT DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

N

All

8.45

8

2.90

992

5th Grade

7.19

7

2.39

48

6th Grade

8.12

8

2.47

155

7th

Grade

7.58

7

2.84

275

8th Grade

9.04

9

2.82

396

Investors

9.46

10

3.19

118

Non-Investors

8.32

8

2.83

874

All

8.64

8

2.88

895

5th Grade

7.40

7

2.22

42

6th Grade

9.17

9

2.82

133

7th

Grade

8.12

8

2.90

233

8th Grade

8.75

9

2.80

374

Investors

9.20

9

3.06

113

Non-Investors

8.56

8

2.84

782

Pre-Exam Scores

Final Exam Scores

Human Capital Investment (Investors Only)
Total Time

43.65

26.85

64.65

118

Problem Solving Time

32.99

19.31

41.43

118

Instructional Time

10.66

3.37

38.85

118

Questions

18.89

10.00

22.53

118

Subjects

1.94

1.00

1.43

118

Notes: All time figures are post-censoring as described in Section 4.3 and quoted in minute units. Investors
are defined as students who logged on to the math learning website at least once during the investment
period. Non-Investors are those who did not.

24

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Table 2. Time Per Question Attempt by Subject

Subject

Censored Mean
Minutes Per Question

Std. Dev.
(minutes)

Mean + 2×Std. Dev.

Algebra

2.422

2.563

7.548

Arithmetic

1.398

1.238

3.874

Combinatorics

2.839

3.532

9.903

Geometry

2.183

2.577

7.337

Logic

1.807

1.742

5.291

Probability

1.996

1.137

4.27

Table 3. EFFORT AND PERFORMANCE BY TREATMENT
Investment

Performance

Used
Website

# Subjects
Attempted

Total
Time

# Questions
Attempted

Final Exam
Score

Quota
Std. Err.

0.154
(0.015)

0.284
(0.037)

6.634
(1.216)

2.729
(0.456)

8.680
(0.139)

Neutral
Std. Err.

0.088
(0.014)

0.189
(0.035)

3.932
(1.149)

1.817
(0.431)

8.604
(0.133)

992

992

992

992

895

N

Notes: Each cell provides the mean of the measure listed in each column. Standard errors are provided in
brackets. Estimates under each of the four effort variables are intended to capture the effect of a treatment
on human capital investment for the total study population, and are therefore averaged over both investors
and non-investors.

a standard deviation of 3.532. The least difficult subject appeared to be arithmetic, with
mean and standard deviation of 1.398 and 1.238, respectively.
5.2. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS.
5.2.1. Testing Overall Differences by Treatment. Tables 3 and 4 investigate the effect of a
quota on the overall population, including both advantaged and disadvantaged groups.
The first column of Table 3 displays the mean of a binary variable, being the fraction of
investors from each treatment group (i.e., subjects who logged on to our website at least
once to practice math). As for the other investment variables, the reader should keep in
mind that Tables 3 – 5 aim to measure a treatment effect of a policy on an entire group,
including both the intensive and extensive margins of investment. This is why the effort

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

25

Table 4. TESTING DIFFERENCES BY TREATMENT
Investment

Performance

Used
Website

# Subjects
Attempted

Total
Time

# Questions
Attempted

Final Exam
Score

Quota − Neutral

0.066***

0.095*

2.701

0.912

0.076

P-Value:

[0.001]

[0.061]

[0.107]

[0.146]

[0.693]

Quota − Neutral

0.065***

0.093*

2.650

0.884

0.097

P-Value:

[0.002]

[0.067]

[0.113]

[0.158]

[0.576]

Quota − Neutral

0.058***

0.078

2.404

0.773

0.164

P-Value:

[0.005]

[0.130]

[0.158]

[0.224]

[0.346]

992

992

992

895

(Controls: none)

(Controls: pre-test scores)

(Controls: pre-test scores, school FEs)
N

992

Notes: Each cell represents a separate regression. The number reported is the coefficient for the quota
treatment. Row 1 includes no controls and provides a statistical test of the differences in Table 1. Row 2
includes control for practice test score. Row 3 includes school fixed effects. P-values for a two-sided test
of the null hypothesis of zero difference are italicized and in brackets. Estimates under each of the four
effort variables are intended to capture the effect of a treatment on human capital investment for the total
study population, and are therefore averaged over both investors and non-investors.

numbers in Table 3 and afterward appear small: they are averaged over both investors
and non-investors. The results indicate that subjects in the quota treatment, including
students from all age groups, were 75% more likely to have visited the website than
students in the color-blind treatment. They also tried out more subjects, spent more time
on the website and answered more questions. Table 3 indicates that students in both
treatments scored roughly the same on the final exam. This is allowed for by the theory,
where predictions for the overall population are qualitatively ambiguous, but later on
we will see a different story when we separate these measures by demographic group.
Table 4 provides statistical tests for the raw differences displayed in table 3. In the
first row we run a simple regression using a dummy for the quota treatment, meaning
it represents the experimental difference between an RQ rule and CB allocations at the

26

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

population level (i.e., including both demographic groups). Each cell in the table represents a separate regression with the outcome variable labeled in the column header.
We report the point estimate and p-value for a test of the hypothesis that there is no
difference by treatment group. From the table we see strong evidence that AA increases
the fraction of students willing to invest at least some time. We also see evidence that
it induces them to experiment with more subjects, as well as increase the total time invested and number of questions attempted. Although these last two differences are only
marginally significant, the estimated magnitudes are large, with quota students logging
an estimated 57% and 70% more inputs of time and question attempts, respectively. Additional controls (pre-test score and/or school fixed effects) are added in the bottom two
rows as a check on the effectiveness of our randomization. It seems to have worked well,
as adding these additional 11 variables caused no significant shifts in point estimates.
5.2.2. Testing Differences by Treatment Within Demographic Groups. Recall that the theory allows for AA to have differential effects by ability and demographic group. In Table
5, we add a demographic dummy to investigate this claim. Each column presents estimates for a regression equation of the form
Outcome = β 0 + β 1 Quota + β 2 Advantaged ∗ Quota + β 3 Advantaged + β 4 Ability + ε,
where Quota is a dummy for treatment status, Advantaged is a demographic dummy,
Ability is a student’s standardized pre-test score, and the specific Outcome variable is
labeled in the column header. With the inclusion of the interaction term Advantaged ∗
Quota, the coefficient β 1 represents the average effect of AA specifically on the disadvantaged group. The effect of the policy on the advantaged group is represented by the sum
β 1 + β 2 . For completeness, all regressions include controls for school-level fixed effects,
and for the primary effects of interest we report p-values in brackets.
For disadvantaged group students we find evidence of large and positive effects across
all four investment measures. First, we see a highly significant 8.7 percentage point increase in disadvantaged students’ willingness to spend at least some time on the website,
under AA. To put this in perspective, we can compute a within-demographic percent
change for the disadvantaged group by 100 × ( β 1 /β 0 )%, which amounts to an increase
of 119% on the extensive margin, relative to their disadvantaged counterparts under the
color-blind treatment. We also see a significant and even larger increase in terms of time
investment: disadvantaged students under treatment RQ increased investment by 181%.
The other two measures capture specific tasks done during time spent on the website:
number of subjects attempted and number of questions attempted. Although the latter
is only marginally significant, both render large point estimates for increases of 101%
and 100%, respectively.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

27

Table 5. TESTING DIFFERENCES BY DEMOGRAPHICS AND TREATMENT
Investment

Performance

Used
Website

# Subjects
Attempted

Total
Time

# Questions
Attempted

Final Exam
Score

Constant ( βb0 )
Std. Err.

0.073***
(0.024)

0.144**
(0.059)

3.033
(1.982)

1.316*
(0.741)

8.147***
(0.209)

Quota ( βb1 )
Std. Err.
P-Value:

0.087***
(0.033)
[0.009]

0.146*
(0.083)
[0.077]

5.517**
(2.757)
[0.046]

1.312
(1.030)
[0.203]

0.624**
(0.287)
[0.030]

Advantaged ∗ Quota ( βb2 )
Std. Err.

-0.047
(0.042)

-0.111
(0.105)

-5.034
(3.506)

-0.866
(1.310)

-0.712**
(0.360)

Advantaged ( βb3 )
Std. Err.

0.028
(0.030)

0.083
(0.076)

1.613
(2.545)

0.877
(0.951)

0.488*
(0.264)

Ability ( βb4 )
Std. Err.

0.029***
(0.011)

0.045*
(0.027)

1.009
(0.893)

0.572*
(0.334)

1.280***
(0.092)

School Fixed Effects

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

N

992

992

992

992

895

0.446
[0.581]

-0.089
[0.684]

Additional Test: Effect of Quota on Advantaged Group
βb1 + βb2
P-Value:

0.040
[0.123]

0.035
[0.586]

0.483
[0.823]

Notes: Each column is a separate regression. Advantaged is an indicator variable for whether the student
is a 6th or 8th grader (the older group in each school type). Ability is the standardized pre-test score,
where standardization is based on the mean and variance within each school type (i.e., 5th /6th or
7th /8th ). Standard errors are in parentheses; p-values for a two-sided test of the null hypothesis of zero
effect are italicized and in brackets. Estimates under each of the four effort variables are intended to
capture the effect of a treatment on human capital investment for the total study population, and are
therefore averaged over both investors and non-investors.

Another striking feature of the table is the performance measure. We find a large and
significant difference in final exam scores for disadvantaged students under AA: they
are estimated to have lifted their scores by 0.624 AMC8 points, or a remarkable 21.7%
of a standard deviation over their disadvantaged counterparts in the control group. Although some portion of this effect may also be due to increased effort and concentration

28

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

on the day of the final exam, we interpret this and the other columns in Table 5 as
evidence that treatment RQ altered labor-leisure trade-offs to induce additional study
effort at home for D students, which in turn lead to more learning and increased math
proficiency.
One concern is that this strengthening of incentives for disadvantaged students may
come at the cost of weakening incentives for advantaged students. However, Table 5
shows evidence that this concern is not economically significant. For 4 out of 5 outcome measures, point estimates for the effect on A, given by β 1 + β 2 , was actually positive, but insignificant. For the final exam outcome, the sum of the two coefficients is
slightly negative (representing about 3% of a standard deviation) but with a large pvalue. The outcome measure under which β 1 + β 2 is most significant is the binary measure of investment, with a p-value of 0.123. This implies an estimated percent change of
100 × ( β 1 + β 2 )/( β 0 + β 3 ) = +39.6% on the extensive margin for advantaged students
under a quota. Thus, we do not find evidence that there is a trade-off between average human capital investment across demographic groups; if anything the data seem to
slightly favor a small increase of investment for the advantaged demographic as well.
Figures 11 – 14 in the Appendix contain graphical depictions of the distributional shifts
of inputs and outputs by demographic and treatment group.
5.2.3. Selective Attrition. One potential source of bias in our results concerning the performance measure (final exam score) is that 97 of the students who took the practice test
and were randomly assigned to a competition group (9.8%) did not show up on the day
of the final test.17 We find that among the disadvantaged students, those assigned to the
quota group were less likely to miss the final exam (10.6% vs. 16.7%). We also find that
among the students who did not show up for the final test, the disadvantaged students
assigned to the quota group had higher practice scores than the disadvantaged students
not assigned to the quota group (7.16 vs 6.35). However, the practice scores among the
students who did show up for the final test were nearly the same across these two groups
(7.91 vs 7.79). These comparisons all point in a direction opposite of our main results
and suggest that the effect of the quota on final performance for disadvantaged students
may have been greater in the absence of this selective attrition.
5.2.4. Policy Responses by Ability Level. The theoretical model predicts that if the underlying cost types for the disadvantaged group stochastically dominate those in the
advantaged group, then qualitative patterns like those displayed in Figure 3 should appear. Namely, for group D the test score distributions under a quota and color-blind
17This problem does not arise with the four investment measures, which did not require observing a

final score for us to estimate them. In Table 5 the sample size for the first four columns represent the full
sample of test subjects.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

29

mechanism should have an interior crossing point, with the former strictly above the
latter to the right of the crossing point, and strictly below to the left. In other words,
there should be a positive mass of the best group D students who decrease output, while
students of medium and low ability from that group increase output. The theory makes
opposite predictions for group A.18
While it is impossible to directly observe the distributions of cost types, we can take
queues from the distribution of pre-test scores by demographic group, since they reflect initial math proficiency, as well as how much progress each student will need to
increase her payout. We can then examine the distributions of final exam scores within
demographic groups under different treatments to see whether our experimental data
seem to be consistent with the theory of incentive effects under AA. Figures 4 – 6 depict
these comparisons in three plots of empirical cumulative distribution functions (CDFs)
for pre-test and final exam scores for grades 7 and 8. For the sake of comparability, we
have limited our sample in these figures to include only students for whom we have
both test scores. Therefore, Figure 4 plots empirical pre-test CDFs only for 7th and 8th
graders who took the final exam.
Figure 4 strongly supports stochastic dominance of initial math proficiency levels
across demographic groups. A two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test rejects the
null hypothesis that the 7th and 8th grade distributions are the same, against a one-sided
alternative that the latter stochastically dominates (in the first order sense) with a p-value
of 1.03 × 10−5 . This means group D on average had to achieve more progress in order
to be competitive for a prize. This is not the same as observing costs, but the two are
certainly related and the idea of stochastic dominance in cost types appears plausible.
We find evidence in Figure 5 that by the end of the study period the score distribution within the 7th grade subsample had diverged by treatment status. A two-sided
KS test for disadvantaged group final exams across treatments results in a p-value of
0.1047, providing marginally significant evidence that the two distributions were not the
same.19 There appears to be a hint of divergence by treatment group among 8th graders
18Although the figures we present in this paper explore distributions of both inputs and outputs, it is

important to remember that the predictions of the theory only directly apply to exam score, as this is the
variable on which prize allocations are based. The mapping from inputs to outputs may vary by student
if each one differs by raw math talent and leisure preference.
19Figures 13 and Figure 14 in the Appendix contain additional plots comparing pre-test scores by
treatment within demographic groups. The differences in the pre-test distributions are due to selective
attrition after we omitted students for whom we have no final exam. The figures suggest that in general
selective attrition is working against our results presented here. For group D the pre-test color-blind
distribution is below the pre-test quota distribution for values at or below the median, and the upper
bound of the pre-test distribution for 7th grade quota students is highest. Both characteristics of these
distributions are substantially reversed by the final exam. Figure 14 suggests that selective attrition within

30

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

EMPIRICAL CDF

Figure 4. PRE-TEST SCORES: 7th GRADE VS 8th GRADE
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

7th GRADERS

0.3
0.2

8th GRADERS

0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

AMC8 PRE−TEST SCORE

EMPIRICAL CDF

Figure 5. SEVENTH GRADE FINAL EXAM SCORES
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

7th GRADE − CB

0.3
0.2

th

7

0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

GRADE − RQ
16

18

AMC8 FINAL EXAM SCORE

EMPIRICAL CDF

Figure 6. EIGHTH GRADE FINAL EXAM SCORES
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

8th GRADE − CB

0.3
0.2

8th GRADE − RQ

0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

AMC8 FINAL EXAM SCORE
Notes: For the sake of comparability, Figures 4 – 6 above use only data for 7th
and 8th graders who took both the pre-test and final exam. See figures 13 and
14 in the appendix for a sense of the role played by selective attrition.

in Figure 6 as well, though the effect is weak and we lack sufficient power for a KS test
to distinguish the two distributions (the p-value for a two-sided test is 0.889).
the 8th grade is also working slightly against finding a significant difference in the direction predicted by
theory.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

31

In interpreting the figures, one caveat should be kept in mind: the KS test can only
indicate that two distributions are not the same, but it does not provide for a test of the
specific ordering of two distributions with an interior crossing point on different subsets
of the support. Therefore, the qualitative patterns displayed in Figures 5 and 6 are
suggestive in nature. However, a striking feature of the plots is the remarkable degree
to which they conform to the qualitative patterns predicted by theory and displayed in
the numerical example from Section 3. Both sets of CDFs have a single interior crossing
point, with the upper bound on group D test scores under AA leading by four AMC8
points—about one and a third standard deviations—relative to that under color-blind
allocations (15 vs 19). Below the crossing point, we see a substantial increase in measured
7th grade math proficiency under a quota. This pattern is reversed for 8th graders (once
again consistent with theoretical predictions), though the effects are much smaller in
magnitude.
5.2.5. Narrowing Achievement Gaps. We now conclude analysis of our experimental
data with a look at the tendency for AA to narrow achievement gaps across demographic
groups. Table 6 displays summary statistics on standardized test scores for the pre-test
and final exam, for grades 7 and 8. In the top panel of the table scores were standardized
within each exam by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation for all
grade 7 and 8 students.20 Therefore, the means indicate distance between the population
average and grade cohort average, in standard deviation units. Without accounting for
treatment status we see that 7th grade students were roughly half of a standard deviation
behind their 8th grade counterparts on average—or −0.295 − 0.181 = −0.476 standard
deviations to be exact—but by the final exam, the gap between 7th and 8th graders had
narrowed by about half—to −0.138 − 0.085 = −0.223 standard deviations.
In the lower two panels of Table 6 we break out this effect by treatment group, displaying the same numbers within treatments, but where score standardization now happens
within each exam-treatment cell. Part of the test score convergence had to do with differences in the conditions of the pre-test and final exams (likely due to incentives or
slightly different content): within the color-blind treatment, about a quarter of the gap
disappeared but remained relatively high at 0.367 standard deviations on the final exam.
However, the achievement gap under AA closed substantially more, by about 80%, beginning at 0.442 standard deviations, and ending at only 0.085 standard deviations on
the final exam.
The medians tell a slightly stronger story, with the median gap beginning about the
same within both treatments, closing virtually to zero under AA, and closing only
20

Once again, in order to make the pre-test and final exam figures comparable, we excluded from the
analysis any students whose final scores were missing due to attrition.

32

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Table 6. NARROWING GAPS
Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

N

Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 7)

-0.295

-0.267

0.996

264

Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 8)

0.181

0.071

0.960

431

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 7)

-0.138

-0.205

1.005

264

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 8)

0.085

0.142

0.987

431

Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 7)

-0.211

-0.199

1.061

135

Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 8)

0.231

0.135

0.920

220

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 7)

-0.030

0.142

0.961

135

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 8)

0.055

0.142

1.050

220

Achievement Gaps for All Treatments

Achievement Gaps for Quota Treatment

Achievement Gaps for Color-Blind Treatment
Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 7)

-0.243

-0.199

0.904

129

Standardized Pre-Score (GRADE 8)

0.259

0.135

0.982

211

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 7)

-0.251

-0.552

1.041

129

Standardized Final Score (GRADE 8)

0.115

0.142

0.921

211

Notes: There are three separate panels in the table, each containing standardized scores on the pre-test
and post-test. Standardization was performed within each panel-test grouping, excluding scores for
students who missed the final exam. For example, pre-test scores for the quota treatment were
standardized using the mean and standard deviation of pre-test scores for all 7th and 8th graders in the
quota treatment who took both the pre-test and post-test.

slightly otherwise. Finally, observing that the within-treatment-demographic standard
deviations are all close to one suggests that the narrowing of gaps within the two treatments was due predominantly to mean/median shifts in test scores. We interpret these
findings as evidence that AA can actually help to narrow achievement gaps by catching
up its target demographic to the rest of the population.
6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
6.1. EXTERNAL VALIDITY AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH. While
interpreting the results from this study, it is important to keep in mind what it can and

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

33

QUANTILE DIFFERENCES
IN STANDARDIZED
SCORE UNITS

Figure 7. GRADE-LEVEL DIFFERENCES VS BLACK/WHITE DIFFERENCES
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

2013 AMC8 PRE−TEST: 8th GRADE QUANTILES − 7th GRADE QUANTILES
2013 NAEP 8th GRADE EXAM: WHITE QUANTILES − BLACK QUANTILES

0.4
0.3
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

QUANTILE RANK

(A) This figure first standardizes AMC8 and NAEP exam scores by subtracting the mean
and dividing by the standard deviation for the relevant sample population. Then, the distribution of standardized test scores for each sub-sample–i.e., AMC8 7th grade, AMC8 8th
grade, NAEP 8th grade whites, and NAEP 8th grade blacks–is approximated by a normal
distribution, which appears to fit the data quite well. The resulting quantile functions are
subtracted from each other in order to illustrate relative disparities between groups.

cannot say. The ultimate question of interest is the effect that real world AA has on
the human capital incentives of American black and Hispanic youth and their families.
There are several reasons why this study cannot fully address this policy question. First,
this experiment involved a fairly homogeneous population to produce a clean exploration of theoretical predictions, using grade level as a proxy for race. This proxy is obviously imperfect. As Figure 7 illustrates, it likely understates the competitive difference
in math proficiency between blacks and whites vying for actual college seats. The graph
compares the difference between black and white 8th grade NAEP quantiles—expressed
in standardized NAEP score units (dashed line)—to the difference in 7th and 8th grade
quantiles from our sample—expressed in standardized AMC8 score units (solid line).
At most NAEP quantiles, black 8th graders trail their white counterparts by about 0.85
standard deviations, whereas the gap among our test subjects is closer to 0.5 standard
deviations. On the one hand, this suggests that real world discouragement effects minorities face may be even larger than those found here, suggesting that AA may have a
larger impact. On the other hand, our homogeneous subject pool does not account for
important differences in home environments, school quality, or cultural factors which
may push the results in other, less predictable directions. Certainly though, in order to
understand how/why a policy works, it is important to cleanly understand the incentive dimension in addition to other sociocultural factors. The results here demonstrate
that AA can be used as an effective tool to improve performance incentives and promote
investment activity among systematically disadvantaged populations.

34

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

The second major limitation in the current analysis is that, although it creates a set
of incentives which mirror human capital competition in key ways, due to feasibility
constraints said incentives are only engineered on a small scale and measured over a
short-run horizon. We tracked our students over a period of 10-days during which they
were given the opportunity to invest in their math proficiency. For students in our
sample who logged positive amounts of study time, their average expected wage was
$10.73/hour, measured as the mean of actual earnings divided by observed time spent
studying. Junior high and high school students preparing for college optimize laborleisure division over a much longer horizon (4-5 years until college applications are due),
with payoffs that are many orders of magnitude larger.21 How these two forces balance
out in the long run is a challenging question. Although the larger picture may pose
feasibility constraints at present, our experimental results at least inform us that students
who are about to enter high school are capable of the kind of complex optimization that
would imply AA having a positive impact toward increasing the minority human capital
stock and narrowing achievement gaps. Once again though, this short-run evidence is
suggestive in nature, and further research is needed to provide a final, complete answer.
6.2. CONCLUSION. We designed a field experiment in which middle school and junior high students compete for heterogeneous cash prizes and are paid by their relative
performance on a nationwide math exam. Our experimental design is intended to give
insight into students’ pre-college human capital investment followed by the college admissions market; namely, voluntary labor-leisure decisions, mathematics learning, and
affirmative action. Within this context, the rank-order prize allocation rule approximated
either a color-blind system, or a representative quota AA policy. We tracked student
study effort during a 10-day investment period prior to the final exam. Although our
experiment involves relatively low-value prizes and a relatively low-stakes exam, we still
find sizable and significant effects of AA on motivation and learning.
Our results are clearly suggestive that students adjust their labor supply in response
to AA considerations. Although some of this effect may come through changes in effort
or focus on the day of the exam, we also find evidence that the disadvantaged students
are more likely to study for the exam under AA. To the extent that our experiment is
informative about American university admissions, the findings suggest two things: (i )
that AA may improve a minority student’s real effort to build human capital in preparation for college, and (ii ) that it can actually narrow achievement gaps while promoting
diversity in higher education.
21
A large literature has focused on the wage return to higher college quality, including Stacy Berg Dale
and Alan B. Krueger [2002], Dan A. Black and Jeffrey A. Smith [2006], and Long [2008]. Although there
is some disagreement as to the magnitude for all students, there is broad consensus that the return to
attending higher quality colleges is economically significant for poor students.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

35

References
Arcidiacono, Peter. 2005. “Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission
and Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings?” Econometrica, 73(5): 1477–1524.
Bettinger, Eric. 2012. “Paying to Learn: The Effect of Financial Incentives on Elementary
School Test Scores.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94: 686–698.
Black, Dan A., and Jeffrey A. Smith. 2006. “Estimating the Returns to College Quality
Using Multiple Proxies for Quality.” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3): 701–728.
Bodoh-Creed, Aaron, and Brent R. Hickman. 2015. “Using Auction Theory to Study
Human Capital Investment in Assortative Matching Markets: a Look at Affirmative
Action in College Admissions.” working paper, University of Chicago.
Bowen, William G., and Derek Bok. 1998. The Shape of the River: Long-Term Consequences
of Considering Race in College and University Admissions. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bracha, Anat, Alma Cohen, and Lynn Conell-Price. 2015. “Affirmative Action and
Stereotype Threat.” working paper.
Calsamiglia, Caterina, Jorg Franke, and Pedro Rey-Biel. 2013. “The incentive effects of
affirmative action in a real-effort tournament.” Journal of Public Economics, 98: 15–31.
Chambers, David L., Timothy T. Clydesdale, William C. Kidder, and Richard O. Lempert. 2005. “The Real Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in American Law
Schools: An Empirical Critique of Richard Sander’s Study.” Stanford Law Review,
57: 1855–1897.
Coate, Stephen, and Glenn Loury. 1993. “Anti-Discrimination Enforcement and the
Problem of Patronization.” American Economic Review, 83(2): 92–98.
Cotton, Christopher, Frank McIntyre, and Joseph Price. 2013. “Gender differences in repeated competition: Evidence from school math contests.” Journal of Economic Behavior
and Organization, 86: 52–66.
Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger. 2002. “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More
Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 1491–1528.
Ferman, Bruno, and Juliano Assuncao. 2011. “Does Affirmative Action Enhance or Undercut Investment Incentives? Evidence from Quotas in Brazilian Public Universities.”
Typescript, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Economics.
Fryer, Roland. 2011. “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence From
Randomized Trials.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 1755–1798.
Hickman, Brent R. 2015. “Human Capital Investment and Affirmative Action: A Structural Policy Analysis of US College Admissions.” Typescript, University of Chicago Department of Economics.

36

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Howell, Jessica S. 2010. “Assessing the Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in
Higher Education.” Journal of Labor Economics, 28(1): 113–66.
Kremer, Michael, Edward Miguel, and Rebecca Thornton. 2009. “Incentives to Learn.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 91: 437–456.
Leuven, Edwin, Hessel Oosterbeek, and Bas van der Klaauw. 2010. “The Effect of
Financial Rewards on Students’ Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 8: 1243–1265.
Long, Mark C. 2008. “College Quality and Early Adult Outcomes.” Economics of Education Review, 27: 588–602.
Loury, Linda Datcher, and David Garman. 1995. “Selectivity and Earnings.” Journal of
Labor Economics, 13(2): 289–308.
Rothstein, Jesse, and Albert H. Yoon. 2008. “Affirmative Action in Law School Admissions: What do Racial Preferences Do?” University of Chicago Law Review, 75(2): 649–
714.
Sander, Richard H. 2004. “A Systemic Analysis of Affirmative Action in American Law
Schools.” Stanford Law Review, 57: 367–483.
Schotter, Andrew, and Keith Weigelt. 1992. “Asymmetric Tournaments, Equal Opportunity Laws and Affirmative Action: Some Experimental Results.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 107(2): 511–539.
7. APPENDIX
7.1. THEORETICAL APPENDIX.
7.1.1. Proof of Theorem 1. The result of the theorem follows from Bodoh-Creed and
Hickman [2015, Theorems 3 and 4], which establish a claim that is both broader (it
allows for shifts in FS as well) and holds under a more general set of conditions. Because
of this their proof is quite complicated, so for completeness we provide a proof for the
simplified version of the model from Section 3. For the reader’s convenience Theorem 1
is restated below:
Theorem 1: Consider two color blind contests, 1 and 2, which differ only by their cost distributions, and assume competition is more fierce under contest 2 in the sense that F1 LR dominates
F2 . Let θ̃ ∈ (θ, θ ) denote the unique crossing point of the density functions where f 1 (θ̃ ) = f 2 (θ̃ ).
There exists a unique interior crossing point θ̈ ∈ (θ, θ̃ ), such that h1∗ (θ ) < h2∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈
and h1∗ (θ ) > h2∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈.
Proof: As mentioned above, the LR dominance property implies first-order stochastic
dominance. Therefore, not only do the densities have a unique crossing point, but it
must also be true that f 1 (θ ) > f 2 (θ ) for θ > θ̃, and f 1 (θ ) < f 2 (θ ) for θ < θ̃. Since the

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

37

same boundary condition applies to both contests, h1∗ (θ ) = h2∗ (θ ) = h, then equation (5)
implies the initial trajectories at the boundary point are ordered in the following way:
h1∗0 (θ ) =

− f 1 (θ )
− f (θ )
< 0 2
= h2∗0 (θ ).
0
c (h; θ )
c (h; θ )

(A.1)

This in turn means that h1∗ (θ ) > h2∗ (θ ) within a neighborhood of θ since the investment
functions are continuous and everywhere differentiable. Note that because slopes are
negative h1∗0 (θ ) < h2∗0 (θ ) means h1∗ , rises in the leftward direction and is more steep at θ.
Now suppose there exists at least one point where h1∗ and h2∗ cross, and let θ̈ ∈ (θ, θ )
denote the maximum of all such possible points, with ḧ ≡ h1∗ (θ̈ ) = h2∗ (θ̈ ), if any exist.
Since h1∗ crosses h2∗ from above at θ̈, it must be that h1∗0 (θ̈ ) ≥ h2∗0 (θ̈ ) (i.e., h1∗ is less steep
e θ ] by LR dominance, and
at the crossing point). However, since f 1 (θ ) > f 2 (θ ) on (θ,
since h < h0 implies c0 (h0 ; θ ) ≥ c0 (h; θ ) by convexity, the following must be true for any
θ ∈ (θ̃, θ ):
h1∗0 (θ ) =

c0

− f (θ )
− f (θ )
 <  ∗2
 = h2∗0 (θ )
 ∗1
0
c h2 ( θ ); θ
h1 ( θ ); θ

⇒

h1∗ (θ ) > h2∗ (θ ).

(A.2)

Therefore, θ̈ < θ̃, if such a point exists. Similarly, since f 1 (θ ) < f 2 (θ ) on [θ, θe), then any
crossing point would have to obey h1∗0 (θ̈ ) = − f 1 (θ̈ )/c0 (ḧ; θ̈ ) > − f 2 (θ̈ )/c0 (ḧ; θ̈ ) = h2∗0 (θ̈ ).
This means that h1∗ can only cross h2∗ from above (i.e., at points where it is less steep) and
so there can be at most one such crossing.
Finally, to see why a crossing point must exist, suppose for a contradiction that for all
θ ∈ (θ, θ ) we have h1∗ (θ ) > h2∗ (θ ). In that case, it follows that
h1∗ (θ )

=
<
≤

1

Z θ
θ c0



1

Z θ
θ c0



h1∗ (u); u



h2∗ (u); u

1

Z θ
θ c0

h1∗ (u); u

 f 1 (u)du + h

 f 2 (u)du + h
 f 2 (u)du + h = h2∗ (θ ) ,

→← .

The strict inequality follows because the first and second line depict expectations over
the decreasing function 1/c0 [h1∗ (u); u] and f 2 places more weight on strictly higher values
of u (or lower values of the function). The weak inequality follows from the supposition
and from c being convex and having a positive cross-partial derivative. Thus we have a
contradiction, so a unique crossing θ̈ exists on the open interval (θ, θ̃ ) and the theorem
is proved. 

38

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

7.2. THEORY EXTENSION: INTRINSICALLY VALUED HC. In the body of the paper,
we assume that students only indirectly benefit from their HC accumulation. Here, we
consider an extension to the model where h is intrinsically valued to the student, and not
just a means of securing a high-quality seat assignment. Naturally, with a more flexible
model comparative statics become more difficult to prove. Therefore, we explore some
simple examples based on a Cobb-Douglas utility form u(s, h) = sα h β , in order to argue
that the qualitative model predictions explored in Section 3 are non-pathological.
7.2.1. Example 1: Linear Utility. If α = β = 1 and costs are linear so that u(s, h) = sh,
c(h; θ ) = θ (h − h), and [θ, θ ] ⊂ (1, ∞), then proving statements analogous to Theorem 1,
Corollary 2, and Corollary 3 is relatively straightforward.22 In this scenario, under CB
student i’s objective is now
max {hi (1 − F [θ ∗ (hi )]) − θi (hi − h)} .
hi ≥ h

(A.3)



Taking an FOC, we get −hi f θi∗ (hi ) θ ∗ 0 (hi ) + (1 − F [θ ∗ (hi )]) = θi . In this world, student
i can be thought to choose HC production in two parts. First, she raises investment to
the level where she optimally benefits from complementarity of her own input hi and
the university’s input s; this calculation involves the direct marginal benefit of a unit of
HC, or (1 − F [θ ∗ (hi )]), and Bodoh-Creed and Hickman [2015] refer to it as the productive
channel of incentives. Above that base level of investment, competitive incentives play
an additional role: in a monotone equilibrium i invests further so as to make her highercost competitors prefer not to try and jump her. This calculation involves the indirect


placement benefit of more HC, or −hi f θi∗ (hi ) θ ∗ 0 (hi ), and it produces a tendency for
over-investment which is referred to as the competitive channel of incentives.
If we now define η (θ ) ≡ log (h∗ (θ )) then through a similar change of variables as
before we can rearrange the FOC to get a differential equation
η 0 ( θi ) = −

f ( θi )
, with boundary condition η (θ ) = log(h).
θi + F ( θi ) − 1

(A.4)

Once again, η is strictly decreasing in θ and we can now prove the analog of Theorem 1
above:
Theorem 4. Assume HC production costs and gross utility are linear in h, so that c(h; θ ) =
θ (h − h), and u(s, h) = sh. Moreover, consider two cost distributions, F1 (θ ) and F2 (θ ), where
competition is more intense under F2 in the sense that F1 LR dominates F2 (i.e., the ratio

f 1 (θ )
f 2 (θ )

is

22The assumption of [θ, θ ] ⊂ (1, ∞) is required because the gross utility and cost function are both

linear in h. Since the direct marginal benefit of more human capital is u2 (s, h) = s and the direct marginal
cost is θ, we must have θ > s, in order to rationalize all students choosing finite HC production.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

39

strictly increasing). Then, letting θ̃ denote the unique crossing point of f 1 and f 2 , there exists a
unique interior crossing point θ̈ ∈ (θ, θe) such that h∗ (θ ) < h∗ (θ ) for θ < θ̈ and h∗ (θ ) > h∗ (θ )
1

2

1

2

for θ > θ̈.
Proof: Recall that strict LR dominance implies f 1 (θ ) ≥ f 2 (θ ) and F1 (θ ) < F2 (θ ), for
e θ ). This with η1 (θ ) = η2 (θ ) and equation (A.4) together mean that η 0 (θ ) < η 0 (θ )
θ ∈ [θ,
2
1
e
and η1 (θ ) > η2 (θ ), for each θ ∈ [θ, θ ). Thus, if η1 and η2 cross, the crossing must be on
the interval [θ, θe).
Now, equation (A.4) can be expressed in integral form by η j (θ ) =

f j (x)
θ x + Fj ( x )−1 dx

Rθ

+

log(h), j = 1, 2. Moreover, if we impose a change of variables y = Fj (θ ) within the
integral, we get
η1 ( θ ) =

Z 1
0

1
dy + log(h) <
F1−1 (y) + y − 1

Z 1
0

1
dy + log(h) = η2 (θ ),
F2−1 (y) + y − 1

where the inequality follows from LR dominance. Therefore, by continuity at least one
crossing point exists on the open interval (θ, θ̃ ). Let θ̈ denote the maximum point at
which η1 (θ̈ ) = η2 (θ̈ ), and note that since the two functions are negatively sloped and η1
crosses η2 from above (moving in the leftward direction) at θ̈, the following must be true
when θ = θ̈:
η10 (θ ) = −

f 1 (θ )
f 2 (θ )
>−
= η20 (θ )
θ + F1 (θ ) − 1
θ + F2 (θ ) − 1

⇔

(A.5)

f 1 (θ ) [θ + F2 (θ ) − 1] < f 2 (θ ) [θ + F1 (θ ) − 1]

Now consider approaching θ from above, beginning at θ̈ and once again moving leftward. Since θ̈ is to the left of the density crossing θ̃, then by the LR dominance property,
we know that if we begin at θ̈ and approach θ from above, then f 2 (θ ) becomes steadily
larger relative to f 1 (θ ) as we move leftward. This also implies that [θ + F1 (θ ) − 1] becomes steadily larger relative to [θ + F2 (θ ) − 1] in the leftward direction (beginning from
θ̈) as well.23 Therefore, the ordering between the right-hand and left-hand sides of inequality A.5 only becomes more pronounced as we move leftward from θ̈. From this
fact it follows that η10 (θ ) > η20 (θ ) for each θ ∈ [θ, θ̈ ], and the crossing point θ̈ is therefore
unique. 
We can build on the above result to prove comparative statics for different seat allocation rules just as we did before. Corollary 5 and Corollary 6 below build on Theorem 4
23To see why, recall that F (θ ) = F (θ ) = 0 and f (θ ) < f (θ ) for each θ < θ̃. Thus, F becomes steadily
2
2
2
1
1

larger relative to F1 when moving in the rightward direction from θ to θ̈, which is the same as saying that
F1 becomes steadily larger relative to F2 when moving in the leftward direction from θ̈.

40

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

in precisely the same way that Corrolary 2 and Corollary 3 build on Theorem 1 above. In
particular, Corollary 6 follows naturally from the proof of Theorem 4: we now know that
0 ( θ ) < η 0 ( θ ) < η 0 ( θ ) for each θ ∈ [ θ̃, θ ], and since the log transformation preserves
ηD
A
∗0
∗0
ordering, it follows that h∗0
D ( θ ) < η ( θ ) < η A ( θ ) on that same interval as well. This also
produces a slight strengthening of the result since the derivatives are strictly ordered at

the density crossing θ̃. Together, the final two results demonstrate that the model still
predicts a large fraction of the disadvantaged group increasing investment under RQ:
Corollary 5. Let HC production costs and gross utility be linear in h, so that c(h; θ ) = θ (h − h),
and u(s, h) = sh. Moreover, assume FD LR dominates FA and let θ̃ ∈ (θ, θ ) denote the unique
crossing of the cost densities where f (θ̃ ) = f A (θ̃ ) = f D (θ̃ ). Then there exist crossing points
θ̈A , θ̈D ∈ (θ, θ̃ ), such that
(i) h∗D (θ ) < h∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈D

and

h∗D (θ ) > h∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈D , and

(ii) h∗A (θ ) > h∗ (θ ) for all θ < θ̈A

and

h∗A (θ ) < h∗ (θ ) for all θ > θ̈A .

Corollary 6. Assume the same conditions as in Corollary 5. Then under the RQ policy (relative to the CB policy), typical disadvantaged students—that is, group D students with costs

θ ∈ (θ̈D , θ̃ ] ∪ TD —exert higher effort and accumulate more HC. Moreover, if we define
d : (θ̈D , θ̃ ] ∪ TD → R as the difference on this set between group D investment under RQ
versus CB, or
d(θ ) ≡ (h∗D (θ ) − h∗ (θ )) ,
then d(θ ) is strictly positive and attains a maximum on the interval (θ̈D , θ̃ ).
7.2.2. Example 2: Curved Utility. Proving qualitative predictions for the entire CobbDouglas utility family is more difficult, so in this section we present some simple numerical examples to further illustrate the model. ΘD and ΘA once again follow normal
distributions truncated to a common support [θ, θ ] = [1, 2]. They both have the same
variance parameter, σA = σD = 0.25, but different mean parameters, µA = 1.1 and
µD = 1.5, which ensures LR dominance (see Figure 8). The group D mass is δ = 0.5.
We numerically solve for equilibria in two examples. In the first (Example 2), HC
factors relatively heavily into match utility, with α = 0.15 and β = 0.75. In the second (Example 3), students care less about their own HC and more about the quality
of the institution they attend, with α = 0.75 and β = 0.15. Equilibrium outcomes are
summarized in figure 9.
The patterns arising from these examples are similar to predictions under the linear
model. There continues to exist a single crossing point between the investment functions
of the two groups under AA vs. CB. Under AA, the highest ability disadvantaged
students and the lower ability advantaged students decrease HC investment, while the

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

41

Figure 8. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES:
Cost Densities
2.5

fD(θ)

PDFs

2

f(θ)
fA(θ)

1.5

1

0.5

0

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

θ

1.7

1.8

1.9

2

Figure 9. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES:
Investment, CB vs AA

(α,β)=(0.75,0.15)

0.55

h* (θ)

0.5

h (θ)

0.45

h (θ)

1.1

D
*

1

*
A

0.9

h* (θ)
D

h*(θ)
*
A

h (θ)
INVESTMENT

INVESTMENT

(α,β)=(0.15,0.75)

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.15
0.5

0.1
1

1.2

1.4

θ

1.6

(A) Example 2

1.8

2

1

1.2

1.4

θ

1.6

1.8

2

(B) Example 3

lower ability disadvantaged students and the higher ability advantaged students increase
HC investment. In both examples average investment in group D rises; for group A it
rises in Example 2 and falls in example 3.
7.3. TIME TRUNCATION RULE. Time on our website was measured at the page level
for each attempt of a quiz by each student. Pages contain blocks of either 3, 4, or 5
questions, so we divided each block-level time observation by the number of questions
in order to get a measure of time spent per question. One difficulty arose in that there
were a small number of clear instances where students left the website in the middle of a
quiz for several hours or more. For example, the largest recorded time spent on a single
question was 2,801 minutes, or roughly 47 hours. In order to correct this problem, a small
number of implausibly large time observations needed to be corrected. After selecting a

42

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

truncation point on the time-per-question domain, we replaced each observation above
that point with the student-specific censored mean of time per question. For example,
suppose that Tommy attempted 11 questions with observed times of 5 minutes for the
first five, 15 minutes for the next five, and 300 minutes for the last, and suppose that
the truncation point were 30 minutes per question. Then the eleventh observation of 300
minutes is replaced by Tommy’s idiosyncratic censored mean of 10 minutes.
In order to select an appropriate truncation point we looked for occurrences of “holes”
in the support of the distribution of times per question, or in other words, points at
which a full support condition fails. We began with a natural assumption on the student
type distribution that there are no interval subsets of the support where the type density
assigns zero mass to the entire interval. If this condition holds, then since time spent on a
question is a continuous choice related to one’s type, that distribution should also have
full support too. That is, unless some observations reflect a different data generating
process, say time elapsed outside of learning activity due to work stoppages. Thus, a
straightforward way to search for spurious time observations is to sort the data and
look for points at which a kernel smoothed density estimate (KDE) equals zero for some
interval of positive length. This idea gives rise to the following data-driven algorithm
for selecting a truncation point:
(1) Sort all time observations from least to greatest, so that the jth and ( j + 1)st observations are ordered by t j ≤ t j+1 for all j = 1, . . . , J.
(2) Using the sample {t j } jJ=1 , compute an appropriately chosen bandwidth b1 for a
KDE based on a kernel function with support on [−1, 1].24 Then find the smallest
j1∗ < J such that t j1∗ +1 − t j1∗ > 2b1 . If no such j1∗ exists, then stop; no truncation is
needed.
(3) Define initial truncation point τ1 ≡ t j1∗ + b1 , and compute bandwidth b2 for the
j∗

KDE based on the censored sample {t j } j1=1 .
(4) In each subsequent iteration k = 2, 3, . . ., if there exists jk∗ defined by
jk∗ ≡ min{ j : t j+1 − t j > 2bk ; j < jk∗−1 },
then update the truncation point by τk ≡ t jk∗ + bk , and re-compute bandwidth bk+1
j∗

for the KDE based on the censored sample {t j } jk=1 .
(5) Stop once k is found such that jk∗+1 does not exist (meaning that for the censored
j∗

sample {t j } jk=1 a KDE is strictly positive everywhere).
24Actually, the only crucial condition here is that the kernel function have bounded support. For

example, in this context a Gaussian kernel would not do, as it places positive mass on the entire real line
for any dataset. This would be equivalent to assuming full support ex ante.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

43

Figure 10. TIME TRUNCATION RULE
250

50

200

150

HISTOGRAM VALUES

HISTOGRAM VALUES

45

Truncation
Point:
LOG(26.14 MIN)

100

50

40

35

Truncation
Point:
LOG(108.39 min)

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
−8

−6

−4

−2

0

2

4

6

LOG(MINUTES PER
QUESTION ATTEMPT)

(A) This panel displays a histogram
of observed time spent on each question. Each datum in the histogram is
a student-question-attempt observation.

8

0
−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

LOG(MINUTES ON INSTRUCTIONAL
PAGE BY QUIZ)

(B) This panel displays a histogram
of time per instructional page view.
Each datum in the histogram is a
student-quiz-attempt observation.

We chose a KDE based on the Epanechnikov kernel, which is known to be marginally
more efficient than other kernel functions. This choice, in combination with Silverman’s
automatic bandwidth selection rule, implies a bandwidth formula of b1 = 2.345b
σ1 J −1/5
in the first iteration, and bk = 2.345b
σk ( jk∗−1 )−1/5 in the kth iteration (k ≥ 2), where b
σk
is the sample standard deviation within the kth iteration. Notice that the algorithm
does not actually require computation of a KDE at each iteration, only a bandwidth,
though choice of the specific kernel is needed to pin down the leading constant on the
bandwidth selection rule.
Executing this process on our data leads to a final truncation point of τ2 = 27.81
minutes per question (the 99.35th percentile of the un-censored sample), after 2 iterations.
Figure 10 displays a histogram of time spent per question, including observations above
and below the truncation point. Time units are depicted in logs rather than levels for
ease of visualization since the largest and smallest observations differ by several orders
of magnitude.
7.4. ADDITIONAL FIGURES. Here we present some additional figures depicting the
empirical distributions of investment activities by group and treatement status. In interpreting these figures, one caveat should be kept in mind. Corollary 2 only directly
applies to the plots in Figures 5 – 6, since these depict CDFs of exam scores, the variable

44

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

Figure 11. TIME SPENT:
CB vs. RQ
1

EMPIRICAL CDF

EMPIRICAL CDF

1

0.95

0.9

COLOR BLIND
QUOTA
0.85
0

100

200

300

400

500

0.95

0.9

COLOR BLIND
QUOTA
0.85
0

600

MINUTES SPENT ON WEBSITE

50

100

150

200

250

MINUTES SPENT ON WEBSITE

(A) Seventh Graders

(B) Eighth Graders

Figure 12. QUESTION ATTEMPTS:
CB vs. RQ
1

EMPIRICAL CDF

EMPIRICAL CDF

1

0.95

0.9

COLOR BLIND
QUOTA
0.85
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

TOTAL QUESTIONS ATTEMPTED
(A) Seventh Graders

0.95

0.9

COLOR BLIND
QUOTA
0.85
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

TOTAL QUESTIONS ATTEMPTED
(B) Eighth Graders

being directly incentivized within the experimental study. Thus, theory predicts that
those plots should qualitatively resemble the patterns in Figures 3 and ??. It has nothing directly to say about other intermediate variables such as time spent on the website,
or number of questions attempted, as these may combine in different ways for different
agents to produce exam scores. However, for illustrative purposes, we present additional
CDF plots in Figures 11 – 14 here.

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION AND HUMAN CAPITAL INVESTMENT

45

EMPIRICAL
CDF

Figure 13. 7th GRADE BY TREATMENT:
Pre-Test vs. Final Exam
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

7th GRADE − QUOTA

0.2

7th GRADE − COLOR−BLIND

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

EMPIRICAL
CDF

AMC8 PRE−TEST SCORE
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

7th GRADE − QUOTA

0.2

7th GRADE − COLOR−BLIND

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

AMC8 FINAL EXAM SCORE

EMPIRICAL
CDF

Figure 14. 8th GRADE BY TREATMENT:
Pre-Test vs. Final Exam
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

8th GRADE − QUOTA

0.2

8th GRADE − COLOR−BLIND

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

EMPIRICAL
CDF

AMC8 PRE−TEST SCORE
1
0.8
0.6
0.4

0
0

th

GRADE − QUOTA

th

GRADE − COLOR−BLIND

8

0.2

8
2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

AMC8 FINAL EXAM SCORE

18

20

