NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF ROTATION GROUP BIAS:
WILL THE REAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE PLEASE STAND UP?
Alan Krueger
Alexandre Mas
Xiaotong Niu
Working Paper 20396
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20396

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

Alan B. Krueger, Industrial Relations Section, Firestone Library, Princeton University, Princeton NJ
08544, akrueger@princeton.edu; Alexandre Mas, Industrial Relations Section, Firestone Library, Princeton
University, Princeton NJ 08544, amas@princeton.edu; Xiaotong Niu, Congressional Budget Office,
Xiaotong.Niu@cbo.gov. We thank Ann Polivka and seminar participants at the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Princeton University, and NBER for helpful comments. StatCan provided helpful statistical tabulations.
This paper has not been subject to CBO’s regular review and editing process. The views expressed
here should not be interpreted as CBO’s. The authors are responsible for all views expressed in the
paper and any errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alan Krueger, Alexandre Mas, and Xiaotong Niu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias:¸˛Will the Real Unemployment Rate Please Stand Up?
Alan Krueger, Alexandre Mas, and Xiaotong Niu
NBER Working Paper No. 20396
August 2014
JEL No. J01,J64
ABSTRACT
This paper documents that rotation group bias — the tendency for labor force statistics to vary systematically
by month in sample in labor force surveys — in the Current Population Survey (CPS) has worsened
considerably over time. The estimated unemployment rate for earlier rotation groups has grown sharply
relative to the unemployment rate for later rotation groups; both should be nationally representative
samples. The rise in rotation group bias is driven by a growing tendency for respondents to report
job search in earlier rotations relative to later rotations. We investigate explanations for the change
in bias. We find that rotation group bias increased discretely after the 1994 CPS redesign and that
rising nonresponse is likely a significant contributor. Survey nonresponse increased after the redesign,
and subsequently trended upward, mirroring the time pattern of rotation group bias. Consistent with
this explanation, there is only a small increase in rotation group bias for households that responded
in all eight interviews. An analysis of rotation group bias in Canada and the U.K. reveal no rotation
group bias in Canada and a modest and declining bias in the U.K. There is not a “Heisenberg Principle”
of rotation group bias, whereby the bias is an inherent feature of repeated interviewing. We explore
alternative weightings of the unemployment rate by rotation group and find that, despite the rise in
rotation group bias, the official unemployment does no worse than these other measures in predicting
alternative measures of economic slack or fitting key macroeconomic relationships.

Alan Krueger
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library, Room A2H
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@princeton.edu
Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@princeton.edu

Xiaotong Niu
Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
Xiaotong.niu@cbo.gov

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

I. INTRODUCTION
Many countries’ labor force surveys have rotating panel structures to improve the
precision of estimated changes in labor force statistics. In these surveys, households selected into
the sample are interviewed several times. In the Current Population Survey (CPS), for example,
households residing at an address selected into the sample are interviewed for four consecutive
months, not interviewed for the next eight months, and then interviewed for an additional four
months. In any given month, there are eight rotation groups in the sample, depending on the
month in which their dwelling was first selected into the sample. Each rotation group should
form a representative sample of the population, with the same labor force characteristics, apart
from sampling errors. This is not the case, however. In the first half of 2014, for example, the
unemployment rate for the first and last rotation groups in the CPS were 7.5 percent and 6.1
percent, respectively. The official BLS unemployment rate for this period was 6.5 percent. 1
These differences raise the obvious question: What was the unemployment rate in the first half of
2014? Why does the unemployment rate vary across rotation groups?
A systematic tendency for differences in estimates across rotation groups is referred to as
“rotation group bias”. Bailar (1975) was among the first to document the rotation group bias in
the CPS. Using data from 1968-1972, she found that the unemployment rate estimated from
different rotation groups in the same time period were systematically different. She found that
these differences came from the margin of out of the labor force rather than employment.
Further, she documented something of a tilted W-shaped pattern, with the first and fifth rotation
groups having the highest unemployment rates and slight upticks in the fourth and eighth rotation
groups. There have been a number of papers aimed at understanding the implications of rotation
1

These estimates are not seasonally adjusted. All of our analyses of the CPS weigh observations using the final
weights.

1

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

group bias on labor force statistics, but the magnitude and evolution of rotation group bias in the
CPS has not been documented since Bailar’s (1975) study. In this paper we estimate the
magnitude of rotation group bias in the CPS over the period 1976-2014. We find that the
magnitude and shape of this bias have evolved and grown over time. For example, between
2009 and 2013, the average unemployment rate in the CPS was 9.3 percent for respondents in the
first rotation group, and 8.3 percent for respondents in the eighth rotation group. Between 1976
and 1980 the corresponding rates were 7.3 percent and 6.8 percent, respectively. Moreover, the
pattern across rotation groups has become more continuously downward sloping rather than Wshaped.
Figure 1A shows the annual average unemployment rate for each rotation group, and
Figure 1B shows the same results subtracting BLS’s official unemployment rate from each
measure. It is clear that there is a secular trend, with the unemployment rate calculated for
households in their first interview (first rotation group) rising relative to the official measure, and
the unemployment rate calculated for households in their final interview (eighth rotation group)
falling relative to the official rate. These differential secular patterns are a vivid motivation for
trying to understand the source of the evolving pattern of rotation group bias in the CPS.
We explore a number of possible explanations for the change in rotation group bias.
These include changing patterns of survey nonresponse, survey redesign effects, the use of proxy
responses, economic conditions, imputation for item nonresponse, and changes in unemployment
duration. The evidence that we have assembled suggests that both changes in nonresponse rates
and a changed response pattern due to some feature(s) of the 1994 CPS redesign played an
important role in the increase in rotation group bias.

2

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

The changes in the 1994 redesign included implementing computer-assisted telephone
interviewing more broadly, dependent interviewing, and changes in the phrasing and skip logic
of some of the labor force questions. The redesign also coincided with a discrete rise in
nonresponse rates. The magnitude of rotation group bias jumped after 1993 and then increased
thereafter faster than the preexisting trend. The redesign could have changed the pattern of
rotation group bias through at least two channels: (i) increased survey nonresponse, which
changed the composition of respondents across months in sample, and (ii) a changed response
pattern due to the introduction of dependent interviewing and a new questionnaire and interview
format. We find evidence supporting both channels.
Rotation group bias is related to survey nonresponse across demographic groups in crosssectional data. This relationship also holds when looking at changes over time. Relating the rate
of survey nonresponse to a simple measure of rotation group bias each year shows that up to 45
percent of the jump in rotation group bias after 1993 can be accounted for by higher nonresponse
rates.
Using the panel structure of the CPS we find a mild increase in rotation group bias for the
subset of respondents who responded to the survey in all eight months. This finding suggests
that a feature of the redesign changed the pattern of response, independent of any effect of the
redesign on response rates.

In particular, we find evidence suggesting that the redesign

influenced the pattern of responses to the job search activity questions differentially across the
rotation groups. After the redesign, respondents who were interviewed several times became
less likely to report actively looking for a job, even if they were on a new jobless spell. We find
little role for other candidate explanations for the change in rotation group bias.

3

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

We also examine labor force surveys in Canada and the U.K. for evidence of rotation
group bias. We find no evidence of rotation group bias in the Canadian survey, and a much
smaller pattern in the U.K. survey than in the CPS. An analysis of labor force estimates in the
U.K. with and without carry-forward imputation for non-respondents (which the U.K.’s Office of
National Statistics uses to impute missing data) shows some evidence that the rotation group
pattern in the U.K. survey is related to nonresponse. These results suggest that repeated
questioning does not automatically lead to the same rotation group patterns as observed in the
CPS, and that features of survey design and response rates matter critically for the extent of
rotation group bias.
Lastly, we explore whether the unemployment rates calculated for different rotation
groups have varying ability to predict alternative measures of economic slack. Ex ante it is
unclear which of the CPS rotation groups has less bias and therefore should receive more weight
in labor force statistics.

Although we cannot assess the most accurate measure of the

unemployment rate, we can assess whether some rotation groups have greater efficacy than
others when it comes to predicting alternative measures of economic slack or fitting key
macroeconomic relationships. Our approach is to compare the strength of the relationship
between the unemployment rate of the eight different rotation groups with total capacity
utilization (TCU) and the Insured Unemployment Rate (IUR). Both of these measures are
closely related to the unemployment rate. Based on this analysis, we find suggestive evidence
that earlier rotation groups (in particular, rotation groups 1, 2, 3 and 5) are stronger predictors of
movements in TCU and IUR. However, adjusting the unemployment to put more weight on
these rotations does not lead to a significant difference relative to the official rate in a price

4

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Phillips Curve equation, wage Phillips Curve equation or GDP growth equation, nor does using
the first principal component of the eight month-in-sample (MIS) unemployment rates.

II. DATA
The CPS is a monthly survey of the labor force in the U.S. About 60,000 households are
interviewed for each survey. The CPS is a sample of physical addresses with eight panels in a 48-4 rotation scheme. In each monthly survey, there are eight groups of respondents identified by
the MIS of their residences.
This study uses the CPS basic monthly surveys collected between January 1976 and May
2014. During the sample period, the CPS went through a major redesign in 1994. Prior to 1994
(the pre-redesign period), interviews in MIS1 and MIS5 were conducted in person. In other
months, a majority of the interviews was conducted over the phone. The phone interviews were
either conducted from interviewers’ homes or from one of two centralized computer-assisted
telephone interviewing (CATI) facilities. Most of the interviews were conducted with a paperbased questionnaire: only about 9% of the data were collected by CATI (Polivka and Miller
1998). After the redesign, the new questionnaire was designed solely for computer-assisted
interviewing. Computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI), where the interviewer visits the
household, is currently used in MIS1 and MIS5 unless a telephone interview is requested by the
household, and CATI is used for other months unless the household does not give permission for
a telephone interview (in which case, the interview is done in person by CAPI). Due to the
redesign, an increasing number of interviews have been conducted by CATI. 2 The shift to
computer-assisted interviewing permits dependent interviewing, which uses information from a
2

In 2004, the fraction of interviews collected by CATI was about 80% in months other than MIS1 and MIS5 (U.S.
Department of Labor 2006).

5

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

previous interview (often combined with answers to other questions) to update information for
the current interview. This design feature is meant to reduce respondent burden.3
Additional details on sample construction are available in Appendix B.

III. THE EVOLUTION OF ROTATION GROUP BIAS IN THE CPS
Following Solon (1986), we focus on a multiplicative model to estimate rotation group
bias. 4 The multiplicative index for a rotation group in a given time period is computed by
dividing the estimate for that rotation group by the average estimate over all eight rotation
groups in the relevant time period and multiplying by 100. If there is no rotation group bias, the
multiplicative index should be 100 for all rotation groups.
Figure 2 presents this index of the unemployment rate by MIS and year. As a handy
summary measure of the degree of rotation group bias, each year we fit a linear slope through the
rotation group indices (i.e., regress the multiplicative indices on a variable running from 1 to 8
representing the rotation group). The slope of the fitted line is presented next to the figure. In all
years from 1976 to 2014, the slope is negative, implying that the estimated unemployment rates
generally decrease with MIS.
We use the slope of the fitted line through the rotation groups as an approximate measure
of the magnitude of rotation group bias. Figure 3 plots these slopes by year. The magnitude of

3

Polivka and Miller (1998) study the effect of the redesign on different estimates of labor force statistics. Based on
the results from the Parallel Survey, the authors calculated the multiplicative and additive factors for adjusting
estimates after January 1994 to be consistent with estimates before January 1994. For example, the multiplicative
factor for unemployment rate is about 1.009, or the redesign increases the unemployment rate by about 1%, though
the change is not statistically significant.
4
Bailar (1975) argued that the estimates of month-to-month changes are unbiased if the rotation group effects are
constant over time and the effects are additive. Solon (1986) showed that the estimates of changes would be biased
if the rotation group effects are multiplicative. Solon also provides empirical evidence that rejects the assumption of
additive rotation group effects.

6

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

the bias measure can be interpreted as the percentage change in the labor force statistic from an
incremental interview month.

For example, in 1994 the bias measure has a value of

approximately -1. This implies that, on average, every incremental month in rotation group was
associated with a decline in the measured unemployment rate by one percent. (Note that the
rotation groups are balanced each year: each year there are 12 observations on individuals in
their first rotation group, 12 observations on individuals in their second rotation, etc. Thus,
seasonality does not play a role in explaining the pattern of rotation group bias.)
Figure 3 shows that the magnitude of the bias for the unemployment rate increased over
time, and almost doubled in absolute value following the 1994 CPS redesign.

To assess

significance of this increase, we fit the slope measure of bias to a linear time trend, a post-1993
dummy (solid line) and, in a second specification, their interaction (dashed line).

These

regressions are shown in the first two columns of Table 1 and the fitted values are displayed in
Figure 3.5 The results show clear statistical evidence of a level shift, with the post-1993 dummy
statistically significant in both specifications. The time-post-93 interaction indicates that the
magnitude of rotation group bias also gradually increased over time after 1993.
The shape of the rotation group pattern with respect to MIS also evolved over time. Table
2 presents the average multiplicative index for the unemployment rate from 1976 to 1993, and
surveys from 1994 to May 2014. Before the 1994 redesign, the index of unemployment rate
exhibits a mildly tilted “W” shape: it decreases after MIS1 and MIS5, with upticks in MIS4 and

5

Formally, this can be viewed as a method of moments approach. An alternative approach for estimating rotation
group bias is to construct a sample with year-by-MIS cells and regress the log of the unemployment rate in the cell
on a MIS linear trend, the interaction of month in sample trend with a post-1993 indicator, and year dummies.
Fitting this model we estimate a MIS coefficient (x100) of -0.9 (t-ratio = -7.6) and an interaction between MIS and a
post-1993 indicator variable (x100) of -1.0 (t-ratio = -7.0).

7

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

MIS8, consistent with Bailar’s (1975) findings.6 Since 1994, the index of unemployment rate
decreases monotonically with MIS with a small uptick in MIS5. The index for the number of
unemployed workers shows a very similar pattern to that of the unemployment rate.
Table 2 also shows that the rotation group bias is smaller for the number of employed
persons.7 This finding suggests that rotation group bias in the unemployment rate is not driven
by whether or not respondents are classified as being employed (see also the results for “not
working last week” in Table 5 below). Instead, rotation group bias in unemployment results
from the margin between being classified as unemployed or out of the labor force.
To summarize, two general trends in rotation group pattern of unemployment rate emerge.
First, the unemployment rate decreased monotonically with MIS since 1994, while it exhibited a
tilted “W” shape before 1994. Second, the magnitude of rotation group bias, as measured by the
slope of the relationship between the multiplicative index of the unemployment rate and MIS,
jumps up in 1994 and gradually increases from that higher level in subsequent years.

IV. CHANNELS
We can broadly group the main sources of bias into two categories: nonresponse and
redesign effects. In this section we focus on these candidate explanations. We begin by
investigating the determinants of the cross-sectional pattern of interview effects, and then we
examine the factors that shifted the pattern over time.

6

Using the CPS basic monthly surveys from 1968 to 1972, Bailar (1975) finds that the index of unemployment rate
starts to have a “W” shape after the 1970 redesign. Prior to 1970, the index for unemployment rate shows peaks in
MIS1 and MIS5.
7
We have also examined the rotation group pattern using an additive index. The additive index for a rotation group
in a given time period is the difference between the estimate for that rotation group and the average estimate over all
rotation groups in that period. If there is no rotation group bias, the additive index should be 0 for all rotation groups.
Figure A1 presents the additive index of unemployment rate for each rotation group by year. The rotation group
pattern of additive index is similar to that of multiplicative index.

8

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

IV.1. Changes in the Magnitude and Pattern of Nonresponse
We first consider survey nonresponse as a candidate mechanism for both the “baseline
bias” (i.e., the fact that there was systematic rotation group effect before the launch of the
redesigned CPS in 1994) and the change after 1993. For this analysis we consider “Type-A noninterviews,” which represent households that are eligible for interviews but were not interviewed
because of refusal, temporary absence, noncontact, and other non-interview reasons.
Figure 4 plots the rate of Type-A survey non-interview by year. There is a discrete
upward jump in nonresponse by approximately two percentage points coinciding with the 1994
redesign. Subsequent to the redesign there is also a noticeable upward trend in nonresponse,
with a dramatic acceleration occurring after 2009, driven by survey refusals. (The upturn in
nonresponse beginning in 2010 coincided with publicity surrounding the 2010 Census, and calls
by some irresponsible officials that individuals should not participate in the Census.) This
pattern of nonresponse is similar to the time-series pattern of rotation group bias, which exhibits
a break in 1994 and then a steeper downward trend over time. A scatter plot of the linear bias
measure against Type-A nonresponse (see Figure 5) shows a strong relationship.
The relationship between nonresponse and rotation group bias also holds in crosssectional data from CPS if we disaggregate the data into race-by-age-by-sex cells. For this
analysis, we pooled data from January 1994 to December 2011. We divide the sample into 20
groups based on gender (men and women), race (white and black), and age (16-24, 25-34, 35-44,
45-54, and 55-64). For each of the 20 groups the magnitude of rotation group bias and the rate of
Type-A nonresponse were calculated.8

8

The CPS does not report demographic information for members of non-interview households. To estimate the rate
of Type-A non-interview for each of the 20 demographic groups, we can obtain demographic information for
members of Type-A non-interview households from other surveys. For households classified as Type-A non-

9

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 3 presents the results from the regression analysis that examines the cross-sectional
relationship between Type-A non-interview and rotation group bias. For all specifications, the
dependent variable is the slope measure of the multiplicative rotation group bias of the
unemployment rate. Column (1) presents the estimated coefficient on the rate of Type-A noninterview; Column (2) presents the estimated coefficient on the rate of refusal; and Column (3)
presents the estimated coefficient on the rate of Type-A non-interview for reasons other than
refusal. The relationship between the magnitude of rotation group bias and the rate of Type-A
non-interview is statistically significant in all specifications. Type-A non-interview accounts for
30% of the cross-sectional variation in rotation group bias.
Column (3) of Table 1 formally tests whether nonresponse can account for the time-series
pattern in rotation group bias. In column (1) we regress the bias measure from 1976-2014
against a time trend, and a post-1993 dummy. In column (3) we include the Type-A nonresponse
rate. Without the nonresponse rate, the post-1993 dummy has a coefficient of -0.65 (t-ratio=2.25), and when we include the nonresponse rate the coefficient falls to -0.35 (t-ratio=-1.14).
Thus, controlling for the nonresponse rate appears to account for almost half of the rise in
rotation group bias after 1993, and renders the effect statistically insignificant. While we only
have observational data and cannot conclude that increased nonresponse itself caused the change
in the pattern of rotation group bias, it seems plausible that nonresponse or some factor related to
nonresponse is responsible for a substantial share of the rise in rotation group bias.

interview in period t, we first try to obtain demographic information of their members from period t-1. If the
information is unavailable in period t-1, we try to obtain the demographic information from period t+1. The rate of
Type-A non-interview in period t is the ratio of the number of persons residing in Type-A non-interview households
of period t and the sum of respondents in period t and those residing in Type-A non-interview households of period t.
For Type-A non-interview households of period t, the count is weighted by the weights in the period from which the
demographic information is obtained. The rates of refusal and Type-A non-interview for reasons other than refusal
are estimated in a similar way. For the regression analysis, MIS1 and MIS8 are excluded from the calculation of
average rate. Figure A2 plots this cross-sectional relationship.

10

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

IV.2. Redesign Effects
Linked Sample
To investigate the role of changes in reporting behavior we utilize the panel structure of
the CPS. If changes in reporting behavior due to the redesign, as opposed to changes in the
pattern of nonresponse, brought about the change in rotation group bias we would expect to see
the shift in bias for respondents who participated in all eight interviews. We therefore link CPS
panels from January 1976 to May 2014 to examine whether the rotation group pattern of
unemployment holds for respondents who are present for all eight interviews. Details on the
construction of the linked file are available in Appendix B.
We assemble a balanced panel of dwellings, which includes dwellings that are eligible for
all eight interviews during the sample period (i.e., dwellings that were first selected into the
sample between January 1976 and February 2013).9 To avoid mismatches, we keep matched
interviews with consistent demographic characteristics, specifically the same reported gender,
race, and age (± 2 years) in all interviews. An individual is considered to be present in an
interview if there is a valid entry for labor force status.
Table 4 presents multiplicative indices of the unemployment rate for the subset of
individuals who are present in all eight interviews (“Present in MIS 1-8”), for respondents who
report valid labor force status in at least one interview but not in all eight interviews (“Missing at
least one”), and all respondents (“All”). We split the sample into periods 1982-93 and 19942014.

(We start the sample in 1982 because information on Type-A nonresponse is only

available consistently in the public-use files beginning in 1982.) It is notable that from 19821993 to 1994-2014 the magnitude of rotation group bias increased by less for those who
9

We cannot construct a “balanced” panel of households. The specific household residing in a dwelling can change
during the interview period.

11

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

responded to the survey each month (0.25 points) than for those who inconsistently participated
in the sample (0.62 points). This finding suggests that a change in response behavior to the labor
force questions, independent of any effect on nonresponse rates, played a secondary role in the
change in rotation group bias compared with nonresponse. An important caveat, however, is that
those respondents who are stable in terms of participating in the survey each month could be
different in other respects and have a different response to the redesign than the less consistent
survey participants.

Components of unemployment
We next explore how the response to labor force questions changed. We begin by
decomposing the unemployment rate into several components. The BLS classifies a worker as
unemployed if: 1) they are on layoff, are given a date to return to work, and are available for
work; or 2) if they did not have a job in the last week, actively looked for a job in the last four
weeks, and are currently available for work. Table 5 shows the rotation group pattern for these
different components of the definition of unemployment. Specifically, we computed the fraction
of respondents who stated they are on layoff, were not employed in the last week, looked for a
job in the last four weeks, and are available for work. (The denominator for these rates is the
number of people in the population. We then computed multiplicative indices, as with the
unemployment rate.)
Consistent with the results in Table 2, we do not observe a change in the rotation group
pattern on the employment margin: in the base 1976-1993 period there is no rotation group
pattern in whether the respondent was working last week, nor do we find a change in the pattern
from this period to 1976-1993. There is strong rotation group bias in the base period in the
12

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

fraction of respondents who looked for work in the last week, and the linear measure of bias
increases from 1.33 to 2.32 in absolute value. (Note that individuals are only asked about job
search if they were without a job in the previous week.) We also observe an increase in bias for
whether the respondent is available for work, with the magnitude of the linear bias measure
rising from 1.21 to 2.34 in absolute value, but respondents are only asked about their availability
for work if they in fact searched for a job. After the redesign, the CPS began asking respondents
who reported looking for a job questions on the type of search in greater detail. There is a large
degree of rotation group bias in the question of whether the worker used active job search
methods. Rotation group bias also increases for the layoff question, but as can be seen in column
(9), the share of respondents who report layoffs is quite low and declining and therefore unlikely
to influence the overall pattern for the unemployment rate. Based on these results, it appears that
the change in response behavior altered the margin for whether or not the respondent is classified
to be in the labor force.

IV. 3. Other explanations
We have ruled out a number of additional explanations including changes in the redesign
that changed how the labor force questions were worded for female respondents, changes in how
people respond to labor force questions as a result of having been asked before, the use of
imputation, proxy responses, economic conditions, and changes in unemployment duration.

Changes by gender
One possible feature of the redesign that could account for changes in labor force
status is the change in how the labor force questions were worded for female respondents. In the
13

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

unrevised CPS manual interviewers were instructed to assess whether the respondent “appears to
be a homemaker,” in which case the manual instructed the interviewer to ask “What were you
doing most of last week -- keeping house or something else?” (Polivka and Miller 1998). The
wording was changed so that there wouldn’t be an asymmetry between men and women. This
was one of several changes that potentially differentially affected the responses for men and
women. Cohany, Polivka and Rothgeb (1994) found in the parallel CPS sample that these
changes likely increased the unemployment rate of women relative to men.
We examine whether the change in rotation group bias could be due to the changes in
question wording by gender by breaking out the index by gender and year. In Table 6 we show
the multiplicative index for the unemployment rate for men and women, separately for 19761993 and 1994-2014. We see an increase in bias for both men and women, and it does not
appear that the increase in bias is any larger for women. The index is very similar for men and
women after 1994, but the magnitude of rotation group bias is greater for women before 1994.
For men and women, the index exhibits the same “W” shape before 1994 and monotonic
declining pattern since 1994. 10

Changes in Responses due to Repeated Questioning
It is possible that unemployed respondents who have already been interviewed are more
likely to change their responses to the labor force question, for example if they want to minimize
the length of the interview (now that they know the interview questions) or because they don’t

10

We have also looked at other characteristics. The magnitude of bias in unemployment rate is greater for the
blacks. There is no consistent difference in the magnitude of bias across groups by age, ethnicity, urbanity or
household size (results are not shown). The characteristics refer to the reported characteristics. Due to proxy
responses, reported characteristics are different from the characteristics of respondents. On average, the magnitude
of rotation group bias in unemployment rate is greater for self-responses compared to proxy responses.

14

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

want to admit that they are still unemployed. We assess this explanation by comparing the
magnitude of rotation group bias by different unemployment durations.
Figure 6 presents the multiplicative index for the fraction of the labor force unemployed
by duration of unemployment and survey year. The figure shows that the change in rotation
group bias occurred in the group that has been unemployed for less than four weeks. The
estimated level shift in the slope measure of rotation group bias for this group is -2.34 (t-ratio=6.26). 11 By contrast, around the time of the 1994 redesign, the magnitude of bias declines
substantially for the fraction of unemployed workers who have been unemployed for 4-14 weeks.
The estimated level shift is 0.61 (t-statistics=1.73). There is no statistically significant level shift
for the fraction of unemployed workers with longer duration. 12 The fact that rotation group bias
has always been substantial for the newly unemployed and that this bias has increased is strong
evidence that repeated questioning about job search activities of the unemployed is not the main
driver of rotation group bias, as the bias is present during the first month of unemployment. This
finding is also evidence against a related potential explanation, that by asking respondents about
their labor force status the interviewers changed their behavior, making them less likely to search
for a job.

11

The estimation allows a linear time trend and a level shift between 1993 and 1994
We have also looked at the rotation group pattern by using different definitions of unemployment. The BLS
publishes six unemployment rates that are either more or less inclusive than the official rate. Appendix Figure A3
presents the average multiplicative index by year for the official rate (U-3) as well as two less inclusive measures,
U-1 and U-2, and three more inclusive measures, U-4, U-5 and U-6. U-1 corresponds to workers who are long-term
unemployed, specifically the fraction of the labor force unemployed for 15 weeks longer, and U-2measures
involuntary job separations or the fraction of workers in the labor force who lose jobs or complete temporary work.
The increase in bias can be seen in U-2 and U-3, but not U-1. Because U-1 has a very different rotation group
pattern since 1994, this is consistent with our finding that the increase in rotation group bias for U-3 is concentrated
among workers with shorter unemployment spells. U-4, U-5, and U-6 were revised in the 1994 redesign. Since
1994, the indices for U-4, U-5, and U-6 show the same monotonically decreasing pattern with respect to MIS as the
index for U3, though the magnitude of rotation group bias decreases from U-3 to U-6.
12

15

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Moreover, if we restrict the sample to workers who are newly unemployed using our
longitudinal sample – i.e., they were either employed or out of the labor force in month t, but
unemployed in month t+1 – we find considerable rotation group bias for the newly unemployed.
And the bias roughly doubled after the 1994 redesign. This finding implies that rotation group
bias occurs even among those who were not asked about their job search behavior in the previous
interview, because they were previously employed and therefore not asked the search questions.
Thus, there is little support for a “Heisenberg Principle” of rotation group bias, in which repeated
questioning about search activity inevitably alters subsequent responses.
Given the sharp increase in rotation group bias for the low duration group, it is also worth
noting that much of the change in the duration pattern of unemployment across rotation groups is
attributable to the introduction of dependent interviewing in the CPS redesign (Abraham and
Shimer 2002). Since 1994, in months other than MIS1 and MIS5, if a worker reports being
unemployed in the previous month and the current month, unemployment duration for the
current month is automatically updated by adding either 4 or 5 weeks to the unemployment
duration recorded in the previous month, depending on the number of weeks elapsed between the
two interviews.

The dependent interviewing for unemployment duration changes the

composition of unemployed workers by duration; it should not affect reported labor force status
or the unemployment rate. 13 It is worth emphasizing that rotation group bias increased
irrespective of duration. Thus, it is possible that the fact that rotation group bias has shifted
primarily for short-term unemployed workers is largely an incidental result, owing to the

13

There was also a change in the unit of reporting. In the redesigned questionnaire respondents were allowed to
report duration in months or years in addition to weeks. Respondents were asked to report the duration in weeks if
duration of four or fewer months were reported.

16

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

adoption of dependent interviewing in rotation groups 2-4 and 6-8, not an independent source of
the changing pattern of rotation group bias.

Imputation for Item-Nonresponse
Imputation is unlikely to be a factor since less than one percent of respondents have
imputed labor force status. (Individuals who refuse to participate in the survey or do not respond
for other reasons do not have their labor force status imputed; imputations are only done for
those with incomplete responses.) The pattern of rotation group bias is very close when we
remove imputed values (Table A1).

Economic Conditions
To test whether economic conditions affected the trend in bias we estimate the timeseries relationship between the bias measure and annual growth in GDP and unemployment rate
(Table A2). Proportional changes in GDP and unemployment rate are not predictive of the bias.

Proxy Response
To save survey time, in the CPS one representative from each household answers
questions for all other household members, or proxy-responses. Proxy-responses might be
systematically different from self-responses and the fraction of proxy responses might change
over MIS.

Table A3 shows that self-responses exhibit greater rotation group bias in

unemployment rate than proxy-responses. That difference between the two types of responses,
however, has not changed over time. In addition, the share of proxy-responses does not vary
across rotation groups.
17

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Unemployment Duration
Unemployment duration has trended upward over time (Valletta 1998, Aaronson,
Mazumder, and Schechter 2010). Figure A4 shows the relationship between median annual
unemployment duration and the measure of rotation group bias. There is a strong positive
relationship, but it is entirely driven by the recession years 2009-2011.

Without these

observations there is no relationship. Thus, the rise in unemployment duration is unlikely to
have played an important role in the increase in rotation group bias.

V. EVIDENCE FROM THE U.K. AND CANADA
Additional evidence supporting the role of nonresponse and the particulars of survey
design in rotation group bias can be found by examining rotation group effects in the U.K. and
Canadian labor force surveys (LFS).

U.K. LFS
The U.K. LFS has five rotation groups in its quarterly survey: each entering cohort is
interviewed for 5 consecutive quarters and then out of the survey.14 Using data from quarterly
surveys from 1993:Q4 to 2013:Q2, we find a very different rotation group pattern in the LFS

14

In the CPS and the LFS of Canada, almost all individuals are interviewed during one week in the middle of each
month, so the month of interview week and the month of reference week generally coincide. In the U.K. LFS,
sampled households are divided into 13 groups and an interviewer contacts one group each week. For households
interviewed at the beginning of a month/quarter, the month/quarter of the interview week will be different from the
month/quarter of the reference week. For the discussion of the U.K. LFS, the calendar time refers to the time of
interview.

18

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

compared to the CPS.15 The top panel of Table 7 presents multiplicative indices for several labor
force statistics. Population counts, as well as the numbers of employed and unemployed workers,
decline with rotation group because the survey weights do not adjust for attrition (although
missing values are imputed using the carry-forward method after the first interview). Unlike the
count statistics, the unemployment rate is less sensitive to attrition, and there is only a modest
pattern of rotation group bias for the unemployment rate, with a bias index (slope) of -0.79,
which is less than half of the magnitude in the CPS. Figure 7 plots the multiplicative indices of
rotation group bias in unemployment rate by year. The pattern of bias varies across years but
shows no obvious tendency of increasing.
In the U.K. LFS it appears that nonresponse plays a role in the observed rotation group
pattern. The U.K. LFS has a significantly lower response rate than the CPS, and the response
rate declines monotonically across rotation groups. For example, in the last quarter of 2010, the
sample included around 15,000 eligible households in each rotation group; 63.5 percent of all
eligible households responded in the first rotation group and 44.4 percent of all eligible
households responded in the fifth rotation group (ONS 2011). In addition, the response rate has
declined over time. For example, in September- November 1997, about 80 percent of all eligible
households responded to the survey or had imputed values, compared to slightly more than 70
percent in the second quarter of 2006 (ONS 2009). Figure A5 plots the fraction of reported labor
force participants with imputed labor force status from 1993 to 2013. The rate of imputation
increased from about 5 percent to almost 20 percent over the sample period.

15

The U.K. LFS changed from an annual survey to a quarterly survey with rotating panel structure in the spring of
1992. The phase-in to quarterly survey was completed in the spring of 1993. Per the EU request, the U.K. LFS
changed from seasonal quarters (winter, spring, summer, autumn) to calendar quarters in May 2006.

19

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Evidence that nonresponse plays a role in the U.K. rotation group pattern can be seen by
looking at the rotation group pattern in the imputation rate. If a household does not provide
responses after the first interview in the survey, responses from the previous quarter are used in
the current quarter (“carry-forward imputation”). The rate is lower for later rotation groups
because of the declining response rate across succeeding rotation groups. Including those
imputed values, the response rates are comparable between rotation groups 1 and 2, and they
start to decline for later rotation groups.
The carry-forward imputation method changes the bias pattern significantly for the
counts by labor force status, but it has a small effect on the rotation group pattern of the
unemployment rate itself. The bottom panel of Table 7 presents multiplicative indices of several
labor force statistics without imputed labor force status. Because imputation starts with the
second rotation group, we observe a sharper drop in the number of individuals between rotation
groups 1 and 2 after removing imputed labor force status. As a result, the slope of multiplicative
indices for the population declines from -4.85 to -5.30.16
The rotation group pattern by labor force status suggests that nonresponse is not random.
The magnitude of rotation group bias in the unemployment rate is substantially greater if the
imputed values are excluded. While the magnitude of bias increases for the number of employed
and unemployed workers after removing imputed values, it declines for the number of
individuals out of labor force. Imputation has a much greater effect on the magnitude of bias for
counts by labor force status than the population counts. The slope of multiplicative indices

16

Among unemployed workers, those with shorter unemployment duration have greater rotation group bias, but the
imputation method has very little effect on the rotation group pattern (Table 7). The slope is -2.04 for the fraction of
labor force participants with unemployment duration less than 3 months, and the slope is -2.48 for the same measure
without imputed values.

20

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

declined from -3.78 to -6.23 for the number of unemployed workers. These results imply that
imputation changes the distribution of individuals by labor force status within each cohort.

Canada’s LFS
The LFS of Canada is a monthly household survey. Since July 1995, about 54,000
households are included in the sample each month. There are six rotation groups, and each is
interviewed for 6 consecutive months. Monthly surveys from January 1976 to December 2010
are used in our analysis.17 The nonresponse rate in the survey is relatively low, at just under 5
percent in 2005 (StatCan 2008).18
Table 8 presents multiplicative indices of several labor force statistics by rotation group
from the Canadian LFS. The labor force statistics reported in the table are remarkably similar
across rotation groups, and the rotation group bias is low throughout the sample period. There is
no apparent tendency for the unemployment rate to decline across rotation groups; indeed, the
slope measure is positive. The fraction of unemployed workers by duration of unemployment
relative to the labor force is also very similar across rotation group. Figure 8 plots multiplicative
indices of rotation group bias by year from 1976 to 2010. We do not observe any significant
variation in rotation group pattern over time.19
To summarize, the international evidence suggests that rotation group bias in the
measured unemployment rate in the U.K. is much weaker than that found in the CPS for the U.S.,

17

The required data for this analysis are not publicly available. StatCan generously provided tabulations of the LFS
by rotation group to us.
18
If a non-responder was not interviewed in the previous month, a weight adjustment is made. Otherwise, all the
labor force information is imputed using longitudinal hot-deck imputation. In addition to using information in the
current period to define the imputation classes in hot-decking, longitudinal hot-deck imputation also uses
information (responses or imputed values) from the previous period.
19
Using an earlier sample from the Canadian LFS, Brisebois and Mantel (1996) find some evidence of rotation
group effects.

21

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

while there is no systematic tendency for rotation group bias in the Canadian LFS. Therefore,
the magnitude of the rotation group pattern observed in the CPS is not a general phenomenon
observed in all surveys with multiple interviews and a rotation group design. We also do not
find an increase in rotation group bias in these other surveys, reinforcing our conclusion that the
1994 redesign played a significant role in the CPS. Lastly, we find evidence that in the U.K., the
extent of rotation group bias is related to nonresponse, something we find evidence for as well in
the CPS. These observations suggest that details of the surveys themselves, such as the nature of
the questionnaire, mode of interviewing, and, relatedly, the survey response rate, play a pivotal
role in shaping the extent and pattern of rotation group bias.

VI. PREDICTING ECONOMIC SLACK AND OTHER MACRO VARIABLES
Figure 1 shows that the unemployment rates calculated for each of the rotation groups tend
to move together, although over time there is an upward drift in the unemployment rate
calculated for the lower rotation groups relative to that for the higher rotation groups. The
official unemployment rate calculated by the BLS is a composite measure that places more
weight on the continuing rotation groups, and less weight on rotation groups 1 and 5. In analysis
that we briefly summarize here, we explored whether it might be possible to combine the rotation
groups in a more efficacious manner than the BLS’s composite measure. The short answer is
that the alternatives that we developed did not consistently do better than the official rate when it
came to predicting key macroeconomic relationships.
In one set of analyses, to develop weights we first used the various rotation groups to
predict alternative measures of economic slack, namely the capacity utilization rate and the
insured unemployment rate. The results of this exercise are reported in Table 9. Although our
22

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

estimates depended on whether we also included a linear time trend, this analysis showed some
tendency for the unemployment rate in the earlier rotation groups (1, 2, 3 and 5) to be a stronger
predictor of economic slack, and with the expected sign, than the later rotation groups.20 If we
use the coefficients from the models in Table 9 to weight the unemployment rate by MIS and
create an alternative measure of unemployment, however, the new measure does not perform
significantly differently than the official BLS unemployment rate in a price Phillips Curve
equation, wage Phillips Curve equation or GDP growth equation.21
Because the unemployment rates for each MIS tended to move together, in a second approach
to reweighting the unemployment rate we estimated the first principal component of the eight
MIS unemployment rates, and then used this measure together with the official BLS
unemployment rate to estimate price and wage Phillips Curves and a GDP growth equation.
Again, we did not find consistent evidence that the alternatively weighted unemployment rate
performed differently than the official measure. Moreover, because the correlation between the
first principal component of the MIS unemployment rates and the official rate was 0.9991, they
are overwhelmingly measuring the same underlying factor.22 We conclude from this exercise
that rotation group bias is probably not confounding the ability of the unemployment rate to
predict key macroeconomic relationships in a meaningful way.

20

The correlation between the average unemployment rate of MIS 1, 2, 3, 5 and the BLS official rate is 0.9981, and
the correlation between the average unemployment rate of MIS 4, 6, 7, 8 and the BLS official rate is 0.9989. Thus,
the high-frequency movements of the three measures are essentially identical.
21
Specifically, we used annual data to relate the PCE (wage) inflation over year t and both measures of the average
unemployment rate over the months of year t and lagged price inflation. We related GDP growth from Q4 to Q4 of
year t to the change in both measures of the unemployment rate over the same period.
22
The weights assigned to each of the eight MIS unemployment rates in the first principal component are virtually
identical: 0.12496, 0.12440, 0.12496, 0.12546, 0.12496, 0.12503, 0.12560, and 0.12468.

23

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have documented that rotation group bias in the CPS has substantially
worsened, with a marked increase in bias since the 1994 CPS redesign. We find suggestive
evidence that the increase in rotation group bias is related to nonresponse, which follows a
similar time-pattern as rotation group bias, as well as possible effects from the 1994 redesign of
the CPS. The results suggest several important avenues for future research. While it does not
appear that rotation group bias is severely confounding estimates of macroeconomic
relationships, it remains an open question as to which rotation group provides the most accurate
measure of the unemployment rate, and whether the increase in rotation group bias has affected
the trend in the official unemployment rate.

To assess these issues one would need an

independent, unbiased unemployment measure, free of rotation effects, that when regressed on
the MIS rates one would expect a coefficient of 1, or a macroeconomic relationship between the
unemployment rate and some other measure with a known coefficient. We leave this question to
future work.
The results also suggest that there is not a “Heisenberg Principle” of rotation group bias,
whereby rotation group bias is an inherent feature of any labor force survey with multiple
interviews. This can be seen most clearly from the Canadian labor force survey that does not
exhibit rotation group bias. This conclusion is also reinforced by the high degree of rotation
group bias for those on new spells of unemployment, who have not previously been asked job
search questions. These observations lead to the question of which aspects of survey design and
implementation can be improved to mitigate rotation group bias. The evidence presented here
suggests that we require a better understanding of survey nonresponse, particularly finding ways

24

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

of reducing nonresponse and better imputation methods to adjust for nonrandom nonresponse, to
help mitigate rotation group bias.
Lastly, we note that the potential for rotation group bias complicates the design and
interpretation of overlap samples. For example, possible rotation group bias in the parallel
sample that was surveyed to assess the effects of the 1994 redesign and rotation group bias in the
CPS itself could confound the interpretation of differences between the two surveys as
measuring the effect of the redesigned survey.

25

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

References
Aaronson, Daniel, Bhashkar Mazumder, and Shani Schechter. "What is Behind the Rise in LongTerm Unemployment?." Economic Perspectives 34, no. 2 (2010).
Abraham, Katharine, and Robert Shimer. “Changes in unemployment duration and labor-force
attachment,” Alan Krueger, Robert Solow (Eds.), The Roaring Nineties, New York: The
Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation (2002), pp. 367–420.
Bailar, Barbara A. "The Effects of Rotation Group Bias on Estimates from Panel Surveys."
Journal of the American Statistical Association 70, no. 349 (1975): 23-30.
Brisebois, Francois, and Harold Mantel. "Month-in-sample effects for the Canadian Labour
Force Survey." In Proceedings of the Survey Methods Section. 1996.
Cohany, Sharon R., Anne E. Polivka, and Jennifer M. Rothgeb. "Revisions in the current
population survey effective January 1994." Emp. & Earnings 41 (1994): 13.
Office for National Statistics (ONS) (2009) “Labour Force Survey user guide – volume 1:
background and methodology 2009”
http://doc.ukdataservice.ac.uk/doc/6632/mrdoc/pdf/lfs_user_guide_vol1_background200
9.pdf .
______ (2011) “Labour Force Survey user guide – volume 1: background and methodology 2011”
http://doc.ukdataservice.ac.uk/doc/7501/mrdoc/pdf/lfs_user_guide_vol1_background201
1.pdf.
Polivka, Anne E., and Stephen M. Miller. "The CPS after the redesign: Refocusing the economic
lens." In Labor Statistics Measurement Issues, pp. 249-289. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1998.
Solon, Gary. "Effects of Rotation Group Bias on Estimation of Unemployment." Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics 4, no. 1 (1986): 105-109.
Statistics Canada (StatCan) (2008). “Methodology of the Canadian Labour Force Survey”
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/71-526-x/71-526-x2007001-eng.pdf.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (2006). “Current Population Survey:
design and methodology” http://www.census.gov/prod/2006pubs/tp-66.pdf.
Valletta, Robert G. "Changes in the Structure and Duration of US Unemployment, 1967-1998."
Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (1998): 29-40.

26

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 1: Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate and Type-A Non-interview
over Time, 1976 – May 2014.

Time
Post-93

(1)
-0.021
(0.013)
-0.649**
(0.288)

(2)
0.012
(0.020)
-0.754**
(0.279)
-0.054**
(0.025)

Time*Post-93
Type A

Constant

N
R2

(3)
0.008
(0.018)
-0.350
(0.306)

-0.246**
(0.112)

(4)
0.015
(0.020)
-0.525
(0.376)
-0.029
(0.037)
-0.149
(0.164)

-1.007***
(0.161)

-0.695***
(0.212)

0.341
(0.633)

-0.016
(0.775)

39
0.605

39
0.651

39
0.653

39
0.660

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The unit of observation is
calendar year. The dependent variable is the magnitude of rotation group bias in unemployment rate as described in
the notes of Figure 2. “Time” is a linear time trend; “Post-93” is an indicator variable for years after 1993;
“Time*Post-93” is the interaction of “Time” and “Post-93”; “Type A” is the number of type-A non-interview
households divided by the sum of interviewed households and type-A non-interview households.

27

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 2: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Labor Force Statistics, 1976 – May
2014.
1

2

1976-1993
# Unemp
# Emp
Unemp Rate

107.5
101.1
105.8

100.3
100.2
100.1

1994-2014
# Unemp
# Emp
Unemp Rate

110.8
101.0
109.2

105.1
100.5
104.3

3

4

5

98.5
99.9
98.7

102.2
100.2
101.8

100.1
99.9
100.2

101.2
100.4
100.9

98.9
100.1
98.9

99.7
99.8
100.0

6

7

8

Mean

Slope

P-value

96.8
99.5
97.6

95.3
99.4
96.2

99.4 12,036
99.8 159,438
99.6
7.0%

-1.05
-0.18
-0.81

0.053
0.016
0.063

95.9
99.3
96.8

94.0
99.4
94.9

94.4 13,051
99.6 200,340
95.1
6.1%

-2.21
-0.23
-1.86

0.000
0.001
0.000

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The estimation of
multiplicative indices is described in the notes of Figure 2. The table presents average annual estimates of three
labor force statistics by MIS: the number of unemployed workers, the number of employed workers, and
unemployment rate. The table also presents the average labor force statistics over eight rotation groups, the slope of
those indices with respect to MIS, and p-value of the slope. The counts are in thousands.

28

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 3: Cross-sectional Relationship between the Rate of Type-A Non-interview and the
Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate, 1994 – 2011.

Type-A non-interview rate

(1)
-0.4006**
(0.145)

Refusal rate

(2)

(3)

-0.9234**
(0.398)

Other
Constant

N
R2

-0.1384
(0.601)

-0.1795
(0.695)

-0.6560***
(0.223)
-0.2272
(0.537)

20
0.298

20
0.230

20
0.325

Notes: The estimates are based on the linked CPS monthly files from January 1994 to December 2011. The sample
is divided into 20 cells based on gender (men and women), race (white and black), and age group (16-24, 25-34, 3544, 45-54, and 55-64). For type-A non-interview households, demographic information is obtained from responses
in the two adjacent rotation groups if available. The calculation of average rate of non-interview excludes
respondents and type-A non-interview households in MIS1 and MIS8. The dependent variable is the magnitude of
rotation group bias in unemployment rate as described in the notes of Figure 2.

29

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 4: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Groups Bias in Unemployment Rate by Response
Pattern Across Interviews, January 1982 – May 2014.
1
82-93

Present in MIS 1-8
Missing at least one
All

94-14

Present in MIS 1-8
Missing at least one
All

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mean Slope

108.5 103.5 101.4 105.3 94.7 94.9 94.1 97.5

5.4%

-1.84

108.9 100.8 99.2 102.7 100.6 96.9 93.9 96.9

9.2%

-1.52

108.1 102.0 100.2 103.7 98.1 96.3 94.2 97.3

6.9%

-1.57

109.5 105.8 101.8 100.1 97.3 95.4 94.4 95.7

5.0%

-2.09

112.5 102.4 99.2 97.7 103.6 97.7 94.3 92.5

8.0%

-2.14

110.1 104.4 100.9 99.2 100.0 96.6 94.5 94.3

6.1%

-2.05

Notes: The estimates are based on the linked CPS monthly files from January 1982 to May 2014. The estimation of
multiplicative indices, mean, and slope is estimated as described in the notes of Figure 2. “Present in MIS 1-8”
includes respondents who have valid labor force status for all eight interviews; “Missing at least one” includes those
who are present in at least one interview, but do not provide valid labor force status in at least one of the eight
interviews; “All” includes all respondents. The linked sample is restricted to include cohorts with matching rate
greater than 40% and individuals with consistent age (±2 years), gender, and race in all interviews.

30

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 5: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Groups Bias in the Fraction of the Population by
Response to Unemployment Questions, 1976 – May 2014.

Layoff
76-93
94-14

1

2

103.8
106.4

98.1
103.8

3
98.2
99.0

Not working last week
76-93
98.2
99.8 100.2
94-14
98.6
99.9
99.9
Looked for job in the last 4 weeks
109.0 100.7
98.3
76-93
111.6 105.0 101.4
94-14
Active job search methods
76-93
94-14
112.6 104.8 100.9
Available if offered a job last week
76-93
108.0 100.7
98.6
94-14
112.1 105.0 101.1

4

5

6

7

102.7
101.4

97.8
100.3

98.2
95.4

99.1
95.0

102.1
98.7

0.7%
0.5%

-0.14
-1.31

100.0
100.1

99.9
100.4

100.7
100.5

100.8
100.3

100.5
100.3

43.0%
41.0%

0.27
0.20

101.7
98.5

101.2
99.2

96.5
96.4

94.2
94.3

98.5
93.5

4.3%
3.9%

-1.33
-2.32

98.2

99.9

96.1

93.9

93.6

3.6%

-2.38

102.1
98.3

100.5
99.5

96.7
96.2

94.6
94.1

98.8
93.7

3.9%
3.5%

-1.21
-2.34

-

8

Mean

-

Slope

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The estimation of
multiplicative indices, mean, and slope is described in the notes of Figure 2. The table presents several statistics as
fractions of the population: the number of workers who are laid off, the number of individuals not working last week,
the number of individuals who looked for a job in the last 4 weeks among those who did not work last week, the
number of active job seekers among those who looked for a job in the last 4 weeks, and the number of individuals
who would be available for a job last week among job seekers.

31

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 6: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Groups Bias in Unemployment Rate by Gender, 1976
– May 2014.

1976-1993
Men
Women
1994-2014
Men
Women

1

2

103.7
108.3

100.2
100.0

109.1
109.3

104.0
104.6

3

4

5

6

7

8

99.5
97.7

101.9
101.8

99.4
101.2

98.1
96.9

97.5
94.6

100.9
100.7

98.9
98.9

100.0
99.9

97.0
96.6

94.9
94.9

Mean

Slope

99.7
99.5

6.9%
7.3%

-0.57
-1.09

95.1
95.1

6.3%
5.9%

-1.84
-1.89

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The estimation of
multiplicative indices, mean, and slope is described in the notes of Figure 2.

32

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 7: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Labor Force Statistics (U.K. LFS),
1993Q4 – 2013Q2.
1

2

3

4

5

Average

Slope

Full Sample
# Employed
# Unemployed
# NILF
Population (16+)
Unemployment Rate
Emp-Pop Ratio

103.2
102.7
123.6
110.7
99.7
93.8

% LF less than 3 months
% LF 3-6 months
% LF 6-12 months
% LF 12-24 months
% LF 24 months or more

102.9
94.5
96.0
99.6
102.1

106.5
100.9
96.4
109.1
102.0
95.7
100.3
95.2
91.5
104.3
98.8
94.6
102.4
101.1
99.4
101.6
101.7
101.6
Unemployment Duration
103.3
100.1
98.6
104.1
99.5
104.1
103.2
101.1
100.8
99.0
99.9
99.7
99.6
98.8
101.8

93.1
90.5
89.3
91.6
97.5
101.3

5,582.3
393.3
3,503.7
9,479.4
6.6%
59.1%

-2.95
-3.78
-8.00
-4.85
-0.79
1.59

95.1
97.8
98.8
101.8
97.8

2.3%
1.1%
1.1%
0.9%
1.1%

-2.04
0.19
0.59
0.45
-1.15

92.5
89.5
91.1
92.0
97.0
100.5

5,109.6
351.4
2,086.0
7,546.9
6.4%
67.7%

-4.85
-6.23
-6.23
-5.30
-1.31
0.43

94.6
96.5
98.0
101.4
98.5

2.3%
1.1%
1.1%
0.9%
1.1%

-2.48
-0.78
-0.18
0.02
-1.18

Full Sample Without Imputed Labor Force Status
# Employed
# Unemployed
# NILF
Population (16+)
Unemployment rate
Emp-Pop Ratio

112.8
114.8
118.2
114.4
101.9
98.5

% LF less than 3 months
% LF 3-6 months
% LF 6-12 months
% LF 12-24 months
% LF 24 months or more

104.9
97.3
98.8
102.2
103.6

102.5
98.2
93.9
104.5
98.4
92.8
101.6
96.7
92.5
102.4
97.8
93.5
101.9
100.3
99.0
100.1
100.4
100.4
Unemployment Duration
102.8
99.1
98.5
103.1
98.5
104.7
102.5
100.3
100.4
98.6
99.9
98.0
98.5
99.0
100.5

Notes: The estimates are based on the U.K. LFS from 1993Q4 to 2013Q2. The table presents multiplicative indices
of several labor force statistics by rotation group (with and without imputed labor force status), the average value
over rotation groups, and the slope of multiplicative indices. The estimation of multiplicative indices and slopes is
presented in the notes of Figure 2. The set of labor force statistics includes the number of employed and unemployed
workers, the number of individuals out of labor force, population, unemployment rate, and employment-population
ratio. Among unemployed workers, the table presents the fraction of labor force by unemployment duration. The
counts are in thousands.

33

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 8: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Labor Force Statistics (Canadian LFS),
1976 - 2010.

# Employed
# Unemployed
# NILF
# Population
Unemployment Rate
Emp-Pop Ratio

1
99.9
99.7
100.3
100.0
99.8
99.9

< 5 weeks
5-15 weeks
16-26 weeks
>27 weeks
Missing

99.7
100.2
99.4
99.8
98.6

2
3
4
99.9
100.0
100.3
99.8
99.6
100.5
100.2
100.0
99.4
100.0
100.0
100.0
99.9
99.6
100.2
99.9
100.0
100.3
Unemployment Duration
98.7
100.1
100.3
100.1
98.8
99.8
100.4
99.7
100.8
101.3
99.5
100.3
100.8
99.4
100.8

5
100.2
99.6
99.8
100.0
99.5
100.2

6
99.7
100.7
100.4
100.0
101.0
99.7

Average
26,770
2,462
15,175
44,408
8.5%
60.1%

Slope
0.00
0.16
-0.03
0.00
0.15
0.00

100.0
99.5
99.7
98.3
101.6

101.3
101.6
99.9
100.7
98.8

2.6%
2.5%
1.4%
1.8%
0.3%

0.35
0.19
0.06
-0.10
0.14

Notes: The estimates are based on the labor force statistics by rotation group and month provided by the Statistics
Canada. The sample period goes from January 1976 to December 2010. The table presents several labor force
statistics by rotation group, the average value over rotation groups, and the slope of multiplicative indices. The
estimation of multiplicative indices and slopes is presented in the notes of Figure 2. The set of labor force statistics
includes the number of employed and unemployed workers, the number of individuals out of labor force, population,
unemployment rate, and employment-population ratio. Among unemployed workers, the table presents the fraction
of labor force by unemployment duration. The counts are in thousands.

34

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table 9: Relationship between Measures of Economic Slack (Total Capacity Utilization Rate and
Insured Unemployment Rate) and the Unemployment Rate for Each Rotation Group, Multiple
Regression Estimates with Monthly Data, 1976–2014.
Log of 1 Minus TCUR
Log of Unemployment Rate
MIS 1
MIS 2
MIS 3
MIS 4
MIS 5
MIS 6
MIS 7
MIS 8
Linear time trend
(monthly)
Constant

0.343**
(0.142)
0.775***
(0.146)
0.423***
(0.152)
-0.371***
(0.113)
-0.0829
(0.120)
0.0440
(0.112)
-0.0480
(0.108)
-0.588***
(0.155)

-0.305
(0.205)

0.173
(0.132)
0.289***
(0.107)
0.170
(0.108)
-0.120
(0.101)
0.0272
(0.0933)
0.0274
(0.0848)
0.0343
(0.0929)
-0.102
(0.118)
0.000620***
(0.000142)
-0.518**
(0.221)

Log of IUR
0.159
(0.140)
-0.269
(0.179)
-0.0162
(0.121)
0.111
(0.128)
0.398***
(0.119)
0.121
(0.100)
0.0800
(0.109)
0.355**
(0.179)

-1.019***
(0.248)

0.380***
(0.109)
0.365***
(0.110)
0.313***
(0.101)
-0.215*
(0.121)
0.255***
(0.0757)
0.142*
(0.0822)
-0.0273
(0.101)
-0.278***
(0.0844)
-0.000807***
(0.000151)
-0.741***
(0.177)

Test coefficients of the eight unemployment rates
Test joint significance (p-value)
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
Test equality (p-value)
0.0000
0.3163
0.3654

0.0000
0.0004

N
R2

461
0.833

461
0.448

461
0.583

461
0.731

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The unit of observation is
calendar month. The dependent variable is either the log of 1 minus TCU or the log of IUR. The set of explanatory
variables includes a set of unemployment rates from eight rotation groups and a linear time trend. Each of the eight
series of unemployment rate is seasonally adjusted using the X-12-ARIMA program from the Census. The table also
presents p-values of two hypothesis tests: joint significances or equality of the coefficients on unemployment rates.
The standards errors are Newey-West standard errors with a lag of 12 months.

35

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 1: Unemployment Rate by Rotation Group and Year, 1976 – May 2014.
(A) Absolute Level

(B) Difference from the BLS Estimates

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. Panel (A) plots
unemployment rate by MIS and year; Panel (B) plots the difference between annual unemployment rate by MIS and
the annual unemployment rate published by the BLS.

36

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 2: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate, 1976 – May
2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The figure plots
multiplicative indices by year, and the slope is presented next to the figure. The multiplicative index is estimated by
dividing the estimate in a given rotation group by the average estimate over all eight rotation groups, and
multiplying by 100. The slope is the linear slope of multiplicative indices with respect to MIS.

37

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 3: Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate over Time, 1976 – May
2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The figure plots the
magnitude of rotation group bias by year. The estimation of the magnitude of bias, or slope, is described in the notes
of Figure 2. The solid line is the fitted line of the magnitude of bias allowing for a linear time trend and a level shift
between 1993 and 1994; the dashed line is the fitted line of the magnitude of bias allowing for a linear time trend, a
level shift between 1993 and 1994, and a trend break between 1993 and 1994.

38

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 4: Rate of Type A Non-interview by Year, 1976 – May 2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The rate of type-A noninterview is the number of type-A non-interview households divided by the sum of interviewed households and
type-A non-interview households. The rate of type-A non-interview due to refusal (or noncontact) is the number of
type-A household for the reason of refusal (or noncontact) divided by the sum of interviewed households and type-A
non-interview households.

39

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 5: Rate of Type-A Non-interview and Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in
Unemployment Rate by Year, 1976 – May 2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The y-axis is the
magnitude of rotation group bias in unemployment rate as described in the notes of Figure 2; the x-axis is the rate of
type-A non-interview. “Type A” is the number of type-A non-interview households divided by the sum of
interviewed households and type-A non-interview households; “Refusal”, “Noncontact”, and “Type A (other)” are
the fractions of households who are type-A non-interview households due to refusal, noncontact, and other reasons,
respectively.

40

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 6: Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in the Fraction of the Labor Force Unemployed by
Unemployment Duration, 1976 – May 2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The figure plots the
magnitude of rotation group bias in the fraction of the labor force unemployed by unemployment duration and year.
The estimation of the magnitude of bias, or slope, is described in the notes of Figure 2. The solid line is the fitted
line of the magnitude of bias allowing for a linear time trend and a level shift between 1993 and 1994.

41

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 7: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate by Year (U.K.
LFS), 1993Q4-2013Q2.

Notes: The estimates are based on the U.K. LFS from 1993Q4 to 2013Q2. The figure plots multiplicative indices of
rotation group bias in unemployment rate by year. The slope of indices is given next to each figure. The estimation
of multiplicative indices and slopes is described in the notes of Figure 2.

42

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure 8: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate by Year (Canadian LFS), 1976 - 2010.

Notes: The estimates are based on the labor force statistics by rotation group and month provided by the Statistics Canada. The sample period goes from January
1976 to December 2010. The figure plots multiplicative indices of rotation group bias in unemployment rate by year. The slope of indices is given next to each
figure. The estimation of multiplicative indices and slopes is described in the notes of Figure 2.

43

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures
Table A1: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate with and
without Imputed Labor Force Status, 1982 – August 2013.
1
with imputed values
82-93
105.3
94-13
108.9
without imputed values
82-93
105.4
94-13
109.2

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mean

100.4
104.0

98.6
100.8

102.3
98.9

99.5
100.2

97.7
97.0

96.5
95.0

99.6
95.2

7.1%
6.1%

100.4
104.0

98.6
100.7

102.3
98.9

99.5
100.2

97.7
97.0

96.5
95.0

99.6
95.1

7.1%
6.1%

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1982 to August 2013. The top panel presents
multiplicative indices of unemployment rate with imputation for item nonresponse in labor force status; the bottom
panel presents multiplicative indices without imputed labor force status. The estimation of multiplicative indices is
described in the notes of Figure 2.

44

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table A2: Economic Conditions and Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate,
1976 - 2013.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.013
0.012
-0.007
0.015
-0.009
0.014
-0.009
0.014
(0.013)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.019)
(0.013)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.020)
Post-93
-0.756** -0.820*** -0.836*** -0.883*** -0.808*** -0.864*** -0.815*** -0.859***
(0.279)
(0.274)
(0.286)
(0.281)
(0.279)
(0.275)
(0.292)
(0.286)
Time*Post-93
-0.043*
-0.040
-0.041
-0.041
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.025)
0.044
0.036
0.008
-0.006
Growth of Real GDP
(0.038)
(0.037)
(0.078)
(0.076)
-0.006
-0.005
-0.005
-0.006
Growth of Unemp Rate
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.009)
Constant
-0.932*** -0.695*** -1.019*** -0.784*** -0.902*** -0.680*** -0.923*** -0.663**
(0.157)
(0.206)
(0.174)
(0.225)
(0.158)
(0.205)
(0.254)
(0.295)
Time

N
R2

38
0.598

38
0.630

38
0.613

38
0.640

38
0.616

38
0.645

38
0.616

38
0.645

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to December 2013. The unit of
observation is calendar year. The dependent variable is the magnitude of rotation group bias in unemployment rate
as described in the notes of Figure 2. “Time” is a linear time trend; “Post-93” is an indicator variable for years after
1993; “Time*Post-93” is the interaction of “Time” and “Post-93”; “Growth of Real GDP” is the annual rate of
growth in real GDP; “Growth of Unemp Rate” is the annual rate of growth in unemployment rate.

45

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Table A3: Multiplicative Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate by Interview
Status (Self versus Proxy), 1976 – 2011.
(A) Weighted Counts

1976-1993
Self
Proxy
1994-2011
Self
Proxy

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Mean

Slope

99.9
100.0

100.0
100.0

100.1
100.0

100.2
99.8

99.8
100.1

99.9
100.1

99.9
100.1

100.1 128,264
99.9 135,031

0.00
0.00

99.7
100.1

100.1
100.4

100.2
100.2

100.2
100.0

99.8
100.3

99.8
99.7

99.9
99.6

100.2 164,942
99.6 163,000

0.01
-0.10

(B) Unemployment Rate

1976-1993
Self
Proxy
1994-2011
Self
Proxy

1

2

108.0
104.0

101.0
99.4

111.6
106.7

104.3
103.7

3

4

5

6

7

99.3
98.2

99.7
103.7

101.2
100.2

98.7
99.1

8

Mean

101.4
99.2

97.7
97.4

101.0
99.7

96.4
97.5

Slope

96.0
96.4

96.9
101.8

7.1%
7.0%

-1.26
-0.44

94.2
95.7

92.7
97.5

5.8%
6.0%

-2.31
-1.32

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to December 2011. The proxy response
status is determined by matching the person line number with the line number of the household respondent. If the
two line numbers do not match, the response for that person is determined to be proxy response. Panel (A) presents
multiplicative indices of weighted counts by MIS and interview status; Panel (B) presents multiplicative indices of
unemployment rate by MIS and interview status. The estimate of multiplicative indices is described in the notes of
Figure 2. The counts are in thousands.

46

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure A1: Additive Indices of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate, 1976 – May 2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The additive index is
estimated by subtracting the estimate for a given rotation group by the average estimate over all eight rotation
groups.

47

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure A2: Cross-sectional Relationship between the Rate of Type-A Non-interview and the
Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in Unemployment Rate by Demographic Group, 1994-2011.
(a) Type A

(b) Refusal

(c) Other

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1994 to December 2011. The estimates
correspond to those in Table 3.

48

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure A3: Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in U1 – U6 over Time, 1976 – May 2014.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The estimation of the
magnitude of rotation group bias is described in the notes of Figure 2.

49

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure A4: Median Unemployment Duration and Magnitude of Rotation Group Bias in
Unemployment Rate by Year, 1994-2011.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1994 to December 2011. The estimation of
the magnitude of rotation group bias is described in the notes of Figure 2. Median unemployment duration is in
weeks.

50

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure A5: Fraction of Labor Force Participants with Imputed Labor Force Status by Rotation
Group (U.K. LFS), 1993Q4 – 2013Q2.

Notes: The estimates are based on the U.K. LFS from 1993Q4 to 2013Q2. The figure plots the fraction of labor
force participants in the survey with imputed labor force status by rotation group.

51

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Appendix B: Sample Construction
B.I. CONSTRUCTION OF THE CROSS-SECTIONAL SAMPLE
The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of the U.S. labor force. The
sampling frame of the CPS includes physical addresses. Households residing in sampled
addresses are interviewed for four consecutive months, not interviewed for the next eight months,
and then interviewed for an additional four months. Any given monthly survey includes eight
cohorts depending on the month in which their addresses are first selected into the sample (MIS).
Individuals or households who move out of sampled residences are not contacted for subsequent
interviews; individuals or households who move into sampled dwellings are included in the
sample for the remaining interviews. This study uses surveys from January 1976 to May 2014,
unless otherwise noted.23 Sample sizes have fluctuated over time. In recent years, around 60,000
households, representing about 100,000 adults, are interviewed each month.
There are two types of nonresponses in the CPS: person/household nonresponses and
item nonresponses. Among household nonresponses, only Type-A non-interview households are
eligible for interview.24 BLS adjusts sample weights among interviewed households to account
for nonresponses and, in principle, create a representative sample. Item nonresponses occur when
an individual is interviewed but does not provide a complete set of responses. In these cases,
missing responses are imputed by BLS using one of the three methods: relational, longitudinal,
or hot-decking imputation. In the public-use micro-data files, imputed values for a variable are
identified by a separate indicator variable.
23

The surveys starting in 1994 are downloaded from the Census Bureau (available at
http://thedataweb.rm.census.gov/ftp/cps_ftp.html#cpsbasic), and surveys prior to 1994 are downloaded from the
National Bureau of Economic Research (available at http://www.nber.org/data/cps_basic.html).
24
Two other types of non-interview, type B and type C, are not eligible for interview. A type-C unit is ineligible for
interview because the address is not for occupancy. A type-B unit is intended for occupancy but is not occupied by
any individual eligible for interview. A type-C unit is not visited again, and a type-B unit is visited in the subsequent
months because the ineligibility situation is considered to be temporary.

52

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

The information on labor force status used in the analysis is based on the recoded status
included in the micro data. Labor force information is collected for individuals ages 16 and
above. Three mutually exclusive statuses are defined: employed, unemployed, or out of labor
force. We also analyze the series of questions that underlies the classification of
unemployment.25 This set of questions is described in the text.
Final weights are used in our analyses. Final weights account for nonresponses, and they
are adjusted to match population estimates.26 The official labor force statistics use composite
weights, which put greater weights on cohorts who are present in the previous calendar month.
The goal of composite weights is to increase the covariance of estimates from two consecutive
calendar months, therefore reducing the sampling variance of changes.27

B.2. CONSTRUCTION OF THE LINKED SAMPLE
Because of the rotating panel structure, it is possible to link individuals over time. Each
sampled individual could provide up to eight sets of responses.
Individuals and households are identified by unique identifiers. The identifiers have
changed over time, however. Prior to 1994, three identifiers are required for linking individuals
over time: household identifier, household number (identifying any change of occupying
household in a dwelling), and person’s line number (identifying individual within each
household). Starting in 1994, additional information is required to identify a household. In
25

The estimates of individual components in the definition of unemployment in the public-use micro data files
might not match the official BLS definition because some instruments that the BLS uses to recode labor force status
contain information that is not available in the public-use micro data files. However, the final outcome, or the
number of unemployed workers, based on the series of questions from public-use micro data files is very close to the
labor force status coded by the BLS.
26
The matches to the population estimates are done separately for groups with different demographic characteristics,
such as age, sex, race, and ethnicity.
27
The BLS made composite weights available in the micro data files starting in 1998. The two sets of weights yield
very similar estimates of rotation group bias.

53

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

addition to the household number, two more components are combined to obtain the second part
of household identifier: sample identifier and serial suffix to identify extra units.
Past survey redesigns introduced inconsistency in identifiers that prevent accurate linkage
in some years. We identify cohorts with inconsistent identifiers due to changes in sampling
frame. Figure B1 plots the fraction of respondents in a given rotation group who are present in all
eight interviews. For our final linked sample, we exclude cohorts whose average linkage rate
over eight rotation groups is far below the average.28
In addition to systematic changes in household and individual identifier, a small fraction
of the identifiers are not uniquely assigned, and some assignments are not consistent over time.
To deal with the non-uniqueness of identifiers, we exclude observations with duplicate
household and individual identifiers within each calendar month.29 To address the issue of
inconsistent identifiers over time, our sample includes individuals who report consistent
demographic information in all of their interviews. Consistency in demographic information is
defined as having the same reported sex, the same reported race, and reported age not varying by
more than 2 years. Observations with inconsistent demographic information account for about 5
to 10 percent of the weighted population during our sample period.

28

The cutoff point is approximately 40 percent. The final sample excludes cohorts who were first selected into the
sample in 1976, 1977, months between April 1984 and September 1985 (inclusive), months between October 1992
and December 1993 (inclusive), and months between March 1994 and August 1995 (inclusive).
29
Household and individual identifiers are uniquely assigned after 1995. Except for 1976 and 1977, the number of
observations with duplicates identifiers is very low, less than 1 in 1,000.

54

The Evolution of Rotation Group Bias

August 2014

Figure B1: Fraction of respondents presents in all eight interviews.

Notes: The estimates are based on the CPS monthly files from January 1976 to May 2014. The x-axis indicates
interviewing cohort, or the year in which households are first selected into the sample. “Interview 1” (or “Interview
8”) plots the fraction of respondents in the first (or eighth) rotation group who are present in all eight interviews.
“Average” plots the average across all eight groups.

55

