                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE LABOR MARKET IMPACTS OF THE 2010 DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL
              SPILL AND OFFSHORE OIL DRILLING MORATORIUM

                                             Joseph E. Aldy

                                         Working Paper 20409
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20409


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




Susie Chung, Napat Jatusripitak, Brett Long, and Carlos Paez provided excellent research assistance
for this project. Jonathan Abramson, Julia Hein, Juliette Kayyem, Mary Landry, and Pete Neffenger
assisted in the provision of data on the spill and spill response. Ed Glaeser, Josh Goodman, Bill Hogan,
Dick Morgenstern, Erich Muehlegger, Danny Shoag, Rob Stavins and seminar participants at Harvard,
the AERE 2013 Summer Conference Sponsored Sessions, and the IZA 2013 Workshop on Labor Market
Effects of Environmental Policies provided useful comments on an earlier draft. Research support
was provided by the Taubman Center for State and Local Government at the Harvard Kennedy School.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Joseph E. Aldy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Labor Market Impacts of the 2010 Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Oil Drilling
Moratorium
Joseph E. Aldy
NBER Working Paper No. 20409
August 2014
JEL No. J30,J64,Q40

                                             ABSTRACT

In 2010, the Gulf Coast experienced the largest oil spill, the greatest mobilization of spill response
resources, and the first Gulf-wide deepwater drilling moratorium in U.S. history. Taking advantage
of the unexpected nature of the spill and drilling moratorium, I estimate the net effects of these events
on Gulf Coast employment and wages. Despite predictions of major job losses in Louisiana — resulting
from the spill and the drilling moratorium — I find that Louisiana coastal parishes, and oil-intensive
parishes in particular, experienced a net increase in employment and wages. In contrast, Gulf Coast
Florida counties, especially those south of the Panhandle, experienced a decline in employment. Analysis
of accommodation industry employment and wage, business establishment count, sales tax, and commercial
air arrival data likewise show positive economic activity impacts in the oil-intensive coastal parishes
of Louisiana and reduced economic activity along the Non-Panhandle Florida Gulf Coast.


Joseph E. Aldy
Harvard Kennedy School
Taubman 382, Mailbox 57
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
joseph_aldy@hks.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
On April 20, 2010, the Transocean Deepwater Horizon suered a catastrophic

blowout while drilling in a BP lease in the Gulf of Mexico's Macondo Prospect

that resulted in the largest oil spill in U.S. history. Due to the ongoing spill and

concerns about the safety of oshore oil drilling, the U.S. Department of the

Interior suspended oshore deep water oil and gas drilling operations on May

27, 2010, in what became known as the oshore drilling moratorium. The media

portrayed the impacts of these events on local employment, with closed sheries,

idle rigs, as well as boats skimming oil and workers cleaning oiled beaches.

    This paper examines the net impact of the oil spill, spill response, and the

drilling moratorium on employment and wages in the Gulf Coast. The spill and

moratorium represented unexpected events in the Gulf Coast region. Coastal

counties and parishes in this region were expected to bear the vast majority of

the eects of these two events, while inland areas were expected to be largely

unaected. The moratorium was expected to aect Louisiana  with signicant

support of the oshore drilling industry  but not, for example, Florida, which

had no active drilling o of its coastline. The timing and magnitude of the spill

response varied across the states over the course of the spill as well.

    These characteristics of the spill, spill response, and moratorium motivate

an event study dierence-in-dierences strategy to estimate the impacts of these

events on the local labor markets. In this framework, the spill, spill response,

and moratorium are considered exogenous events that  treat the coastal coun-

ties, as dened by their hydrologic characteristics by the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration, in the Gulf region. Given the surprise nature of

these events, they can credibly be characterized as exogenous and hence the

pre-event period should not include anticipatory behavior in the Gulf economy.

I categorized ve Louisiana  oil parishes identied by the U.S. government

as most active in support of oshore drilling activities for  treatment by the

drilling moratorium.

    To estimate the net eects of these events on employment and wages, I use

monthly county/parish-level data (quarterly data for wages) from the Quarterly

Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW). Figure 1 illustrates graphically the

employment levels in the Louisiana oil parishes, the non-oil coastal parishes of

Louisiana, counties on the Florida Gulf Coast, and the control (inland) counties

in the Gulf States and identies the dates of the spill and the drilling mora-

torium. To facilitate comparisons over 2010, I have indexed total employment




                                         2
for these four groups of counties such that they each equal 1.0 in January 2010.

Employment growth among these four groups follows a nearly identical trajec-

tory through April 2010 and then a signicant divergence occurs. Florida Gulf

Coast counties experience a signicant drop in employment from May through

July and then begin to experience employment growth immediately after the

capping of the well (July 15). The non-oil parishes on the Louisiana coast track

quite closely the employment path of the inland counties throughout the spill. In

contrast, the Louisiana oil parishes had eectively at employment throughout

the spill and moratorium and avoided the decline in employment that aected

these other Gulf Coast regions during May, June, and July of 2010.

   In statistical analysis based on 2010 data, I nd that the net employment

eect of the spill, spill response, and moratorium is a fairly precise zero for

most parts of the Gulf Coast during 2010. In particular, the coastal counties

of Texas, Mississippi, and the Florida Panhandle all experienced net job im-

pacts that cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.     Three Gulf Coast

sub-regions experienced statistically signicant changes in employment. I nd

that the most oil-intensive parishes in Louisiana witnessed a 1.2% increase in

employment (95% condence interval, 0.4 to 2.0%), and the Alabama coastal

counties experienced a 1.3% increase in employment as well. In contrast, the

Non-Panhandle Florida counties on the Gulf Coast experienced a 2.7% decrease

in employment (95% condence interval, -1.9 to -3.5%).

   Complementing these employment impacts, I nd that the Louisiana oil

parishes experienced a statistically signicant increase in the average wage of

about 2%.    Likewise, the Alabama coastal counties enjoyed higher wages of

about 4 to 6% during the spill. The rest of the Gulf Coast counties and parishes

experienced economically small and statistically insignicant impacts on wages.

   I undertook an array of robustness checks of the base econometric model.

First, I accounted for seasonality in labor markets by extending the panels to

cover the 2008-2010 period and I permitted seasonality (month xed eects)

to vary by coastal regions and by states in some specications. Second, I em-

ployed a modied denition of coastal counties/parishes. Third, I substituted

U.S. non-Gulf State counties as controls for the inland Gulf State counties and

parishes. Finally, I omitted Texas observations, since the state was eectively

 up current from the spill and largely unaected by the spill events. The ad-

verse employment impacts in the Non-Panhandle Florida coastal counties hold

across nearly all robustness checks. The results for Louisiana parishes are mixed

across the robustness checks, with non-oil parishes experiencing statistically sig-



                                        3
nicant positive employment impacts when accounting for seasonality and with

some variations in geographic controls. The Louisiana oil parishes typically have

either statistically signicant 1-2% employment increases or smaller estimates

that cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.     The positive and statis-

tically signicant wage impacts in the Louisiana oil parishes and the Alabama

hold across virtually all robustness checks.

   I conducted a variety of external validity checks. First, I implemented the

employment and wage models for the mining support industry  expected to

be impacted by the drilling moratorium  and the accommodation industry 

expected to be impacted by the spill and spill response. There is some mixed

evidence of statistical declines in mining support employment in the Louisiana

oil parishes and Alabama coastal counties, but no evidence of adverse impacts

on wages in this industry. The Non-Panhandle Florida coast experienced statis-

tically signicant declines in accommodation industry employment and wages.

Second, I estimated the impacts of the spill on the number of business estab-

lishments, and found statistically signicant increases of 1-5% for Louisiana oil

parishes and non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes across an array of specications,

while Alabama, Mississippi, and all of Gulf Coast Florida experienced statisti-

cally signicant declines in the count of establishments. Third, I investigated

worker migration using IRS tax statistics, but found no statistically signicant

impacts of these events on net migration.      Fourth, I analyzed parish-specic

sales tax data for Louisiana and found a statistically signicant increase of 11%

in sales tax revenues in the Louisiana oil parishes. Fifth, I investigated quarterly

air travel passenger arrivals by airport in the Gulf Coast states, which provides

some evidence of lower air passenger arrivals in Florida Gulf Coast airports than

other airports during this time. I also provide evidence of the magnitude of the

spill response, the positive impact of initial compensation claims on employ-

ment, and the very small take-up of benets available through the rig worker

assistance fund to further illustrate the net labor market impacts of these events.

   The next section synthesizes the relevant literature on local labor market

shocks and describes the predicted labor market impacts reported in the media

during the spill and moratorium in 2010.       The third section outlines the em-

pirical strategy. Section four presents the empirical results for the base models

for employment and wages, followed by an extensive array of robustness and

external validity checks. The nal section concludes.




                                         4
2     Predicted Labor Market Impacts of the Spill
      and Drilling Moratorium
2.1 Local Labor Market Shocks
The local labor markets literature highlights the expected outcomes of an ad-

verse shock to labor demand  such as the shutting down of a shery due to

an oil spill or a drilling moratorium. A negative demand shock should decrease

wages and increase unemployment and, with time, result in out-migration of

workers, who seek better wages elsewhere (Blanchard et al., 1992). The impact

on rms could be mixed, with the initial demand shock causing some rm exit,

but the wage readjustment process leading to in-migration of rms that seek

out low-cost labor and eventually mitigate some of the impact of the negative

shock. Due to the dynamics of migrating workers and rms, Topel (1986) nds

that a transitory shock is likely to have a more pronounced impact on wages

than a permanent shock.

    A positive demand shock  such as a large spill clean-up eort  should in-

crease wages, reduce unemployment, and result in net in-migration of workers.

The positive shock to economic activity could result in short-run rm entry,

although higher wages could discourage long-run entry. In light of worker mi-

gration, the increase in employment under a positive labor demand shock could

reect more jobs for residents and/or more jobs for migrants.
                                                                          1 Enrico (2011)'s

assessment of the local labor market literature notes that empirical evidence on

this question is mixed.

    While the theoretical and empirical literature have been motivated by and

focused on a wide array of local labor market shocks, of particular relevance

to the analysis in this paper is the impact of Hurricane Katrina, one of the

most destructive and deadly hurricanes to strike the Gulf Coast, on the region's

labor markets. In the months following the storm, payroll employment fell by

more than one-third in New Orleans (Groen and Polivka, 2008). The number of

business establishments in Orleans Parish fell nearly 20% in the two years after

the hurricane (Vigdor, 2008). Yet, in contrast to the oil spill, which primarily

shocked demand, Katrina adversely impacted labor supply and demand. Vigdor

(2008) notes that the higher wages and relatively low unemployment a year after

the storm suggests that the reduction in labor supply dominated the decline

   1 During the 2010 oil spill, some Gulf Coast political leaders complained that spill response
jobs went to non-residents.


                                               5
in labor demand. In analysis of individual income tax return data, Deryugina

et al. (2014) nd that the gap in wage earnings between Katrina victims and the

control group had closed by 2007, and non-employment dierences had likewise

closed by 2009. In light of these ndings, in the regression models that control

for seasonality presented below, I focus on panels over the 2008-2010 period (as

opposed to longer panels) to minimize  Katrina eects in my statistical models.

   Since theory cannot unambiguously resolve the net eect of simultaneous

positive and negative demand shocks in a local labor market, I focus on an

empirical analysis of the impact of the spill, spill response, and moratorium

on the Gulf Coast labor markets. If the adverse shocks (spill and moratorium)

dominate the positive shock (spill response), then I would expect a decline in em-

ployment and wages, as well as out-migration and, in the short run, fewer busi-

ness establishments. Before turning to the empirical framework and analysis, I

present some evidence of the potential scope of adverse labor market impacts

predicted in spring and summer 2010 during the spill and drilling moratorium.



2.2 Predicted Labor Market Impacts of the Spill
In the weeks after the Deepwater Horizon sank to the bottom of the Gulf of Mex-

ico, analysts and politicians began to predict the potential employment impacts

of the spill. In May 2010, the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank identied about

130,000 jobs at risk from the spill in the forestry/shing, arts/entertainment/recreation,

and accommodation and food services industries in the Gulf States (Chriszt and

Hammill, 2010). An economist at the University of Central Florida estimated

that 39,000 (195,000) jobs could be lost in Florida if the spill caused a 10%

(50%) decline in tourism (Harrington, 2010). The spill adversely impacted lo-

cal employment through the closing of state and federal Gulf sheries and by

discouraging some tourists from vacationing on the Gulf Coast that summer

(Aldy, 2011).

   Some early evidence suggested that regional tourism, especially in Florida,

would bear adverse impacts from the spill. Oxford Economics (2010) presented

information reecting tourist travel intentions to the Gulf Coast in summer

2010. First, they reported on consumer webpage views for TripAdvisor, which

is the world's most popular travel website. Gulf coast destinations of Clearwater,

Destin, Gulf Shores, Fort Myers Beach, Key Largo, Panama City Beach, and

Pensacola each had changes in TripAdvisor page views in June 2010 relative to

June 2009 ranging between -25% and -52%, while Atlantic coast destinations,




                                        6
such as Daytona Beach, Hilton Head, Miami, Myrtle Beach, and West Palm

Beach experienced changes in page views ranging between -4 and +17%. Oxford

Economics also reported that a June 2010 survey found that 10% of households

intending to travel to the Gulf Coast for vacation had changed their plans as a

result of the oil spill. Oxford Economics (2010) estimated a reduction in tourism

revenues by 12% in the rst year after the beginning of the spill.



2.3 Predicted Labor Market Impacts of the Drilling Mora-
    torium
Within a week of the U.S. government's announcement of the May 27 drilling

moratorium, representatives of the oil and gas industry highlighted potentially

large employment losses (see Table 1). The Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and

Gas Association identied potential job losses in excess of 30,000 (Louisiana

Workforce Commission, 2010). In June, several economists at Louisiana State

University independently estimated moratorium-related job losses in the range

of 10,000  20,000 for the state of Louisiana (Dismukes, 2010; Mason, 2010;

Richardson, 2010).    The U.S. government also employed regional multiplier

models in two analyses: an internal Department of Interior assessment in July

reportedly estimated job losses in excess of 23,000 (Power and Eaton, 2010)

while an interagency working group report published in September estimated

job losses in the 8,000  12,000 range (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2010).

   Senator Mary Landrieu of Louisiana stated that the moratorium  could cost

more jobs than the spill itself  (Condon, 2010). John Hofmeister, the former

CEO of Shell, stated that  50,000 people could lose their jobs (Desel, 2010).

The head of one Florida-based investment rm wrote in his oil spill blog that

 an extended moratorium. . .   will cost up to 200,000 higher-paying jobs in the

oil drilling and service business and that the employment multiplier of 4.7 will

put the total job loss at nearly 1 million permanent employment shrinkage over

the next few years (Kotok, 2010).

   The pre-spill employment data can put these moratorium job loss estimates

in context.   First, about 9,000 rig workers worked on projects in the Gulf of

Mexico covered by the moratorium (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2010). The

total number of workers  onshore and oshore  in the oil and gas industry and

in support services to oil and gas extraction in the Gulf States in April 2010

numbered about 110,000 (BLS, nd).




                                        7
3     Empirical Strategy
The Deepwater Horizon oil spill and the oshore drilling moratorium were two

unprecedented and unexpected events.            With an estimated release of about 5

million barrels of oil over nearly three months, the Deepwater Horizon spill was

some 50 times larger than the second biggest spill in U.S. history, the 1969

Santa Barbara spill (National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil

Spill and Oshore Drilling, 2011).       The scope of the Deepwater Horizon spill

likewise triggered an unprecedented spill response.

    The May 27, 2010 oshore drilling moratorium was also an unexpected event.

In 2009, a bipartisan energy bill passed the Senate Energy and Natural Re-

sources Committee that would have opened up the eastern Gulf of Mexico to

drilling (American Clean Energy Leadership Act, S. 1462).            In March 2010,

President Obama announced a new oshore leasing plan that would also make

available more of the Gulf to oshore drilling. Prior to the spill, political mo-

mentum pointed toward more Gulf of Mexico oshore drilling, not the potential

for restricted access and drilling activities.       A search of GoogleNews, shows

no media articles calling for a moratorium on drilling throughout the Gulf of

Mexico before May 27, 2010.

    The economic impacts of the spill, spill response, and moratorium varied

within and among the Gulf States. Figure 2 illustrates the coastal and inland

counties for each of the ve Gulf States as well as the location of the Deepwater

Horizon oil spill. Coastal counties and parishes in this region bore the vast ma-

jority of the eects of these events, while inland areas were largely unaected.

The moratorium was expected to aect select Louisiana parishes  with signif-

icant support of the oshore drilling industry  but not Florida, which had no

active drilling o of its coastline.

    The timing and magnitude of the spill response varied across the states over

the course of the spill as well.       The spill began with the Deepwater Horizon

explosion on April 20 and the sinking of the rig on April 22. Soon after the rig

collapsed to the bottom of the Gulf of Mexico, remote robots captured video of

oil leaking from the well. Throughout May, BP undertook an array of eorts

to contain the well without immediate success, and by the end of the month

it appeared very likely that the spill would not be stopped until a relief well 

requiring at least three months  intercepted the leaking well some 17,000 feet

below sea level. On May 27, the Department of the Interior issued a six-month

suspension order for deepwater drilling, commonly referred to as the oshore




                                            8
drilling moratorium. On July 15, the leak was capped. On September 19, the

relief well ocially killed the well.     Nearly a month later on October 12, the

Department lifted the drilling moratorium.

   These spatial and temporal characteristics of the spill and moratorium mo-

tivate the empirical framework.         I use a dierence-in-dierences strategy to

estimate the impacts of the spill, spill response, and moratorium on employ-

ment and wages. In this framework, the spill, spill response, and moratorium

are considered exogenous events that  treat coastal counties in the Gulf region

(see Table 2). Given the surprise nature of these events, they can credibly be

characterized as exogenous and hence the pre-event period should not include

anticipatory behavior in the Gulf economy (i.e., relocating shing vessels to the

Atlantic coast in anticipation of the spill or relocating drilling rigs to another

region in anticipation of the moratorium). Expectations that oil could impact

any part of the Gulf Coast  as evident with the discussion above on online

Florida tourism searches and clearly indicated in contemporaneous media cov-

erage of the spill  suggests that all Gulf state coastal counties and parishes

should be considered  treated by the spill.        Coastline incidence of oil ranged

from Cameron Parish, the western-most coastal parish in Louisiana to Wakulla

County, on the eastern edge of the Florida Panhandle.
                                                              2 Spill response activities

focused on these coastlines and nearby waters (as well in the immediate vicinity

of the Deepwater Horizon ), although some spill response eorts originated in

Texas as well. Very little spill response activities occurred in the Non-Panhandle

Florida coastal counties.

   I employ the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's denition

of Gulf of Mexico coastal counties and parishes for Alabama, Florida, Louisiana,

Mississippi, and Texas (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, nd).

These counties are assumed to be  treated by the spill for May through July

2010.   In addition, I isolate the ve Louisiana parishes identied by the U.S.

government as most active in support of oshore drilling activities  Iberia,

Lafayette, Lafourche, St. Mary's, and Terrebonne (Interagency Economic Re-

port 2010).
             3   These are assumed to be treated by the moratorium for June

   2 Refer    to      the     Environmental      Response       Management         Applica-
tion     (ERMA)       Deepwater       Gulf    Response      website      for     geographic
data      on    the      oil   spill:       http://gomex.erma.noaa.gov/erma.html#/x=-
89.37870&y=29.14486&z=6&layers=23036+5723+23566+24402+2725+4155+2174,                   last
accessed Augsut 3, 2014.
   3 Dismukes (2010) estimates that nearly three-quarters of the economic impacts of the
moratorium would be borne by these ve parishes in his multiplier analysis for Louisiana.



                                             9
through October 2010.
                                 4 For the  control group, I employ all non-coastal coun-

ties and parishes in these ve states. Table 3 presents summary statistics on

the number of coastal and inland counties by Gulf State as well as average

employment, weekly wage, and establishment counts.

    Formally, I specify the following regression equations:



                      ln(yit ) = αi + δt + β1[spill]t 1[coastal]i + εit                     (1)




    ln(yit ) = αi + δt + β1[spill]t 1[nonoil − coast]i + γ1[mor]t 1[oil]i + εit             (2)




                          6
                          X
ln(yit ) = αi +δt +             β1[spill]t 1[nonoil−coast]i 1[region]j +γ1[mor]t 1[oil]i +εit
                          j=1
                                                                                            (3)

    in which    y   represents one of two labor market outcomes: (a) total employ-

ment for county       i   in month     t,   and (b) average weekly wage in 2010 dollars for

county   i   in quarter t;
                          5       α   represents county xed eects,    δ   represents month-

year (quarter-year) xed eects in the employment (wage) specications; the

indicator functions        1[spill]   and    1[mor]   take the value of 1 for the months May

through July (oil spill duration) and for the months June through October

(moratorium duration), respectively;
                                                 6 the indicator functions   1[coastal], 1[oil],
1[nonoil−coast] take the value of 1 for NOAA-classied Gulf Coast counties and
parishes, the ve Louisiana  oil parishes of Iberia, Lafayette, Lafourche, Saint

Marys, and Terrebonne, and all coastal counties and parishes except for the ve

oil parishes, respectively; and the indicator function             1[region]   takes the value

of 1 for each of these six regions: Alabama, Panhandle Florida, Non-Panhandle

Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas.                 I estimate the base models with

data for January through October 2010 (I test for sensitivity to panel length

and seasonal controls in the robustness checks). The standard errors are clus-

   4 The appendix    table lists Gulf Coast counties within each treatment category.
   5 I also employ   the quarterly-based specication for establishment count analyses in the
robustness checks below.
   6 For the wage and establishment count analyses, these indicators take the value of 1 for
2010 quarter 3. The spill began in week four of the second quarter, and the moratorium
began in week nine of the second quarter. Given this timing and the likely lag for wage
adjustment, I specify the wage and establishment count models such that the net treatment
of spill, response, and moratorium are assumed to occur in 2010q3.


                                                   10
tered by county/parish to account for potential serial correlation in the data

(Bertrand et al., 2004).

    To implement this model, I employ QCEW monthly county/parish-level em-

ployment and quarterly county/parish-level wage data (BLS, nd). The BLS and

state employment security agencies compile monthly employment and quarterly

wage and establishment data for workers covered by various unemployment in-

surance programs, and hence is eectively a measure of employment provided

by employers. It does not include data on the self-employed, proprietors, armed

forces, domestic workers, and railroad workers. This dataset only permits an

investigation of employment levels; it does not include data on labor force par-

ticipation, unemployment, or unemployment rates.
                                                          7 In addition, the QCEW

provides employment and wage data, for some counties and parishes in this re-

gion, by sector and industry, and I use these data to investigate industry-specic

labor market impacts in the robustness checks.




4     Results
4.1 2010 Panel Analyses of Employment and Wages
Table 4 presents the employment results for estimating equations 1-3.              Equa-

tion 1, which permits an examination of a common treatment of the spill, spill

response, and moratorium on all coastal counties and parishes, shows fairly pre-

cise zero impacts for the Gulf Coast counties. The estimated coecient cannot

be distinguished from zero and the 95% condence interval ranges from about

a 7/10 of 1% decline to a 1/10 of 1% increase in employment.

    The model in column 2 allows for dierential impacts for the ve oil-intensive

parishes of Louisiana and for the rest of the Gulf Coast counties. This model

eectively focuses on the treatment of spill, spill response, and moratorium on

the oil-intensive parishes and the treatment of spill and spill response on the

rest of the Gulf Coast region, which had little economic activity that could

be impacted by the oshore drilling moratorium. Not surprisingly, the non-oil

Gulf Coast counties show similar impacts as the entire Gulf Coast in column 1

results. The oil parishes exhibit a statistically signicant employment increase

of 1.2%.

   7 While the Current Population Survey's Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS)
provides such information at the county-by-month level, the LAUS data are imputed for most
counties and months, in contrast to the QCEW count data.



                                           11
   The model in column 3 provides even greater exibility in estimating the im-

pacts of treatment by the spill, spill response, and moratorium by allowing for

eects to vary by state and sub-state region, including the Louisiana oil parishes.

The results in column 3 illustrate a statistically signicant 1.2% employment

gain in the Louisiana oil parishes, a statistically signicant 1.3% employment

gain in Alabama coastal counties, and a statistically signicant 2.7% employ-

ment decline in Non-Panhandle Florida Gulf Coast counties. Based on average

2009 employment levels in these three regions, these statistically signicant es-

timated impacts translate into about 3,000 more jobs in the oil parishes, 3,000

more jobs in the Alabama coastal counties, and 50,000 fewer jobs in the Florida

coastal counties reecting the net eects of the spill, spill response, and mora-

torium.

   Table 4, columns 4  6, present the results for impacts of these events on the

average weekly wage.    As evident above in the discussion of employment, the

average treatment eect for the Gulf Coast counties as a whole is not statistically

dierent from zero (the 95% condence interval is about +/- 1 %) (column

4). The Louisiana oil parishes experience a statistically signicant increase in

wages of about 2% (columns 5 and 6). Likewise, the Alabama coastal counties

appear to have higher wages, with a statistically signicant estimate of about

4% (column 6). The non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes experience a statistically

signicant 2.5% decline in wages. Both Florida regions, Texas, and Mississippi

experience small and statistically insignicant wage impacts during the oil spill.

Given the evident variation in employment and wage outcomes by state and

sub-state region, I focus on model (3) in the subsequent robustness checks.



4.2 Robustness: Seasonality
To address the concern that the results presented above reect regular seasonal

variations in labor markets, I expanded the analyses to include a longer panel

(2008-2010) and allowed for month (quarter) xed eects to vary between coastal

and non-coastal regions as well as by state. Table 5 presents the employment

impacts for these seasonality robustness checks and includes the model from

column 3 in Table 4 for reference.

   While the oil parishes exhibit a statistically signicant employment increase

of 1  2% in the 2010 panels (columns 1, 3, and 5), the longer panels show

fairly precise zeroes for the oil parishes (columns 2, 4, and 6).   These results

highlight a question for this kind of analysis (and is common to all reduced-




                                        12
form dierence-in-dierences empirical models)  when should the panel start?

The panel could start as early as January 1990 (given the construction of the

public domain QCEW dataset) or as late as April 2010. A longer panel pro-

vides more power to estimate parameters, but if omitted time-varying factors

aect a subset of counties or parishes, then lengthening the panel could aect

the estimation of county/parish xed eects and the treatment eects. For ex-

ample, Hurricane Katrina and post-hurricane rebuilding dierentially impacted

counties and parishes in 2005 and subsequent years. In addition, the increase

in oil prices over 2003-2008, including the sharp run-up in spring and summer

of 2008, could have spurred greater drilling activity and associated support ac-

tivity employment in the oil parishes than in 2010. A longer panel, however,

permits the estimation of seasonal trends in employment that may explain some

of the variation evident in a 2010-only panel. I report panel results for 2008-

2010  long enough to control for seasonality but post-Katrina and after the

local labor market had begun to converge to a new normal, at least as described

in the literature reviewed above in section 2.
                                                    8

    Alabama coastal counties enjoy a statistically signicant employment in-

crease of 1.3 to 2.0% in the 2010 panel (columns 1, 3, and 5), but small, positive,

statistically insignicant eects in the 2008-2010 panel. Non-Panhandle Florida

Gulf Coast counties experience a statistically signicant employment decline of

1.7  2.7% in four of the six specications presented in Table 5 (columns 1,

3, 5, and 6). With longer panels, Texas coastal counties appear to experience

statistically signicant employment gains ranging between 1.5 and 2.0% for the

2008-2010 panel.

    Table 6 presents the seasonality robustness checks for the wage impacts. In

ve of the six specications, Louisiana oil parish wages are statistically signif-

icant and higher than control wages by 2  3%.              Likewise, in ve of the six

specications, Alabama coastal county wages are about 4  6% higher and sta-

tistically signicant. In 2008-2010 panels, Texas coastal county wages are 1.4

 1.9% higher. The statistically signicant decline in non-oil Louisiana coastal

parish wages only holds for two models with the 2010 panel. The two Florida

regions and Mississippi experience small and statistically insignicant wage im-

pacts during the oil spill.

   8 I have also estimated these models with 2007-2010 and 2009-2010 panels, which yield very
similar results to the 2008-2010 panel models.




                                             13
4.3 Robustness: National Controls
The primary empirical strategy in this paper rests on the assumption that the

non-coastal counties and parishes in the Gulf Coast region are not impacted by

the spill, spill response, or moratorium and thus can serve as controls in the

regressions. Given the close proximity many of these counties and parishes have

to the treated coastal region, there may be a risk that the controls are aected by

changes in economic activity in the treatment region. For example, if a worker

lost her job in a treatment county and relocated to a control county where she

took on a new job, then we would have a case in which the employment status of

the individual is unchanged but this empirical framework would estimate a delta

of -2 for employment (for treatment employment minus control employment

during the treatment period).    In a similar way, if a worker quits a job in a

control county so he can move to a treatment county and participate in spill

response, then this approach would again show a change in employment (in this

case a delta of +2) despite the fact that the employment status for the worker

in question is unchanged.

   To address this possible concern, I run the base regressions with a modied

sample.   I exclude all control counties and parishes in the Gulf States and I

add all non-Gulf State counties in the United States. Thus, I use the non-Gulf

Coast region as the control group for the treatment of the spill and moratorium

on the Gulf Coast counties and parishes. This also permits an illustration of

how employment trends in the Gulf Coast region compared with the rest of the

nation during these events.

   Table 7, columns 1 and 2, shows the results for employing national controls

for employment outcomes. In both panels, the Florida coastal regions have a

statistically signicant lower employment of 2 to 4%. Neither the Louisiana oil

parishes nor the Alabama coastal counties show employment impacts statisti-

cally dierent from zero in each of the panels. While the non-oil Louisiana oil

parishes and coastal counties of Mississippi and Texas appear to have statisti-

cally lower employment in the 2010 panel on the order of 1 to 1.5%, these results

do not hold up in the 2008-2010 panel.

   Table 8, columns 1 and 2, presents the results for wage impacts using the

national sample. The Louisiana oil parishes have statistically signicant higher

wages ranging between 2.5  3.2%. Likewise, Alabama has statistically higher

wages in the 5  6% range. There is some evidence of statistically higher wages

in Texas  up to 2%  in the 2008-2010 panel. None of the other regions have




                                        14
wage impacts statistically dierent from zero.



4.4 Robustness: Omit Texas
Texas counties represent about 48% of the sample in the Gulf State statistical

analyses. Texas may not have experienced much of an impact from the oil spill,

since the spill occurred southeast of the boot of Louisiana and the vast majority

of the oil moved to the east and north from the leaking well. To address the

concern that the Texas counties  coastal and inland  may not be appropriate

for inclusion in these statistical analyses, I have run the base regressions with a

four-state Gulf sample that omits coastal and inland counties of Texas.

   Table 7, columns 3 and 4, shows the results for the model runs with this

modied sample. As before, the Louisiana oil parishes and the Alabama coastal

counties have statistically higher employment in the 2010 panel, but not in

the 2008-2010 panel.   The non-oil Louisiana parishes have statistically higher

employment, ranging from about 0.7% to 2.2% in the 2010 and 2008-2010 pan-

els, respectively. The Non-Panhandle Florida coastal counties have statistically

lower employment of about 2.3% in the 2010 panel, although this eect falls and

is not signicant in the 2008-2010 panel. Overall, these results are fairly similar

to those specications that include Texas counties in the regression model.

   Excluding the Texas observations does not qualitatively alter the estimated

wage impacts of the spill, response, and moratorium (Table 8, columns 3 and 4).

Louisiana oil parish wages experience a statistically signicant 2.2% increase,

and the Alabama counties enjoy statistically signicant increases of 4  6%

across these panels as well. There is limited evidence of a statistically signicant

decline in the non-oil Louisiana coastal parish wages, as illustrated in the 2010

panel.   None of the other state-specic coastal wage impacts are statistically

dierent from zero in this  Omit Texas framework.



4.5 Robustness: Denition of Coastal
The base regressions employ the NOAA denition of a coastal county or parish

in the Gulf States. I have also employed a more narrow denition that requires

a county or parish to meaningfully border the Gulf of Mexico. In these analyses,

I have dropped what I now dene as  buer counties and parishes  those that

NOAA identies as coastal but do not have meaningful coastline. This reduces

the sample from 534 to 444 counties and it also eliminates those counties that

may have experienced relatively weak  treatment, when compared to those



                                        15
counties with signicant coastline, and relatively stronger  treatment, when

compared to those counties further inland.

   The Louisiana parishes  oil-intensive and non-oil  have statistically higher

employment in the 2010 panel but not in the 2008-2010 panel (Table 7, columns

5 and 6).   Alabama coastal counties (in this case, Baldwin and Mobile) have

statistically higher employment of 1.9% to 2.7% across the panels, while Non-

Panhandle Florida coastal counties have statistically lower employment of more

than 3% in the two panels. These results illustrate the robustness of the adverse

employment impacts to Florida and potentially highlight the positive employ-

ment impacts to the two Alabama counties sitting on the Gulf Coast.

   For wage eects under this alternative denition of coastal counties and

parishes (Table 8, columns 5 and 6), the oil-intensive Louisiana parishes have

statistically signicant higher wages of about 2% in the panels. Coastal counties

in Non-Panhandle Florida appear to experience a statistically signicant decline

of about 1.4 to 2.3% in these panels. In addition, Alabama appears to benet on

the order of 1.5  2.0% in the average wage. There is no statistically signicant

impact of the spill on non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes in this framework.



4.6 External Validity: Industry-Specic Impacts
To complement the analyses of total employment and wages, I have also es-

timated equation 3 with industry-specic data for the support activities for

mining (NAICS 213, which includes drilling oil and gas wells NAICS 213111)

and accommodation (NAICS 721) industries.        These industry-specic analy-

ses permit further investigation of the impacts of the spill, spill response, and

moratorium on directly aected industries. While additional industries, such as

shing (NAICS 1141), water transportation (NAICS 483), oil and gas drilling

(NAICS 211) would certainly be of interest for this kind of analysis, the cen-

soring of the public domain county-level employment data renders these panels

much too small (3, 20, and 62 counties, respectively, out of 534 in the region).

Table 9 presents the estimated employment and wage impacts for the support

activities for mining and accommodation industries.    As a result of data cen-

soring, the models for support activities for mining industry exclude Florida

counties.

   For the mining support industry, the Louisiana oil parishes, Alabama coastal

counties, and Mississippi coastal counties appear to experience a statistically

signicant decline in employment based on the 2010 panel, but this is robust




                                       16
to extending the panel to 2008-2010 only for Alabama, which suers an 11%

decline.    In contrast, non-oil Louisiana parishes experience a 14% increase in

mining support employment in the longer panel.         Louisiana oil parishes and

Alabama coastal counties also experience a decline in the wage in the mining

support industry based on the 2010 panel, although this eect falls to a statis-

tical zero for each region in the longer panel. Mississippi coastal counties have

a statistically signicant 1.63.3% increase in mining support wages in the two

panels.

   For the accommodation industry, the Louisiana oil parishes have a statisti-

cally signicant increase of nearly 5% in employment, while the non-Panhandle

Florida counties (-4.7%), Mississippi coastal counties (-4.8%), and Texas coastal

counties (-2.7%) experience statistically signicant declines in employment in

the 2010 panel. These results hold only for the non-Panhandle Florida counties

in the 2008-2010 panel, which shows a 3.7% decline in accommodation employ-

ment in these counties. For this industry, again, only the non-Panhandle Florida

counties show a statistically signicant decline in wages, ranging from -3.6 to

-6.2% in the two panels, although there is weak evidence that the Louisiana oil

parishes enjoyed a 4.2 to 4.7% increase in the accommodation industry wage

(statistically signicant at the 10% level in each panel).



4.7 External Validity: Establishment Count
The QCEW provides quarterly counts on the number of business establishments

in each county. I employ equation (3) and replicate the specications as reported

in Table 6 on wages with the natural logarithm of the establishment count as the

dependent variable. Table 10 presents the results for these specications with

quarter, quarter-by-coastal, and quarter-by-state xed eects (in addition to

county xed eects) for 2010 and 2008-2010 panels. As in the wage regressions,

the third quarter of 2010 is considered the  treated quarter in these statistical

analyses.

   In all specications, non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes experience statisti-

cally signicant increases in the establishment count, ranging from about 0.5 to

4%. In all but one specication, the Louisiana oil parishes likewise experience

statistically signicant increases of about 1 to 4%.   In all specications, Pan-

handle Florida and Non-Panhandle Florida experience statistically signicant

declines in establishment count of about 1 to 2% in the former and about 2

to 4% in the latter. In a majority of specications, Alabama and Mississippi




                                        17
coastal counties also experience statistically signicant declines in establishment

count, 3 and 1%, respectively.

   The net positive impacts of these events on Louisiana business establish-

ments is consistent with the zero to positive impacts on employment and wages

for the two Louisiana regions in nearly all specications. Likewise, the adverse

impact on Non-Panhandle Florida coastal business establishments squares with

the nding of a decline in employment across virtually all statistical models.



4.8 External Validity: Migration
The standard models of local labor markets suggest that a negative (posi-

tive) shock that decreases (increases) wages will result in out-migration (in-

migration). To investigate the potential impacts of the spill, spill response, and

drilling moratorium on migration, I use annual migration data provided by the

U.S. Internal Revenue Service (nd) to estimate a version of equation 3. In par-

ticular, I estimate this regression model with an array of migration dependent

variables: net migration (scaled by the non-migration population), the natural

logarithm of in-migration, and the natural logarithm of out-migration. Net mi-

gration reects the net eect of total in-county migration and total out-county

migration for a given year.   Given the annual nature of the data, I consider

the 2010 data for the various coastal counties and parishes as treated, and run

the models with 2009-2010, 2008-2010, and 2007-2010 panels. I also run these

models with various assumptions about xed eects: using year, year-by-state,

and year-by-coastal xed eects (and all with county xed eects) in various

model runs.

   The net migration models consistently show  across panel lengths and var-

ious assumptions over xed eects  no statistically signicant impact of the

spill, spill response, and moratorium on net migration ows in coastal counties

and parishes in the Gulf States. For the in-migration and out-migration models,

there is no evidence that any region, in any specication, experienced a statisti-

cally signicant increase in either in-migration or out-migration. There is some

evidence that Louisiana oil parishes and non-oil Louisiana parishes experienced

statistically signicant declines in in-migration and out-migration.    In almost

all specications, the Florida Panhandle and Non-Panhandle Florida counties

experienced statistically signicant declines in in-migration and out-migration,

with the Non-Panhandle counties having the largest declines (as much as -9%)

of any region.   The reductions in both in- and out-migration may reect un-




                                        18
certainty over the duration and persistence of these events on the local labor

markets.



4.9 External Validity: Sales Tax Revenue
To further corroborate the labor market ndings for Louisiana and Florida,

I separately analyze these states' parish-/county-level sales tax data.
                                                                                            9     The

State of Louisiana reports sales tax revenues by parish for the state general

sales tax on an annual basis for scal years that run from July to June. The

state sales tax rate was 4% over the sample period and across all parishes.
                                                                                                    10

The revenue data are for scal years ending in June of a given calendar year

(Louisiana Department of Revenue, 2010, 2011).                  For this analysis, I conduct

a standard dierence-in-dierences analysis that allows for comparisons across

two time periods: (1) July 2009  June 2010, and (2) July 2010  June 2011; and

comparisons across three groups: (1) non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes, (2) oil

parishes, and (3) inland (control) parishes. Specically, I estimate the following

regression:




ln(revit ) = αi +δt +β1[2010/2011]t 1[nonoil−coast]i +γ1[2010/2011]t 1[oil]i +εit
                                                                                                   (4)

    in which    rev   represents total sales tax revenue for parish          i   in year   t; α   rep-

resents county xed eects;        δ   represents the xed eect for the 2010/2011 year

(the 2009/2010 year xed eect is omitted); the indicator function                  1[2010/2011]
takes the value of 1 for the 2010/2011 tax revenue year; and the other indicator

functions were dened above.

    The oil parishes experienced an increase in sales tax revenues for the July

2010  June 2011 period relative to the previous twelve months. This increase

in tax revenues diers statistically from the non-oil coastal parishes and the

inland parishes, each of which experienced no meaningful change in the level

of revenues.
              11 The dierence-in-dierences estimator using parish-level data to

   9 This analysis focuses on Louisiana and Florida because of the distinctive impacts of the
spill, response, and moratorium on these two states and the availability of public use sales tax
data.
  10 Technically, the 4% state general sales tax consists of a 3.97% state sales tax and a 0.03%
Louisiana Tourism Promotion District sales tax. The revenue data presented covers only the
state sales tax; it does not include parish or city-established sales tax revenues.
  11 A Wald test of the hypothesis that β̂ = γ̂ is rejected at the 1% level, and γ̂ is statistically
signicant at the 1% level.



                                                19
compare the before and after time periods yields a statistically signicant 11%

increase in sales tax revenue for the oil parishes relative to the inland parishes.

     The State of Florida reports county sales tax data on a monthly basis.
                                                                                   12 I

use gross sales subject to the state sales tax in a specication similar to (4):




       ln(salesit ) = αi + δt + β1[spill]t 1[pan]i + γ1[spill]t 1[nonpan]i + εit    (5)



     in which   sales represents gross sales subject to the state sales tax for county
i   in month    t; α   represents county xed eects;   δ   represents month and year

xed eects; and the other indicator functions were dened above. Given the

seasonal nature of Florida tourism, I estimate equation (5) with a 2010 sample

(January to July) and January 2009  July 2010 and January 2008  July

2010 samples. The Panhandle counties experienced a 12-15% increase in gross

sales relative to the non-Gulf Florida counties during the spill months, and this

impact is statistically dierent from zero at the 1% level in all three sample

periods. In contrast, Non-Panhandle Gulf coast counties experienced relatively

small and statistically insignicant sales increases (1.5-2.6%) during the spill.

Wald tests of the hypothesis that the coecient estimates on the Panhandle and

Non-Panhandle indicator variables are equal are rejected at the 1% signicance

level in all three sample periods.



4.10 External Validity: Commercial Air Travel
The labor market impacts presented above suggest that tourism may have been

adversely impacted by the oil spill, especially in Florida. To further investigate

these impacts, I employ data compiled by the U.S. Bureau of Transportation

Statistics (nd), which tracks commercial air travel, including number of pas-

senger arrivals by airport by quarter.       According to the BTS, there were 115

airports in the ve Gulf States receiving commercial air passengers in the sec-

ond quarter of 2010. For this analysis, I limit the sample of airports to those

with at least 50,000 passenger arrivals per quarter, which corresponds to about

four daily arrivals of a Boeing 737-sized aircraft. This restriction drops a num-

ber of military installations that occasionally receive civilian arrivals and very

small airports.        The resulting sample includes 32 airports that received more

  12 I    accessed    Florida     county-by-month     sales   tax      data        from
http://dor.myorida.com/dor/taxes/colls_from_7_2003.html on August 12, 2012.



                                            20
than 97% of all commercial air passengers in these ve states in the second

quarter of 2010. Coastal counties and parishes host 15 of these airports.

   To evaluate the potential impacts of the oil spill on commercial air travel, I

estimate the following regressions:



                  ln(passit ) + αi + δt + β1[spill]t 1[coastal]i + εit                  (6)




 ln(passit ) + αi + δt + β1[spill]t 1[F Lcoast]i + γ1[spill]t 1[nonF Lcoast]i + εit     (7)



   in which   pass   represents the total number of arrivals for airport     i   in quarter

t; α   represents airport xed eects;    δ   represents quarter-year xed eects; the

indicator function   1[spill]   takes the value of 1 for the third quarter of 2010; the

indicator functions    1[coastal], 1[F Lcoast],    and   1[nonF Lcoast]   take the value

of 1 for airports in NOAA-classied Gulf Coast counties and parishes, airports

in Florida coastal counties, and airports in non-Florida Gulf Coast counties,

respectively. I estimate the models with varying lengths of panels, ranging from

2008:Q1 through 2010:Q3 to only the rst three quarters of the 2010 calendar

year. The standard errors are clustered by airport.

   For the specications of equation 5, there is a modest but statistically

insignicant reduction (-6%) in commercial air travel passengers for the oil

spill quarter. By estimating dierential impacts for Florida versus non-Florida

coastal airports (equation 6), there is some weak evidence that Florida airports

are adversely impacted by the oil spill.           With the 2010 panel, I estimate a

17% decline in Florida coastal airport passenger arrivals, although this estimate

cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.         Using the 2007-2010, panel I

estimate a similar 15% decline that is statistically dierent from zero at the

10% level.



4.11 External Validity: Spill Response Labor Mobiliza-
     tion
The unprecedented mobilization of spill response resources  including more

than 800 specialized skimmers, 120 aircraft, 8,000 vessels, and nearly 50,000 re-

sponders (Aldy, 2011)  provided employment opportunities that could counter

the potential adverse eects of the spill and the moratorium.              While many

of these responders represented workers relocating temporarily to address the



                                              21
spill, some were local displaced workers.         For example, shermen who faced

closed state and federal sheries during the spill could participate in the Ves-

sels of Opportunity program. Through this program BP paid $1,200 - $3,000

per day per vessel for skimming, booming, and related response operations (Na-

tional Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Oshore Drilling,

2011).   Between April and July 2010, the U.S. Coast Guard expended nearly

$600 million on spill response, with more than $100 million each for personnel

and cutters as well as more than $250 million for other federal, state, and local

government clean-up eorts (National Pollution Funds Center, 2013).
                                                                                13



4.12 External Validity: BP Clean-up Expenditures and
     Economic Damage Compensation
The clean-up activities and compensation for economic damages provided by BP

could counter at least some of the impacts of lost income on economic activity.

BP's expenditures in the Gulf States for damage compensation and clean-up

were quite signicant. By June 1, 2010, BP reported spending nearly a billion

dollars for clean-up, and the clean-up tab increased to more than $3 billion by

July 5. On September 17, BP reported clean-up spending of nearly $10 billion.

BP reported compensation for damage claims of $40 million through June 1,

$147 million through July 5, and nearly $400 million through August 23, when

BP turned over the claims process to the independent Gulf Coast Claims Facility

(GCCF) created as a part of the June 16 agreement with the White House

(Aldy, 2011). On September 21, 2010, the GCCF reported paying out nearly

$300 million in its rst month in operation, with 36% and 29% of the funds to

Louisiana and Florida claimants, respectively (GCCF, 2010). Fishing industry

claims represented about $120 million followed by nearly $75 million in claims

from food, beverage, and lodging industries. By May 2012, the GCCF had paid

out about $6.5 billion in claims, with the food, beverage, and lodging industry

claims in excess of $1 billion representing the largest industry category.             By

then, Florida's claims amounted to a 38% share of all fund payments, followed

by Louisiana's share of 28% (GCCF, 2012).

   The compensation payments for oil-spill related damages are similar to some

forms of targeted scal stimulus. Drawing from Feyrer and Sacerdote (2011),

I estimate the relationship between compensation claims and the change in

  13 The Coast Guard sought and received compensation for these clean-up and spill response
expenditures from BP, the responsible party as specied under the Oil Pollution Act.


                                            22
employment using county-specic claims data from the September 2010 GCCF

report:

                                                                   
                      employment                       compensation
              ∆                             =α+β                              + θj + εi           (8)
                       population       i                population       i

    in which the dependent variable is the dierence in the ratio of employment

to total county population over September 2009  September 2010 (using a

12-month dierence to control for seasonality), the key variable of interest is

the ratio of compensation claims to total county population in September 2010,

and   θ   represents state xed eects to control for state-specic drivers of em-

ployment. With compensation per capita measured in $100,000 per person, my

estimated    β̂   of 2.93 (with a robust standard error of 0.42) suggests an implicit

scal multiplier of about $34,000 per job, which is relatively small given the

scal multiplier literature (see Council of Economic Advisers, 2014). This ap-

proach suers from an obvious endogeneity problem: compensation claims are

larger in counties suering greater economic damages from the spill.
                                                                                          14 Such an

endogeneity problem, however, should bias the coecient estimate down and

increase the dollars per job implicit multiplier.            My model likely suers from

another source of endogeneity: counties suering signicant economic damages

from the spill also experienced a signicant inux of spill response resources and

activities, as detailed above. While this model is not statistically identied, the

apparent bias is consistent with various factors increasing employment in some

of the worst hit parts of the spill, especially in Louisiana and Alabama.
                                                                                             15



4.13 External Validity: Rig Worker Assistance Fund
On June 16, 2010, as a part of a larger agreement, the White House and BP

agreed that BP would set aside $100 million for a Rig Workers Assistance Fund

(RWAF) to benet any rig workers laid o as a result of the drilling moratorium.

BP allocated the $100 million to the Baton Rouge Area Foundation, which was

responsible for designing and implementing the assistance fund.                       The RWAF

made grants, ranging from $3,000 to $30,000, available to individuals who had

  14 Feyrer and Sacerdote employ political instruments based on the seniority of Congressional
delegations in their stimulus analyses. There is no obvious analog to the oil spill.
  15 The average county-level per capita compensation payments are comparable across the
Alabama coast, Florida panhandle, and Louisiana coast (oil and non-oil parishes). Payments
are about a factor of three lower in the Mississippi coast, and an order of magnitude lower
in the Non-Panhandle Florida gulf coast counties and the Texas coast. Inland compensation
payments are, on average, three orders of magnitude smaller.



                                               23
been working on deepwater drilling rigs as of May 6, 2010 and had lost their

jobs. The RWAF took a rst round of applications in September 2010 and paid

out grants totaling $5.6 million to 347 workers. To put these claims for lost jobs

in context, 347 rig workers would sta less than two deepwater drilling rigs like

the Deepwater Horizon.

    The RWAF opened a second round in the Spring of 2011 to provide grants

to those individuals who lost their jobs in a position that supported deepwater

drilling rigs, such as shipyard workers, caterers, drilling support operations, etc.

In this second round, the RWAF paid out about $5.8 million to 408 workers.

These relatively modest claims for displaced rig support workers are consistent

with the evidence that few rigs left the Gulf of Mexico:        only ve of the 46

rigs operating on April 20, 2010 had left the region as of September 10, 2010

(U.S. Department of Commerce, 2010). Anecdotal evidence indicates that  oil

companies used the enforced suspension to service and upgrade their drilling

equipment, keeping shipyards and service companies busy (Broder and Krauss,

2010).




5    Conclusions
The April 20, 2010 explosion on the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig precipi-

tated several economic shocks to the Gulf Coast region: an unprecedented U.S.

oil spill, an unprecedented mobilization of spill response resources, and an un-

precedented moratorium on deepwater drilling. This paper has investigated the

impact of these shocks on employment and wages in the Gulf Coast region.

    Non-Panhandle Florida gulf coast employment fell during the oil spill, as

evident across panels and various robustness checks. The analysis for the ac-

commodations industry provides additional evidence of the adverse impact of

the spill on Non-Panhandle Florida coastal employment in a tourism-oriented

industry. The evaluation of commercial air passenger arrivals also suggests evi-

dence of a decline in tourism in the Florida coast as a result of the spill. A casual

comparison of the Florida Panhandle  treated by the spill and spill response 

to the Non-Panhandle Florida coast  treated by only the spill  could imply

a positive employment impact of 1 to 2% of total employment associated with

spill response.

    The analysis of employment shows little adverse impact in Louisiana, the

state closest to the leaking well in the Macondo Prospect of the Gulf of Mexico.




                                         24
The various statistical models illustrate either statistically signicant increases

in employment in the oil parishes (2010 panel) and the non-oil coastal parishes

(2008-2010 panel) or small eects (point estimates < |0.5%|) that are statisti-

cally indistinguishable from zero. Figure 3 presents the estimated employment

impacts for each coastal region based on the 2010 panel model (Table 5, column

1; left graph) and the 2008-2010 panel model (Table 5, column 2; right graph).

These graphs show the signicant adverse impacts in the Non-Panhandle Florida

coastal counties in contrast with the rest of the Gulf Coast region. The Louisiana

oil parishes also enjoyed a statistically signicant increase in the average wage

across all panels and virtually all robustness checks, and the oil parishes and

non-oil Louisiana parishes alike experienced a statistically signicant increase

in the number of business establishments. Complementary analyses of sales tax

revenues in Louisiana indicate that the oil parishes enjoyed greater levels of

economic activity during the spill, spill response, and moratorium than non-oil

coastal parishes and inland parishes in Louisiana. In aggregate, this evidence

suggests a net positive labor market shock to the oil parishes and a net zero to

positive shock to the non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes during the period of the

spill and moratorium.
                          16

    The results of these statistical analyses for the Louisiana parishes dier sig-

nicantly from the predictions made with various state and regional multiplier

models employed to assess the impacts of the drilling moratorium. A number

of analysts quickly undertook multiplier analysis of the moratorium after its

announcement. None of these analysts employed their modeling tools to evalu-

ate the employment and economic activity impacts of the spill itself or the spill

response.   Figure 4 presents the estimated combined employment impacts for

all Louisiana coastal parishes (oil parishes and the non-oil parishes) based on

the estimated 2010 and 2008-2010 panel models (Table 5, columns 1 and 2).

The net eect of the spill, spill response, and drilling moratorium resulted in

a statistically signicant increase of about 6,400  20,000 in coastal Louisiana

employment relative to the counterfactual.            All of the predicted negative im-

  16 A casual comparison of the oil parishes (treated by spill, spill response, and moratorium)
to the non-oil Louisiana coastal parishes (treated by spill and spill response) would result in
an inconclusive assessment of the incremental impact of the moratorium. In some statistical
models, the comparison would suggest that the drilling moratorium increased jobs and other
models would yield the opposite conclusion. In virtually all wage models, the comparison
would suggest a net positive impact of the moratorium on labor compensation. The more likely
outcome is that the intensity of spill response activity centered more on the oil parishes than
non-oil parishes and the moratorium, as evident in the limited take-up of benets available
through the Rig Worker Assistance Fund, had little economic impact.



                                              25
pacts on employment from the published 2010 analyses fall outside the 95%

condence intervals of these models. The estimated employment losses in the

ex ante multiplier models, in comparison to employment gains in the ex post

statistical analysis  and for that matter, simple graphical analysis in Figure 1 

suggests several shortcomings of the multiplier tools. First, the ceteris paribus

assumption made in the drilling moratorium multiplier analyses did not appro-

priately represent the economic environment in the Gulf Coast region during

the summer of 2010. Everything else was not equal; a signicant inux of spill

response resources provided a source of income and employment for at least

some of those displaced by the spill and the moratorium. Second, these multi-

plier models operated as if a signicant number of drilling rigs would relocate

to other regions and layo a signicant number of workers. This did not pan

out, perhaps in part resulting from the uncertainty about future government

regulation  including the length of the moratorium  in the Gulf of Mexico.

   These results yield several policy implications. First, a signicant pulse of

resources in spill response appears to oset much of the adverse impacts of the

spill. This is not a determination that the optimal level of spill response was

pursued, but to simply note that the spill response delivers an array of imme-

diate and longer-term economic and environmental benets.         In other words,

spill response represents a kind of economic stimulus that creates employment

opportunities, not unlike conventional scal stimulus.     Second, the ambiguity

about the length of the drilling moratorium may have mitigated some of the

adverse impacts of the drilling moratorium.     Throughout what was originally

billed as a 6-month moratorium, Department of the Interior ocials noted that

it could end early (and in fact, the moratorium ended more than one month

early). This uncertainty may have created an incentive for rig owners to wait,

not unlike how uncertainty associated with an irreversible investment can cre-

ate value in waiting for new information.     Third, multiplier analyses that do

not characterize the complexity and temporal attributes of an economic shock

may be uninformative and potentially biased for policy deliberations.       To be

fair, multiplier models provide analysts with a tool to conduct ex ante analysis

premised on a few assumptions about the economic environment that is, by

denition, not available through ex post statistical analysis of employment and

wage data. Just as scientic models of the fate of oil spilled from the Macondo

Prospect would deliver misleading predictions if they failed to account for skim-

ming, dispersant applications, deepwater containment, boom deployment, and

other means of mitigating the eects of the spill, economic models that, by as-



                                        26
sumption, fail to account for the economic and employment impacts of response

activities would also produce misleading predictions. Finally, the net positive

labor market impacts in the regions exposed to the most substantial clean-up

activity and the net negative labor market impacts in those regions with the

least clean-up activity illustrate how a rapid, signicant infusion of resources in

response to a labor market shock, such as a natural or human-caused disaster,

can mitigate the shock's adverse impacts to labor income and participation.




                                        27
References
Aldy, J. E. (2011). Real-time economic analysis and policy development during
  the bp deepwater horizon oil spill. Vand. L. Rev. 64, 17951817.


Bertrand, M., E. Duo, and S. Mullainathan (2004). How much should we trust
  dierences-in-dierences estimates?               Quarterly Journal of Economics 119,
  249275.


Blanchard, O. J., L. F. Katz, R. E. Hall, and B. Eichengreen (1992). Regional
  evolutions. Brookings papers on economic activity , 175.


BLS (n.d.). Quarterly census of employment and wages. Data, Bureau of Labor
  Statistics, Washington, DC.            ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/
  cew/beta/.
Broder, J. and C. Krauss (2010).              Job losses over drilling ban fail to ma-
  terialize.    The New York Times .           [Online; posted 24-August-2010]        http:
  //www.nytimes.com/2010/08/25/us/25drill.html?_r=0.
Chriszt, M. and M. Hammill (2010).                 Estimating the oil spill's impact in the
  gulf.                              http://macroblog.typepad.com/
            Technical report, Atlanta, GA.
  macroblog/2010/05/estimating-the-oil-spills-impact-in-the-gulf.
  html.
Condon, S. (2010). Mary landrieu: Drilling moratorium could cost more jobs
  than oil spill. CBS News . [Online; posted 14-July-2014]              http://tinyurl.
  com/l3vv3a7.
Council of Economic Advisers (2014, February). The economic impact of the
  american recovery and reinvestment act: ve years later. Report to congress,
  Executive Oce of the President.


Deryugina, T., L. Kawano, and S. Levitt (2014, July). The economic impact
  of hurricane katrina on its victims:              evidence from individual tax returns.
  Working paper, University of Illinois.


Desel, J. (2010).        Ex-shell ceo:    Job loss from gulf oil spill could top 50,000.
                                       http://www.kens5.com/news/
  KENS5 News . [Online; posted 2-June-2010]
  Ex-Shell-CEO-Job-loss-from-Gulf-oil-spill-could-top-50000-95400514.
  html.
Dismukes,      D.   E.   (2010).    Deepwater        moratorium:     Overview   of   impacts
  for     louisiana.      Technical      report,    Baton   Rouge,   LA.     http://www.
  rallyforeconomicsurvival.com/PDF/DISMUKES.pdf.
Enrico, M. (2011). Local labor markets. Handbook of labor economics 4, 1237
  1313.




                                               28
Feyrer, J. and B. Sacerdote (2011). Did the stimulus stimulate? real time esti-
  mates of the eects of the american recovery and reinvestment act. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


GCCF       (2010).       Gccf    program   statistics          overall    summary.          Techni-
  cal     report. https://web.archive.org/web/20100923042450/http:
  //gulfcoastclaimsfacility.com/GCCF_Overall_Status_Report_
  09-21-2010.pdf.
GCCF (2012).  Overall program statistics. Technical report. https://web.
  archive.org/web/20120515193036/http://gulfcoastclaimsfacility.
  com/GCCF_Overall_Status_Report.pdf.
Groen, J. A. and A. E. Polivka (2008). The eect of hurricane katrina on the
  labor market outcomes of evacuees. The American Economic Review , 4348.


Harrington,         J.   (2010).         Tracking       oil     spill     job    losses    a    slip-
  pery     task.         The    Tampa    Bay    Times .          [Online;       posted    17-June-
  2010]         http://www.tampabay.com/news/business/workinglife/
  tracking-oil-spill-job-losses-a-slippery-task/1103427.
Kotok, D. (2010). Oil slickonomics: Part 8, chemotherapy in the gulf of mex-
  ico. [Online; accessed 17-June-2010]          http://www.cumber.com/commentary.
  aspx?file=062010.asp.
Louisiana    Department         of   Revenue   (2010).        Annual      tax   collection     report
  09-10.       Technical       report,   Louisiana   Department            of   Revenue,       Baton
  Rouge, LA.  http://www.revenue.louisiana.gov/forms/publications/
  TCReport(09.10)Final.pdf.
Louisiana Department of Revenue (2011).                  Annual tax collection report 10-
                                     http://revenue.louisiana.gov/
  11. Technical report, Baton Rouge, LA.
  forms/publications/TCReport10.11(Final)i.pdf.
Louisiana     Workforce         Commission      (2010).             Crisis      caused    by     the
  moratorium.              Technical     report,     Baton         Rouge,       LA.            http:
  //www.rallyforeconomicsurvival.com/PDF/Eysink%20Louisiana%
  20Moratorium%20PPT%2025june%20920.ppt%20[Read-Only].pdf.
Mason, J. R. (2010).            The economic cost of a moratorium on oshore oil
  and gas exploration to the gulf region.                     Technical report,       Washington,
  DC.  http://www.saveusenergyjobs.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/
  The_Economic_Cost_of_a_Moratorium_on_Offshort%20_Oil_and_Gas_
  Exploration_to_the_Gulf_Region.pdf.
National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Oshore
  Drilling (2011). Deep water: The gulf oil disaster and the future of oshore
  drilling, report to the president. Technical report, Washington, DC.




                                               29
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (n.d). List of coastal counties
  for the bureau of the census statistical abstract series.                           Technical report.
  http://www.census.gov/geo/landview/lv6help/coastal_cty.pdf.
National Pollution Funds Center (2013). Fpn n10036 mississippi canyon block
  252 daily nancial summary. Technical report. Provided by Jonathan Abram-
  son, Regional Manager, U.S. Coast Guard National Pollution Funds Center,
  via email January 9, 2013.


Oxford    Economics          (2010).         Potential       impact       of   the   gulf    oil   spill   on
  tourism:     Report prepared for the u.s. travel association.                             Technical re-
  port.  http://www.ustravel.org/sites/default/files/page/2009/11/
  Gulf_Oil_Spill_Analysis_Oxford_Economics_710.pdf.
Power, S. and L. Eaton (2010). U.s. saw drill ban killing many jobs. The Wall
                [Online; posted 20-August-2010] http://online.wsj.com/
  Street Journal .
  article/SB10001424052748704488404575441760384563880.html.
Richardson,     J.        (2010).         Economic         impact    of    oshore     moratorium          on
  louisiana.          Technical           report,     Baton       Rouge,       LA.          http://www.
  rallyforeconomicsurvival.com/PDF/Richardson.pdf.
Topel, R. H. (1986). Local labor markets. The Journal of Political Economy ,
  S111S143.


U.S.   Bureau        of     Transportation           Statistics     (n.d.).          Air    carrier    sum-
  mary:        T3:         U.s.     air    carrier           http:
                                                       airport      activity     statistics.
  //www.transtats.bts.gov/DL_SelectFields.asp?Table_ID=273&DB_
  Short_Name=Air%20Carrier%20Summary.
U.S. Department of Commerce (2010). Estimating the economic eects of the
  deepwater drilling moratorium on the gulf coast economy. Technical report,
  Washington, DC. Interagency Economic Report.


U.S. Internal Revenue Service (n.d.).                  Soi tax stats  migration data.                http:
  //www.irs.gov/uac/SOI-Tax-Stats-Migration-Data.
Vigdor, J. (2008). The economic aftermath of hurricane katrina. The Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 22 (4), 135154.




                                                      30
Figures and Tables

Figure 1:   2010 Employment for Oil Parishes,     Non-Oil Louisiana Coastal
Parishes, Florida Coastal Counties, Control (Inland) Counties




Source: Constructed by author using QCEW employment data for total covered
employment across all industries.




                                     31
     Figure 2: Gulf Coast Region, Coastal Counties and Parishes, and the Louisiana Oil Parishes
32
                                   Figure 3: Estimated Employment Impacts by Coastal Region
33




     Notes: The employment estimates are based on the 2010 panel model presented in Table 5 column 1 (left) and the 2008-2010
     panel model presented in Table 5 column 2 (right) and average 2009 employment. The 95% condence intervals are presented
     as error bars.
     Figure 4: Estimated Louisiana Employment Impacts in Statistical Models and Ex Ante Predicted Employment Impacts from
     2010
34




     Notes:   The Model `10 and Model `08-`10 estimates are based on the estimated combined employment impact for non-oil
     Louisiana coastal parishes and Louisiana oil parishes for the 2010 panel and 2008-2010 models presented in Table 5, columns
     1 and 2, respectively, and average 2009 employment. The 95% condence intervals are presented as error bars for these two
     statistical model estimates. Condence intervals or other representations of the distribution around the central estimates are
     not available from the sources published in 2010.
                    Table 1: Ex Ante Estimates of the Employment Impacts of the Oshore Drilling Moratorium



     Estimated Job Loss       Region      Source
           8,169            Gulf States   Mason (2010)
           9,462            Louisiana     Dismukes (2010)
           17,464           Louisiana     Richardson (2010)
           23,247          Not Specied   Department of the Interior (DOI; Power and Eaton (2010))
           30,000           Louisiana     Louisiana Mid-Continent Oil and Gas Association (LMCOGA)
           50,000          Not Specied   Quoted by John Hofmeister, former CEO, Shell (Desel (2010))
     200,000-1,000,000     Not Specied   Kotok (2010)
35
                                    Table 2: Treatment by 2010 Spill-Related Exogenous Shocks



     Region                                    Oil Spill   Spill Response   Oshore Drilling Moratorium
     Alabama Coastal Counties                     X              X
     Florida Panhandle Coastal Counties           X              X
     Florida Non-Panhandle Coastal Counties       X
     Louisiana Oil Parishes                       X              X                      X
     Louisiana Non-Oil Coastal Parishes           X              X
     Mississippi Coastal Counties                 X              X
     Texas Coastal Counties                       X              X
     Gulf Coast Inland Counties
36
           Table 3: Number of Counties and Average County Employment, Wages, and Establishments in 2009, Gulf States
                          Number of Counties     Employment (1000s)      Weekly Wage (2010$)     Establishments (1000s)
      Region              Coastal     Inland     Coastal      Inland     Coastal      Inland     Coastal       Inland
      Gulf Coast States     139         395         57          36         693         648          3.7          2.4
                                                   (182)      (121)       (139)       (138)        (9.6)        (7.9)
      Alabama                 8          59         34          26         681         655          2.4          1.6
                                                   (53)        (51)       (134)       (121)        (3.2)        (2.8)
      Florida                40         27*         66         163         645         720          5.3         13.7
                                                   (111)      (243)        (87)       (145)        (8.1)       (20.4)
      Panhandle              18                     29                     630                      2.1
                                                   (42)                    (72)                    (2.7)
      Non-Panhandle          22                     95                     657                      7.9
37




                                                   (139)                   (96)                    (9.9)
      Louisiana              38          26         39          14         772         634          2.6          1.0
                                                   (57)        (25)       (153)       (146)        (3.6)        (1.6)
      Oil Parish              5                     56                     850                      3.6
                                                   (39)                    (36)                    (2.8)
      Non-Oil Parish         33                     36                     760                      2.4
                                                   (59)                   (161)                    (3.7)
      Mississippi            12          70         18          12         618         585          1.1          0.8
                                                   (24)        (18)       (127)        (92)        (1.2)        (1.2)
      Texas                  41         213         81          32         692         658          4.2          1.8
                                                   (308)      (128)       (138)       (145)       (15.2)        (6.4)
     Source: BLS (nd).
     Notes: Standard deviations presented in parentheses. * Some  inland Florida counties refer to those on the Atlantic coast.
                      Table 4: Estimated Employment and Wage Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, 2010
                                           (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)        (5)        (6)
      Region                        ln(employment)      ln(employment)   ln(employment)   ln(wage)   ln(wage)   ln(wage)
      Gulf Coast                         -0.0032                                          -0.0016
                                        (0.0020)                                          (0.0051)
      Gulf Coast ex Oil Parishes                            -0.0034                                  -0.0024
                                                            (0.0021)                                 (0.0052)
      Oil Parishes                                         0.012***         0.012***                 0.021***   0.020***
                                                            (0.0040)        (0.0040)                 (0.0044)   (0.0043)
      LA Coast ex Oil Parishes                                               0.0026                             -0.025**
                                                                            (0.0025)                            (0.012)
      AL Coast                                                              0.013**                             0.038**
                                                                            (0.0061)                            (0.016)
38




      FL Panhandle Coast                                                    -0.0075                             -0.0013
                                                                            (0.0048)                            (0.0011)
      FL Non-Panhandle Coast                                               -0.027***                            -0.0079
                                                                            (0.0040)                            (0.012)
      MS Coast                                                              -0.0016                              -0.015
                                                                            (0.0054)                            (0.016)
      TX Coast                                                               0.0026                             -0.0022
                                                                            (0.0029)                            (0.0066)
      Sample Period                       2010                2010           2010          2010       2010       2010
      N(counties)                          534                534             534           534        534        534
      N                                   5,340              5,340           5,340         1,602      1,602      1,602
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and month (or quarter). ***,
     **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels.
              Table 5: Estimated Employment Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, Seasonality Robustness Checks
                                          (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)                (6)
      Region                      ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment)
      Oil Parishes                    0.012***            -0.0021          0.022***             0.0030           0.010***             -0.0050
                                      (0.0040)           (0.0074)           (0.0048)          (0.0076)            (0.0038)           (0.0074)
       LA Coast ex Oil Parishes         0.0026            0.012**          0.0064**           0.016***            0.0045*            0.011**
                                      (0.0025)           (0.0051)           (0.0030)          (0.0055)            (0.0023)           (0.0050)
       AL Coast                       0.013**              0.0022          0.017***             0.0061           0.020***             0.0026
                                      (0.0061)            (0.021)           (0.0063)           (0.021)            (0.0060)            (0.020)
       FL Panhandle Coast              -0.0075            -0.0056            -0.0036           -0.0011             -0.0032            -0.0052
                                      (0.0048)           (0.0065)           (0.0051)          (0.0066)            (0.0047)           (0.0065)
39




       FL Non-Panhandle Coast        -0.027***            -0.017*          -0.023***            -0.013           -0.023***           -0.017**
                                      (0.0040)           (0.0086)           (0.0043)          (0.0090)            (0.0039)           (0.0085)
       MS Coast                        -0.0016            -0.0053             0.0022           -0.0014             -0.0020            -0.0064
                                      (0.0054)            (0.013)           (0.0056)          (0.0013)            (0.0053)           (0.0013)
       TX Coast                         0.0026           0.016***           0.0064*           0.020***            -0.00012           0.015***
                                      (0.0029)           (0.0053)           (0.0035)          (0.0057)            (0.0030)           (0.0053)
       Sample Period                     2010           2008-2010              2010          2008-2010          2008-2010           2008-2010
       Seasonal Eects                          Month                             Month-by-Coastal                       Month-by-State
       N                                5,340              18,156             5,340             18,156              5,340             18,156
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and month (2010 panel) or county, month,
     and year (2008-2010 panel). Each sample includes 534 counties/parishes. ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10%
     levels.
                 Table 6: Estimated Wage Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, Seasonality Robustness Checks
                                     (1)             (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
      Region                      ln(wage)     ln(wage)    ln(wage)    ln(wage)    ln(wage)     ln(wage)
      Oil Parishes                0.020***      0.020**     0.0083     0.025***    0.030***     0.020**
                                  (0.0043)     (0.0087)    (0.0095)    (0.0088)    (0.0040)     (0.0087)
      LA Coast ex Oil Parishes    -0.025**      -0.0032    -0.038***    -0.0020     -0.0097     -0.0036
                                   (0.012)     (0.0083)     (0.013)    (0.0081)     (0.012)     (0.0083)
      AL Coast                     0.038**     0.058***      0.026     0.063***    0.060***     0.054***
                                   (0.016)      (0.012)     (0.018)     (0.012)     (0.015)      (0.012)
      FL Panhandle Coast           -0.0013      0.0031      -0.013      0.0080       0.015       0.0010
                                  (0.0011)     (0.0083)     (0.014)    (0.0081)     (0.011)     (0.0083)
40




      FL Non-Panhandle Coast       -0.0079      -0.0014     -0.020      0.0034      0.0083      -0.0035
                                   (0.012)     (0.0073)     (0.014)    (0.0068)     (0.011)     (0.0073)
      MS Coast                     -0.015       -0.0051     -0.027     -0.00026     -0.011      -0.00029
                                   (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.018)     (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.014)
      TX Coast                     -0.0022     0.014***     -0.014     0.019***     -0.0040     0.018***
                                  (0.0066)     (0.0051)     (0.010)    (0.0051)    (0.0070)     (0.0059)
      Sample Period                 2010       2008-2010     2010      2008-2010   2008-2010   2008-2010
      Seasonal Eects                      Quarter          Quarter-by-Coastal       Quarter-by-State
      N                             1,602        5,874       1,602       5,874       1,602       5,874
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and month (2010 panel) or county,
     month, and year (2008-2010 panel). Each sample includes 534 counties/parishes. ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at
     the 1, 5, and 10% levels.
              Table 7: Estimated Employment Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, Geographic Robustness Checks
                                          (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)            (5)                 (6)
      Region                      ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment) ln(employment)                   ln(employment)
      Oil Parishes                     -0.0048              -0.010            0.022**             0.010        0.0097*              -0.0032
                                      (0.0039)            (0.0072)           (0.0044)           (0.0076)       (0.0040)            (0.0075)
      LA Coast ex Oil Parishes       -0.0090**              0.0043           0.0072**           0.022**         0.014**              0.029
                                      (0.0024)            (0.0049)            (0.028)            (0.050)       (0.0050)             (0.019)
      AL Coast                          0.0016             -0.0060            0.018**             0.013          0.027*             0.019**
                                      (0.0061)             (0.021)           (0.0062)            (0.020)        (0.013)            (0.0065)
      FL Panhandle Coast              -0.019**             -0.013*            -0.0029             0.0055       0.00090             0.00039
                                      (0.0048)            (0.0064)           (0.0050)           (0.0065)       (0.0058)             (0.010)
41




      FL Non-Panhandle Coast          -0.039**            -0.024**           -0.023**            -0.0061       -0.031**            -0.032**
                                      (0.0040)            (0.0086)           (0.0042)           (0.0085)       (0.0053)            (0.0072)
      MS Coast                         -0.013*              -0.013             0.0029            0.0052         0.0084                0.017
                                      (0.0053)             (0.013)            (0.055)            (0.013)        (0.082)             (0.015)
      TX Coast                       -0.0091**             0.0085                                            -0.00036               0.019
                                      (0.0029)            (0.0052)              (0.)               (0.)        (0.0044)             (0.013)
      Sample Period                      2010            2008-2010              2010           2008-2010      2008-2010           2008-2010
      Sample Region                            National                       Gulf States excluding TX     Gulf States excluding buer counties
      N(counties)                       2,865                2,865              280                280            444                  444
      N                                 28,650             97,410              2,800              9,520          4,440               15,096
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and month (2010 panel) or county, month,
     and year (2008-2010 panel). ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels.
                 Table 8: Estimated Wage Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, Geographic Robustness Checks
                                      (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)                 (6)
      Region                       ln(wage)      ln(wage)   ln(wage)      ln(wage)       ln(wage)            ln(wage)
      Oil Parishes                 0.032***      0.025***   0.022***       0.022**       0.020***            0.019***
                                   (0.0035)      (0.0085)   (0.0049)      (0.0088)       (0.0044)            (0.0088)
      LA Coast ex Oil Parishes      -0.022*      -0.0048    -0.036***      -0.0066        -0.034              -0.037
                                    (0.012)       (0.082)    (0.012)      (0.0082)        (0.029)             (0.032)
      AL Coast                     0.050***      0.063***   0.040**       0.061***        0.020*              0.019**
                                    (0.015)       (0.012)    (0.016)       (0.012)        (0.011)            (0.0087)
      FL Panhandle Coast            0.010         0.0079    0.00044        0.0053         -0.0053             -0.0011
                                    (0.011)      (0.0082)    (0.012)      (0.0082)        (0.011)             (0.011)
42




      FL Non-Panhandle Coast        0.0036        0.0033     -0.0061       0.00071      -0.023***            -0.014***
                                    (0.011)      (0.0071)    (0.012)      (0.0073)       (0.0060)            (0.0052)
      MS Coast                      -0.0033      -0.00039    -0.013        -0.0030      -0.015***             -0.0096
                                    (0.016)       (0.014)    (0.016)       (0.014)       (0.0052)            (0.0072)
      TX Coast                      0.0092      0.0419***                               -0.012               0.012
                                    (0.061)      (0.0050)     (0.)           (0.)         (0.013)             (0.010)
      Sample Period                  2010       2008-2010     2010       2008-2010      2008-2010           2008-2010
      Sample Region                         National        Gulf States excluding TX    Gulf States excluding buer counties
      N(counties)                   2,867         2,867       280            280           444                  444
      N                             8,601         31,537      840           3,080         1,332                4,884
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and quarter (2010 panel) or
     county, quarter, and year (2008-2010 panel). ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels.
                       Table 9: Estimated Industry-Specic Employment and Wage Impacts, Gulf Coast States
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
      Region                       Mining Support 213      Accommodation 721        Mining Support 213        Accommodation 721
                                                 ln(employment)                                          ln(wage)
      Oil Parishes                -0.063***     0.0014      0.048**      0.017      -0.047*     -0.0030        0.015      0.042*
                                   (0.0017)     (0.039)     (0.024)     (0.037)     (0.027)     (0.020)       (0.035)     (0.024)
      LA Coast ex Oil Parishes      0.013       0.14**       0.014      0.0078       -0.048     -0.0023        -0.020      0.022
                                   (0.014)     (0.0062)     (0.017)     (0.038)     (0.033)     (0.034)       (0.023)     (0.019)
      AL Coast                     -0.11***    -0.11***      0.026       0.052     -0.18***     -0.0022         0.12       0.12
                                   (0.0060)     (0.018)     (0.040)     (0.043)     (0.015)     (0.014)        (0.10)     (0.073)
      FL Panhandle Coast                                  0.0089       0.034                               0.036       0.030
43




                                                            (0.022)     (0.037)                               (0.040)     (0.027)
      FL Non-Panhandle Coast                             -0.047***    -0.037**                           -0.062***   -0.036***
                                                            (0.012)     (0.017)                               (0.021)     (0.011)
      MS Coast                    -0.072***     0.0025     -0.048***    0.0012      0.033**    0.016***       -0.0081      0.011
                                   (0.0050)     (0.018)     (0.016)     (0.042)     (0.015)     (0.012)       (0.077)     (0.030)
      TX Coast                      0.014*      -0.032     -0.027**      -0.052      -0.017    0.082***       -0.0034      0.024
                                   (0.0083)     (0.028)     (0.013)     (0.034)     (0.027)     (0.027)       (0.042)     (0.041)
      Sample Period                 2010      2008-2010      2010      2008-2010     2010     2008-2010        2010      2008-2010
      N(counties)                    118         118          247         247         118         118           223        223
      N                             1,180       4,012        2,470       8,398        354        1,298          669        2,453
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county.    All models include xed eects by county and month (quarter) (2010
     panel) or county, month (quarter), and year (2008-2010 panel). ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10%
     levels.
            Table 10: Estimated Establishment Impacts, All Industries, Gulf Coast States, Seasonality Robustness Checks
                                           (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)
      Region                      ln(establishments) ln(establishments) ln(establishments) ln(establishments) ln(establishments) ln(establishments)
      Oil Parishes                     0.0080***             0.039***               0.0020              0.038***            0.0087***             0.040***
                                        (0.0018)             (0.0036)              (0.0025)             (0.0036)             (0.0017)             (0.0036)
       LA Coast ex Oil Parishes        0.0097***             0.040***             0.0054***             0.041***             0.011***             0.040***
                                        (0.0022)             (0.0037)              (0.0020)             (0.0037)             (0.0021)             (0.0037)
       AL Coast                          -0.0017            -0.030***            -0.0076***            -0.031***             0.00073             -0.029***
                                        (0.0022)             (0.0050)              (0.0029)             (0.0050)             (0.0020)             (0.0050)
       FL Panhandle Coast             -0.0099***            -0.021***             -0.016***            -0.021***           -0.0083***            -0.020***
                                        (0.0032)             (0.0048)              (0.0036)             (0.0051)             (0.0031)             (0.0048)
44




       FL Non-Panhandle Coast          -0.019***            -0.037***             -0.025***            -0.037***            -0.018***            -0.036***
                                        (0.0045)             (0.0070)              (0.0047)             (0.0070)             (0.0044)             (0.0069)
       MS Coast                         -0.00014             -0.011**              -0.0061*             -0.012**             -0.00027             -0.011**
                                        (0.0027)             (0.0051)              (0.0032)             (0.0052)             (0.0028)             (0.0051)
       TX Coast                         0.00064               0.0090*              -0.0053*              0.0083              -0.00032              0.0083
                                        (0.0026)             (0.0052)              (0.0030)             (0.0053)             (0.0027)             (0.0052)
       Sample Period                      2010              2008-2010                2010              2008-2010           2008-2010             2008-2010
       Seasonal Eects                            Quarter                                Quarter-by-Coastal                         Quarter-by-State
       N                                  1,602                5,874                 1,602                5,874                1,602                5,874
     Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by county. All models include xed eects by county and quarter (2010 panel) or county, quarter,
     and year (2008-2010 panel). Each sample includes 534 counties/parishes. ***, **, * denote statistical signicance at the 1, 5, and 10%
     levels.
                                                  Table A.1: Counties by Treatment Region
      Region                           Counties/Parishes by FIPS Code
      Alabama Coast                    1003*, 1025, 1039, 1053, 1061, 1097*, 1099, 1129

                                       12005*, 12013, 12033*, 12037*, 12039, 12045*, 12059, 12063, 12065*, 12073, 12077, 12079, 12091*, 12113*, 12123*, 12129*,
      Florida Panhandle Coast          12131*, 12133

      Florida Non-Panhandle Coast      12015*, 12017*, 12021*, 12027, 12029*, 12041, 12043, 12049, 12053*, 12057, 12067, 12071*, 12075*, 12081*, 12083, 12087*,
                                       12101*, 12103*, 12105, 12115*, 12119, 12121
45




      Louisiana Oil Parishes           22045*, 22055*, 22057*, 22101*, 22109*

                                       22001, 22005, 22007, 22009, 22011, 22019, 22023*, 22033, 22037, 22039, 22047, 22051*, 22053, 22063, 22071, 22075*, 22077,
      Louisiana Non-Oil Coast          22079, 22085,22089, 22091, 22093, 22095, 22097, 22099, 22103, 22105, 22113*, 22115, 22117, 22121, 22125

      Mississippi Coast                28005, 28039, 28045, 28047*, 28059*, 28073, 28091, 28109, 28113, 28131, 28147, 28157

                                       48007*, 48015, 48025, 48039*, 48047, 48057*, 48061*, 48071*, 48089, 48123, 48131, 48149, 48157, 48167*, 48175, 48201,
      Texas Coast                      48215, 48239, 48241, 48245*, 48247, 48249, 48261*, 48273*, 48285, 48291, 48297, 48321*, 48351, 48355*, 48361, 48391,
                                       48409*, 48427, 48457, 48469, 48473, 48477, 48479, 48481, 48489*
     Notes: * refer to counties classied as coastal under the more narrow denition of coastal in the robustness checks.
