                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PRICE SETTING IN ONLINE MARKETS:
BASIC FACTS, INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS, AND CROSS-BORDER INTEGRATION

                                      Yuriy Gorodnichenko
                                       Oleksandr Talavera

                                       Working Paper 20406
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20406


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Oleksandr Talavera. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Price Setting in Online Markets: Basic Facts, International Comparisons, and Cross-border
Integration
Yuriy Gorodnichenko and Oleksandr Talavera
NBER Working Paper No. 20406
August 2014
JEL No. E3,F40,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

We document basic facts about prices in online markets in the U.S. and Canada, a rapidly growing
segment of the retail sector. Relative to prices in regular stores, prices in online markets are more flexible
as well as exhibit stronger pass-through (60-75 percent) and faster convergence (half-life less than
2 months) in response to movements of the nominal exchange rate. Multiple margins of adjustment
(frequency of price changes, direction of price changes, size of price changes, exit of sellers) are active
in the process of responding to nominal exchange rate shocks. Furthermore, we use the richness of
our dataset to show that degree of competition, stickiness of prices, synchronization of price changes,
reputation of sellers, and returns to search effort are important determinants of pass-through and speed
of price adjustment for international price differentials.


Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
530 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu

Oleksandr Talavera
Management School, University of Sheffield,
Conduit Road,
Sheffield,
S10 1FL, UK.
oleksandr.talavera@gmail.com
1. Introduction
E-commerce is a rapidly increasing segment of the retail market. For example, the U.S. Census
Bureau estimated that total e-commerce sales for 2013 were $263.3 billion, or approximately 5.6
percent of total retail sales in the U.S. economy. This represents an increase of 16.9 percent from
2012 while total retail sales increased by 4.2 percent in 2013, which is consistent with historical
trends: online sales have grown much faster (10 or more percent) than sales of brick-and-mortar
stores. Forrester Research, an independent technology and market research company, predicts that
by 2016 online sales will account for more than 9 percent of total retail sales.1 However, despite a
significant and rapidly expanding share of e-commerce, the properties of online prices are still
relatively understudied even though these prices can shed new light on a number of key puzzles.
         Indeed, online markets have unique qualities. For example, the physical cost of changing
prices is negligible for internet stores and therefore internet prices could be fluctuating every instant
(minute, day, week) in response to shifting demand and supply conditions. Search for best online
prices for very narrowly defined goods is particularly cheap and simple as consumers do not need
to travel anywhere, buyers can establish the distribution of prices with just a few clicks, and
pressure for price convergence is especially strong with ubiquitous price comparison websites.
More generally, the geographical location of consumers and stores is largely irrelevant in e-
commerce and therefore administrative borders and similar frictions are likely to play a much more
limited role.
         These special qualities of online markets can help understand why pass-through of
exchange rate fluctuations and reversion to the law of one price are generally weak in international
data and thus constitute one of the central puzzles in international economics (Obstfeld and Rogoff
2000). In a highly integrated market with low frictions of price adjustment, easy search and price
comparisons, and limited influence of geographical barriers, one can rule out some popular
explanations of the puzzle and narrow down the set of plausible theories. Using internet prices in
the U.S. and Canada for a broad array of products, we try to exploit these insights and provide new
evidence on the nature and sources of frictions in price adjustment and departures from the law of
one price.
         To document and study the properties of online prices, we have constructed a unique dataset
of price quotes. Specifically, for almost 5 years we scraped prices and other relevant information
from a leading price comparison website. The data include each good’s unique identifier (similar


1
  These patterns are very similar in other developed countries. For example, according to the Centre for Retail
Research, online retail sales in Europe jumped 20 percent this year, far outstripping the 1.4 percent growth in
store-based sales. Furthermore, the share of online sales in total sales is larger in Europe than in the USA. For
instance, the share is 9.5 percent in the U.K.

                                                                                                               1
to barcodes in the scanner price data), each good’s description, prices for each seller, each seller's
unique identifier, the number of seller reviews, the ranking of seller quality, reviews of goods, etc.
The dataset covers a broad range of goods sold online including software, movies, music,
electronics, tools, and others. We have collected information for more than 140,000 goods and
more than 11 million price quotes.
        There are several advantages of using our data. First, the time span (almost 5 years) is
considerably longer than the time span usually available for researchers studying online prices
(typically a year or less). This dimension is important when we study dynamic properties of prices
such as duration of price spells, speed of price convergence, and pass-through. Second, the
coverage of goods is much broader than in previous analyses of online prices which typically
focused on books and CDs. The latter types of goods are easy to compare across sellers or countries
but they also have a number of unusual properties which make generalizations difficult. Our dataset
is heavily populated by durable goods which tend to be under-represented in typical scanner price
data and which are much more likely to be traded and moved across distant locations. Third, we
collected prices for identical goods in the U.S. and Canada so that comparison of prices is direct
and simple. Thus, we can avoid a number of pitfalls associated with comparing goods that are only
broadly similar or comparing price indexes. Fourth, our data include information on important
attributes such as the reputation of sellers and goods as revealed by ratings of sellers and products.
We can use these attributes to explore the determinants of properties of online prices. In contrast,
previous research on basic properties of prices had only very limited (if any) information about
properties of goods for which prices were available. Fifth, our data include many sellers rather than
one retail chain and therefore we can assess the relative importance of different sources of price
variation (e.g., store-level, country-level, etc.). This multi-seller dimension is important because
branches of a single seller are less likely to engage in competition between each other than with
branches of different sellers. Finally, the high frequency of our data allows us to time reactions of
prices to other high frequency events such as changes in the exchange rate or natural experiments
thus making identification more clear-cut.
        Using this dataset, we report properties of various pricing moments (e.g., the frequency and
size of price changes) in e-commerce and thus complement influential studies by Bils and Klenow
(2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) presenting the same information for regular brick-and-
mortar stores. We find that the size of price changes in online stores (approximately 4 percent) is
less than half the size of price changes in regular stores (approximately 10 percent). We also find
that price changes occur much more frequently in online stores (approximately once every 3 weeks
or less) than in regular stores (once every 4-5 months or more). This evidence is consistent with
the view that online prices are much more flexible than prices in regular stores. However, the fact
that we still observe some rigidity in online prices suggests that the costs of changing prices are
more complex than just physical menu costs and instead are likely to involve costs of gathering and
processing information as well as potentially coordinating price changes with customers, suppliers
or other sellers. We also document that price dispersion is substantial and persistent, even for very
narrowly defined goods. For example, the average standard deviation of log prices in a given week
for a precisely defined good at the bar-code level is approximately 0.12.
        Once these basic facts are established, we study the sensitivity of online prices to fluctuations
of the nominal exchange rate. Since adjustment of online prices is unlikely to have any physical costs
and, with easy shipping, the physical location of the seller is much less important, the pass-through
could be quick and nearly complete while it can be slow and partial in the prices of regular stores
because of the frictions associated with trade flows and mobility of buyers. We find that, on average,
the pass-through in online markets is incomplete but large and amounts to approximately 60-75
percent, which is greater than the 20-40 percent pass-through documented for regular markets. The
speed of price adjustment to equilibrium levels is substantially faster in online markets (half-life is
about 2-2.5 months) than in regular markets (half-life varies from 3 quarters to a few years).
        There is significant heterogeneity in pass-through and the speed of price adjustment across
goods. Using the richness of our data, we show that for goods with certain characteristics the pass-
through can be close to 100 percent. We also document that the size of the pass-through and the
speed of price adjustment are systematically associated with the degree of price stickiness, turnover
of sellers, returns to search, synchronization of price changes, reputation of sellers, and the degree
of competition. These results help reconcile the heterogeneity of estimated pass-throughs and
speeds of adjustment across studies and provide new facts for theoretical models to match.
        In summary, the stylized facts we document about prices in online stores relative to prices
in regular, brick-and-mortar stores are: 1) the duration of price spells is shorter; 2) the size of price
change is smaller; 3) pass-through is larger; 4) the speed of price adjustment is faster; 5) dramatic
heterogeneity of the pass-through and the speed of adjustment is systematically related to
fundamental properties of the goods and the markets in which these goods are sold. Most of these
findings are consistent with reduced frictions and increased integration in online markets and thus
can inform policymakers and researchers about what one may expect to observe when frictions in
regular markets are reduced.
        This paper is related to several strands of research. The first strand is focused on assessing
whether the law of one price (or its milder versions such as the purchasing power parity (PPP)
hypothesis) holds and how quickly deviations from the law of one price are eliminated. The early
generation of this literature could use only price indexes collected at the country or regional level,
which led to a number of practical and conceptual issues with the interpretation of the results. Rogoff
(1996) summarizes this literature as documenting that PPP is likely to hold in the long run but it takes
a long time for prices to converge to the PPP (half-life is routinely estimated to be over a year and in
most cases multiple years). This literature also found that deviations from PPP can be quite large and
heterogeneous across countries and time (e.g., Takhtamanova 2010, Campa and Goldberg 2005,
Barhoumi 2005) which can be only partially explained by sticky prices and exchange rate regimes,
constituting the PPP puzzle.2
         Data limitations of the first strand motivated the second generation of studies which focused
on using micro-level price data to measure pass-through and the speed of price adjustment for goods
defined more precisely. Imbs et al. (2005, 2010), Crucini and Shintani (2008), Broda and Weinstein
(2008), and others showed that the pass-through and the speed of price adjustment are higher when
prices for narrowly-defined goods are considered: the half-life of price adjustment falls to about a
year. These papers demonstrate that the PPP puzzle observed in price indexes can be explained at
least to some extent by aggregation biases. Because the micro-level price data are richer and easier
to compare across countries, the second generation studies can also provide a more detailed account
of the relative importance of producer-currency pricing (PCP) versus pricing-to-market (PTM)
hypotheses. For example, Gopinath et al. (2011) find support for the PTM hypothesis in explaining
incomplete pass-through in the weekly scanner (barcode level) price data for a retailer selling goods
in both the U.S. and Canada. We contribute to this literature by examining the behavior of prices at
the level of precisely defined goods sold by multiple stores in different countries.
         Easier access to micro-level price data also allowed exploring the determinants of pass-
through and speed of price adjustment. For example, Menon (1996), Kardasz and Stollery (2001),
Gaulier et al. (2006), Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013), Mayoral and Gardea (2011) relate market
structure, market power (including adjustment of mark-ups), tariffs, presence of multinationals,
and importance of non-traded inputs for price stickiness of final goods and the size of pass-through.
We contribute to this literature by exploring the determinants of pass-through and speed of price
adjustment for online markets.
         The third strand of research we contribute to is focused on documenting price rigidities at
the micro-level which could be used later to calibrate macroeconomic models, see e.g. Bils and
Klenow (2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). Studies in this literature concentrate almost
exclusively on prices collected in regular, brick-and-mortar stores. In contrast, we focus on online
prices which describe a rapidly growing part of the retail sector. Online prices will play an
increasingly important role in the future and, thus, macroeconomists should incorporate properties



2
  This literature also related trade frictions to the level of price dispersion. See Engel (1993), Engel and Rogers
(1996) and Gorodnichenko and Tesar (2009).
of a broader set of goods, including goods sold online, when they characterize micro-foundations
of their macroeconomic models.
        The fourth strand documents basic facts about properties of online prices. In a study
representative of this literature, Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000) compare online and conventional-
store prices for books and CDs. They find that online prices are 9-16 percent lower than prices in
regular stores, the changes in online prices are much smaller for online prices, yet quotes of internet
prices are quite dispersed even for precisely defined goods. Much of the subsequent literature tried
to, mostly theoretically, explain dramatic dispersion of prices in online markets (e.g., Baye and
Morgan 2001, Baye and Morgan 2004, Morgan, Orzen, and Sefton 2006, Baye and Morgan 2009)
by information frictions (e.g., bounded rationality), sellers’ ability to discriminate consumers (e.g.,
based on what sellers know about customers),3 and differences in advertisement (e.g., investment in
building brand reputation). We provide evidence that considerable price dispersion in online markets
applies to a very broad set of goods.
        The previous studies most relevant for our paper are Lünnemann and Wintr (2011), Boivin
et al. (2012), and Cavallo et al. (2014). Lünnemann and Wintr (2011) document stickiness of online
prices in the U.S. and large European markets (Germany, France, Italy, and the U.K.). They find
that internet prices change less often in the U.S. than in Europe (the opposite is true for conventional
stores). Online prices are more flexible than their offline counterparts with half of the spells ending
within a month. However, the result is not universal as it does not hold for subsets of goods, nor it
is homogeneous across shops, which can exhibit significant differences. In contrast, Boivin et al.
(2012) focus on the dynamics of online price differences across three book sellers: Amazon.com
(and Amazon.ca), BN.com (Barnes & Noble website), and Chapters.ca. They find that price
differentials (or relative quantities) for books do not react to fluctuations in the relative price of
foreign competitors following exchange rate movement which is consistent with extensive market
segmentation and pervasive violations of the law of one price. Similar to Boivin et al. (2012),
Cavallo et al. (2014) collect online prices for four large retailers (Apple, H&M, Zara, and IKEA)
in a number of countries and document that the violations of the law of one price (e.g., they compare
prices for a given IKEA product in IKEA websites in Germany and Sweden) appear only for
countries outside currency unions and arise at the time goods are introduced rather than at later
stages of product life when shocks can move real exchange rates for goods. We merge these lines
by exploring a larger set of goods, using longer time series and price quotes from multiple sellers,
exploiting significant movements in the nominal exchange rate, and investigating determinants of
observed pass-through and speed of price adjustment.


3
  For example, Deck and Wilson (2006) study discrimination based on search history which can indicate how a
customer informed is about prices for a given good.
        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the next section we describe the dataset
and how it was collected. In Section 3, we document the basic properties of online prices. In Section
4, we do extensive international price comparisons. We estimate the pass-through and the speed of
price adjustment for online prices. In addition, we explore the determinants of the size and speed
of price adjustment in response to changes in the nominal exchange rate. In Section 5, we discuss
our results and make concluding remarks.



2. Data Description

A.   Data collection
This study uses data collected from a price comparison website which provides price quotes for
two countries: USA (.com domain) and Canada (.ca domain).4 Styles of pages with price quotes
are similar across countries which simplifies data extraction and identification of exactly identical
products listed by Canadian and U.S. sellers. Identifiers for goods listed on the website are similar
to barcodes used in the analysis of scanner price data. For example, manufacturing product number
(MPN) 0S03110 uniquely identifies Hitachi Touro Mobile Pro Portable External 750 GB 2.5" Hard
Drive. Figure 1 shows screenshots of typical web-pages from price comparison websites.
        Although the price comparison platform we use has similar websites in other countries, we
limit the set of countries to the U.S. and Canada. This choice is motivated by several reasons. First,
the link between the U.S. and Canadian websites greatly simplifies linking goods across countries.
Second, trade flows are more likely to be affected by trans-ocean shipping costs, language
differences, etc. if we compare prices in, for instance, Japan and the U.S. Finally, we want to study
countries with strong trade ties. The U.S.-Canada pair is ideal in this respect as flows of goods and
services between these two countries are strong even for online markets. For example, Statistics
Canada (2013) reports that 63 percent of Canadian online shoppers placed an order with a U.S.
online store in 2012. This is comparable to the 82 percent share of Canadian online shoppers who
placed an order with a Canadian online store.
        In contrast to a few previous studies that investigate properties of online prices and typically
have up to one year of data (e.g. Lünnemann and Wintr 2011), our data cover almost five years.
The data collection was launched on November 16, 2008 and continued until September 2013.
Importantly, this timeframe includes a period of significant appreciation of the Canadian dollar
against the U.S. dollar from 1.30 in the end of 2008 to 0.95 in the middle of 2011 (see Figure 2).



4
  The U.S. part of the website was among the top 10 Web portals based on total unique visitors in January 2010.
Comscore, January 2010. The website reported in 2012 that tens of millions of people visited it every month.
Longer time series combined with significant changes in the exchange rate will help us to obtain
precise estimates.
         Every Saturday at midnight, a Tcl/python script has been triggered to collect webpages with
price information. The script has several stages. First, it collects information on the universe of goods
available for a given type of goods on the comparison website. For each good, there exists a link to a
unique webpage with price quotes. The script constructs a dictionary of goods and associated links.
Second, the script follows the links and downloads webpages with price quotes. It usually takes about
24 to 48 hours to download a complete set of pages for all goods in targeted categories. Third, after
the webpages are downloaded, the python part of the script extracts good description, unique
manufacturing product number (MPN), prices for each seller, and sellers' unique ids from every
webpage. Our price quotes are net prices (i.e., prices before taxes and shipping/handling costs). Figure
3 shows an example of price quotes extracted from the webpages for a good popular in the U.S. and
Canada. Whenever possible, we also collected gross prices (i.e., net prices plus taxes and
shipping/handling costs) where the destination was an address in Berkeley, CA. Gross prices are
available for about a half of net price quotes.
         In the end, we have obtained information for more than 140,000 goods and 11 million good-
seller-week-country quotes. Our price data covers 55 types of goods in four main categories:
computers (20 types, e.g., laptops), electronics (13 types, e.g., GPS), software (12 type, e.g.,
computer games), and cameras (10 types, e.g., digital cameras). Table 1 presents the list of
categories and types of goods in our sample.5 We focus on these categories of goods because online
purchases are particularly relevant for these goods (Gorodnichenko et al. 2014) This selection of
goods, the length of the time sample, and variation in exchange rates in our time sample provides
us with a number of advantages relative to what researchers used in previous studies.6
         First, our dataset covers a relatively diverse set of goods while the vast majority of papers
on online prices almost exclusively focused on books or CDs for which it was relatively easy to
ensure that the same good is compared across sellers. Prices of these goods have, however, a
number of unusual properties such as very long spells of constant prices. Furthermore, the market
for books and CDs is dominated by a handful of major sellers such as Amazon.com and
Barnes&Noble. Thus, it may be hard to generalize results beyond books and CDs. The diversity of
goods in our sample will be essential when we study determinants of the size of exchange rate pass-
through and the speed of price adjustment.

5
  The price comparison website has been introducing more detailed categories over time. To ensure consistency
in our data, we use the classification of goods available at the time when we started to collect our data.
6
  We have no information on the quantities of goods bought at quoted prices and some price quotes may be
irrelevant for consumers. However, in another dataset with online quotes and clicks associated with these quotes,
Gorodnichenko et al. (2014) found that pricing moments are similar for equally weighted price quotes and for
price quotes weighted by clicks.
        Second, a great deal of research studying the law of one price has been using data on goods
for which transaction costs for cross-border purchases are likely to outweigh even large departures
from the law of one price. For example, consumers are unlikely to directly take advantage of
arbitrage opportunities in grocery products which are typically available in scanner price data or
cost-of-living surveys (e.g., Economist Intelligence Unit). In contrast, we focus on goods for which
transaction costs are small and consumers are essentially free to exploit even small arbitrage
opportunities. Indeed, goods in our sample are durable, standardized, and easy to ship. Most goods
in our sample are produced outside the U.S. or Canada and marginal cost shocks can be effectively
differenced out when we take the ratio of Canadian and U.S. prices. These qualities are also likely
to limit the importance on non-tradables which often account for a significant share of the cost of
selling goods in regular stores.
        Third, goods in our data are precisely defined and therefore one can be more certain that he
or she compares prices of the same good when he or she contemplates a purchase. For example,
we treat as separate goods red and blue iPods which otherwise share exactly the same technical
characteristics. This contrasts with previous research using price indexes or prices for broadly
defined goods (e.g., toothpaste).
        Fourth, our dataset collects price quotes from multiple sellers while previous research (e.g.,
Gopinath et al. 2011, Cavallo et al. 2014) typically used micro-level price data from one seller (e.g.,
because scanner price data are supplied by one retail chain). This aspect is important because branches
of the same seller in different countries (e.g., Amazon.com and Amazon.ca) are less likely to compete
with each other than outlets of different sellers (e.g., Amazon.com and BHphotovideo.com). Our data
covers a broad spectrum of sellers such as large general stores (Amazon, Newegg), large specialized
or branded stores (B&H or Dell), and niche stores (Memory4less).
        Finally, data are collected at weekly frequency which allows us to study responses of prices
at relatively high frequency and makes identification cleaner.

B. Data filters
Because price data are extraordinarily heterogeneous in our sample, we apply a series of filters to
minimize the effects of missing values, extreme observations and the like. Specifically, we
winsorize prices of goods at top and bottom 1 percent. For time series analyses focused on dynamic
responses or control for lagged values of variables, we keep only goods with at least twenty
consecutive observations. We consider three commonly used procedures to deal with missing values
(see Coibion et al. (2012) for a discussion). The first procedure (“A”) assumes that a price spell ends
when there is a price change or a missing value. The second procedure (“B”) combines spells on
both sides of a missing spell provided the price before and after the missing spell is unchanged.
Suppose we observe a price of $1 during weeks 2 to 3 and the price for weeks 4 to 6 are missing,
but we observe a price of $1 for week 7 followed by $1.5 for week 8 and $1.4 for week 9. The length
of the ($1) spell is 2+1=3 weeks. The third procedure (“C”) imputes the previously observed price
to all missing values. In the example above, this means that we include weeks 4 to 6, resulting in a
($1) spell length of 2+3+1 = 6. We will make calculations based on procedure C as the benchmark
but we find similar results with procedures A and B. We use imputations only to calculate the
duration of price spells. Finally, because we are interested in international price comparisons, we
constrain the sample only to goods that were sold by both U.S. and Canadian online sellers.
         These filters reduce the number of goods in our sample from 140,000 to about 12,000. We
verified that selection into the estimation sample is likely to be random as various pricing moments
are approximately the same in the full and the estimation samples. For example, Appendix Figure
1 shows that the distribution of price levels for the estimation sample is close to the distribution for
the full sample. Appendix Table 1 demonstrates that the key moments are very similar for the full
and estimation samples.



C. Data quality
Price comparison websites are convenient aggregators of price information. Consumer Futures
(2013), a statutory representative of consumers in the U.K., reports that 56 percent of all shoppers
use price comparison websites in some way: to hunt for bargains (85 percent of who use price
comparison websites), compare prices (83 percent), identify providers (69 percent), buy goods (52
percent), etc. 95 percent of internet users are aware of price comparison websites. E-commerce
merchants use price comparison websites to attract new customers and increase sales.7 Price
comparison websites have a great multiplier as they send data to thousands of sites worldwide.
         Price comparison websites routinely allow automatic export of product feed so that
whenever an online seller changes a good’s price, the new price is immediately reflected on price
comparison websites. Online sellers are also interested in keeping their price as current as possible
because they often pay for clicks on price comparison websites and, if a price is outdated or a good
is out of stock, online sellers waste money. However, there could be systematic discrepancies
between prices reported on price comparison websites and prices listed on the websites of sellers


7
  Online sellers do not put every product they sell on price comparison websites because these websites may
charge a fee per listing. (However, some price comparison engines scrape prices from webpages of online sellers
who do not submit their listings.) As a result, online sellers may list only goods with competitive prices. While
such behavior can affect some moments of the data (e.g., frequency of price changes), it is not a problem for our
analysis of international price comparisons. Indeed, the very nature of online markets is such that competition is
fierce, turnover is high, and search for best prices is cheap. Hence, only the best prices are relevant for consumers
and end up being transaction prices.
because, for example, online sellers may engage in “bait and switch” strategies. To assess the
quantitative importance of this concern, we compare prices from both sources (that is, from the
price comparison website and from a seller listed on the price comparison website) for a random
sample of 100 goods.8 Specifically, a script clicks on a link for each seller listed on our price
comparison website and collects price information from the seller’s webpage (if necessary, this
information is checked manually).
         We find (Figure 4) that, while there are some discrepancies, price quotes (Panel A) are
remarkably consistent across sources. When we aggregate price quotes across sellers and focus on
the average price for a given good (Panel B), the difference between the sources is small. The
differences are somewhat larger when we consider dispersion of prices across sellers measured in
terms of standard deviation (Panel D) and interquartile range (Panel C). However even for price
dispersion, the price comparison website provides quite accurate information. If we regress a moment
based on prices from sellers’ websites on the corresponding moment based on prices from the price
comparison website, we get an estimated slope close to one and estimated intercept close to zero with
R2 approaching to one. We cannot reject equality of moments across the sources of price information.
We conclude that the quality of price data from the price comparison website is high.



3. Basic facts about price setting in online markets
Table 2 shows descriptive statistics for our data. Let i, t, s, c index goods, time (weeks), sellers, and
countries. The average log price log                 in our sample is 5 (or approximately $150). This
magnitude is significantly larger than the level of prices considered in previous studies (e.g., with
scanner price data or online prices of books and CDs) where goods routinely have prices below
$10. It is also not unusual in our sample to observe prices of goods above $600 (approximately 75th
percentile) or $1400 dollars (approximately 90th percentile). Since we will focus on how quickly
cross-border arbitrage opportunities dissipate, the level of prices is important since search effort is
likely to be larger for big-price-tag items. Also note that the level of prices is approximately the
same in the U.S. and Canada.
         Goods routinely have multiple sellers in our data. The average number of sellers is
approximately 2.3 in Canada and 3.6 in the U.S. This is consistent with the notion that the U.S.
market is larger than the Canadian market but the difference is not as striking as one observes in
the numbers of regular brick-and-mortar stores in two countries. In part this difference is smaller
because online markets tend to be more concentrated. We also observe that the stability of sellers—


8
  We are extremely grateful to Alberto Cavallo for generating price data from websites of online sellers and sharing
these data with us.
we define stability as the ratio of the number of stores selling a good in a given week to the number
of stores ever selling this good in the month which covers the given week—is a bit larger in Canada
(0.423) than in the U.S. (0.405).
         Similar to previous studies of online prices (e.g., Brynjolfsson and Smith 2000, Baye et al.
2006), we observe dramatic cross-sectional dispersion of prices which is calculated as
                                                                                          .
                          ≡          ∑   ∈     log                 ∑   ∈    log               ,
                              #                             #


where        is the set of stores that sell good i in week t in country c. On average across goods and
time periods, the standard deviation of log prices within a country is 0.128-0.151, which is significant
but smaller than one can observe for the dispersion of prices across regular stores.9,10 Given that the
levels of prices are large in our sample, these price differentials correspond to significant dollar
amounts. In some cases, the differences between cheapest and most expensive prices are in multiple
hundreds of dollars which could be surprising given easy search for the best prices in online markets.
However, we do observe that the size of price differentials is negatively correlated with the level of
prices. That is, more expensive goods tend to have smaller (log) price dispersion. We also find that
the cross-sectional dispersion of prices in any given market is fairly persistent. The serial correlation
of log or level of standard deviation of log prices in a given week is routinely above 0.85.
         The duration of price spells depends on the treatment of missing values in price quotes and
the treatment of small price changes. We define a price change as a movement in prices larger than
one percent in absolute value. We discard very small price changes (less than one percent in
absolute value) as these changes are likely to arise from measurement errors (e.g., Eichenbaum et
al. 2014). The mean price spell is the shortest with procedure A (approximately 1.4-1.5 weeks) and
the longest with procedure C (approximately 3.0-4.1 weeks). The duration of price spells is a little
longer in the U.S. than in Canada. Overall, the duration of price spells is considerably shorter for
online prices than for prices observed in the scanner price data (e.g., Kehoe and Midrigan 2010),
in government surveys of prices (e.g., Bils and Klenow 2004, Nakamura and Steinsson 2008), or
in online prices for books (e.g., Boivin et al. 2012) where mean duration of price spells is at least
several months. The duration of price spells we document, however, is consistent with Lünnemann
and Wintr (2011) who analyze a similar set of goods but have data only for one year.11



9
  For example, Coibion et al. (2012) report that the standard deviation in the log price for a given unique product
code (UPC), a given market (metro area) and a given week is 28% on average across periods, markets and UPCs.
10
   Rating of sellers is a strong predictor of price deviations for a given good and, thus, some price dispersion is
due to compensating differentials for seller reputation. However, the dispersion remains high even after
controlling for store rankings.
11
   We experimented with using ∧- and ∨-shaped filters as in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) to identify sales. We
found that removing sales does not materially affect our results.
           Price increases and decreases are equally likely in our data. The average price change is
slightly negative which captures the fact that goods in our sample are subject to technical
improvements over time and thus prices of existing goods tend to depreciate with the age of goods.
The median absolute log price change is approximately 4 percent in both countries, which is again
similar to facts documents in Lünnemann and Wintr (2011). In contrast, Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008) document for regular prices in brick-and-mortar stores that the average absolute price
change is about 10 percent for goods in the consumer basket and for goods similar to goods in our
sample. Shorter durations of price spells and smaller sizes of price changes for online prices than
for prices in regular stores are consistent with menu costs being smaller for online sellers than for
regular stores. However, the non-negligible rigidity of online prices suggests that there are other
costs associated with price changes (e.g., collecting and processing information) which make prices
somewhat inflexible.
           As a final measure of price stickiness, we consider synchronization of price changes across
sellers. Specifically, we define synchronization in a given week for a given good as the fraction of
price quotes with a price change conditional on a least one price change and having at least two
sellers at this point in time:
                                                       ∑   ∈                ,    ,       1
                                                                                                       ,
                                         ∑   ∈                 missing ∩    ,    ,       missing      1

where we code                                    as missing if ∑   ∈                 ,    ,        1. The average
synchronization is 19 percent in the U.S. and 30 percent in Canada. Given that there are on average
three stores for a given good in a given week, the magnitude of this fraction points to little
synchronization of price changes across sellers. However, there is considerable heterogeneity in
synchronization across goods.12



4. International price differentials

A. Descriptive statistics
We focus on two popular measures of international price differentials: the relative exchange rate
log         /       and the real exchange rate log                      /       where i and t index goods and
time,           (   ) is a price measure for a given good in Canada (U.S.),          is the CAD/USD nominal
exchange rate. Since for any given period/good/country, there are multiple sellers and hence
multiple prices, we consider several measures of prices at the country level: mean price across
sellers; median price across sellers; minimum price across sellers; mean price weighted by the


12
     We present selected statistics by category of goods in Appendix.
reputation of sellers (reputation is measured as the number of stars, from 1 to 5, that consumers
assign to sellers). For the last measure we use two imputations for sellers with no information
about their reputation (i.e., no stars are assigned): assign the lowest possible score (one star) or the
middle of the range (2.5 stars). Each of these measures has pros and cons. For example, while the
mean price was often used in previous research, median prices are less sensitive to extreme price
quotes. In light of Chevalier and Kashyap (2011) and Baye et al. (2009), one may conjecture that
minimum prices are closer to transaction prices and thus are more likely to capture prices relevant
for consumers. Finally, while price is the most important factor in the comparison process, the
reputation of sellers is a factor in choosing where to buy a good and it may be reasonable to give a
higher weight to sellers with high ratings (Consumer Futures 2013).13
         Irrespective of which measure of prices we use, international price differentials are
moderately large and mildly persistent (Table 3). The AR(1) coefficient is between 0.80 and 0.92
(at weekly frequency) depending on whether we control for good/type fixed effects. These estimates
correspond to half-life of 3 to 6 week, which is much shorter than half-lives (typically about a year)
estimated on prices collected in regular stores. The mean of log             /       and log               /
is about 5 to 13 percent. Some of the price dispersion across countries could be explained by
differences in taxes. For example, the value added tax (federal and provincial) in Canada is about
13 percent and there is big variation in sales taxes across U.S. states.14 However, differences in taxes
are unlikely to be the whole story. First, there is dramatic variation in price differentials (columns
(4) and (5) in Table 3): the 25th percentile of the mean price differential is close to zero while the
75th percentile is between 15 and 25 percent. If price differentials were mainly determined by taxes,
one would expect to see little if any variation in price differentials across goods or over time. Second,
for a subsample of goods we have information for gross prices that include taxes and shipping costs,
we observe similar international price differentials (Appendix Table 1).15
         The standard deviation of price differentials across countries—which ranges from 0.23 to
0.28 see column (2) in Table 3—is 50 to 100 percent larger than the standard deviation of price
differentials within countries, which is between 0.12 and 0.14. This finding is qualitatively
consistent with results reported in the earlier literature comparing price differentials within and
across countries (e.g., Engel and Rogers 1996). However, moments for the real and relative

13
   We also constrained our sample to include sellers with 4+ star reviews. We found similar results. See Appendix
Table 6.
14
   Although we use an address in Berkeley, CA, online sellers with no physical presence in California do not have
to collect sales tax (close to 10 percent) on behalf of the state of California. As a result, Californian consumers
often pay no sales tax on their online purchases.
15
   The price comparison webpage was redesigned for various goods in various times and in many versions of the
webpages we could specify the location of the buyer and thus obtain net and gross prices. We used the address of
the department of economics at UC Berkeley as the shipping destination. Gross prices are available for about half
of quotes for which we have net prices.
exchange rates are broadly similar so that fluctuations in the nominal exchange rate are unlikely to
be the main factor in cross-border price differentials.
        In summary, properties of online price differentials are qualitatively similar to properties of
prices in regular markets but the magnitude and persistence of price differentials are smaller relative
to counterparts reported in previous studies for brick-and-mortar stores. Thus, this first pass at the
data suggests that frictions are much smaller in online markets but non-negligible cross-sectional
dispersion of prices and some persistence of price differentials are consistent with some border
frictions in online markets. In the following sections, we will examine determinants of these
persistent and volatile cross-border price differentials in online markets.



B. Pass‐through and the speed of price adjustment
To characterize the dynamics of cross-border price differentials, one commonly uses two metrics:
pass-through (i.e., how movements in the nominal exchange rate are translated into movements of
prices of goods) and the speed of price adjustment to equilibrium levels. While there is a variety of
versions of these two metrics, we employ two basic econometric specifications to construct these
metrics:

Pass-through : log                                                 ,                                       (1)

                                                           ,
Speed of price adjustment :      log                 log
                                                           ,
                                              ,
                                        log                                                                (2)
                                              ,


where             is a set of control variables and        ≡                 is the first difference operator.16
Specification (1) estimates the long-run pass-through and is similar to specifications estimated in
Goldberg and Knetter (1997), Campa and Goldberg (2005), Goldberg and Hellerstein (2013). The
law of one price predicts that      should be equal to one and, hence, values of                 closer to one
correspond to smaller departures from the law of one price. Specification (2) is set in the error-
correction/cointegration form where       quantifies how quickly the deviation from equilibrium is
eliminated. More negative values of       mean faster adjustment. In Specification (2), equilibrium
relationship between relative and the exchange rate (coefficient               ) is determined according to
specification (1).17 Thus, while the equilibrium relationship nests the law of one price, it also allows
deviations from the law of one price (i.e.,       can be less than one). Since we use an estimated           in



16
   We use BIC to select the number of lags for log     ,       ,       and        . Results are similar when we
allow for more lags.
17
   We found similar results when we restrict  1.
equation (2), one may be concerned about the consistency of estimated                 as well as using standard
inference for estimated . These concerns are unlikely to be quantitatively important for several
reasons. First, exchange rates are fairly persistent and approach a unit root so that an estimate of
in specification (1) can be super-consistent. Second, the error terms in specifications (1) and (2) are
essentially uncorrelated and thus adjustment for the generated regressors is minimal. Hence, we can
first estimate specification (1) and then use               to construct the deviation from equilibrium
relationship in specification (2). In our preferred specification,                   include good fixed effects.
           Table 4 reports estimated specifications (1) and (2) on pooled data.18 To account for the
fact that error terms in specifications (1) and (2) can be correlated across time, goods, and countries
as well as the fact that         is common across goods and countries, we use the Driscoll and Kraay
(1998) standard errors. Note that for specification (2) we have fewer observations because we
restrict the sample only to price quotes with at least one spell of twenty consecutive observations
without imputations.
           The estimated exchange rate pass-through is about 60 to 75 percent which is considerably
larger than 20 to 40 percent pass-through typically reported in previous studies based on prices
collected from regular stores (Menon 1996, Kardasz and Stollery 2001, Goldberg and Verboven
2001, Barhoumi 2005, Campa and Goldberg 2005, Gaulier et al. 2006, Takhtamanova 2010,
Gopinath and Rigobon 2008, Cao et al. 2012). This increased pass-through is consistent with
salient features of online markets: i) prices are more flexible, ii) competition is fierce, iii) consumers
can easily buys goods from the U.S. or Canada, iv) distribution/non-tradable costs are small, and
v) most goods are produced overseas so that the costs are similar across countries.
           Estimated ’s suggest fast correction of prices toward a long-run equilibrium. If we abstract
from the short-run dynamics (i.e.,        and ) in specification (2), 7 percent or more of the gap from the
long-run relationship is closed in a week (or correspondingly about 25 percent of the gap is closed in
a month and 60 percent in a quarter) which implies the half-life of 2-2.5 months or less. This speed
of adjustment is considerably faster than the speed estimated on price indexes (e.g., Rogoff (1996)
estimates a half-life of 3 to 5 years) or scanner price data where prices of exact same goods sold in
regular stores are compared across countries (e.g., Broda and Weinstein (2008) estimate a half-life of
2.9 quarters). This speed of price adjustment, however, would probably not surprise observers of the
online markets. For example, Baye et al. (2007) emphasize that i) online customers compare prices
within goods, not within stores; ii) the number of sellers and prices changes frequently; and iii) firms
need to constantly monitor prices of their rivals. All of these factors are likely to accelerate price
adjustment. Yet, the speed of adjustment we find is much higher than the speed estimated by Boivin


18
     Appendix Table 5 presents estimates for data aggregated to monthly frequency.
et al. (2012) for online prices of books. This discrepancy in the results is likely to reflect the specifics
of book markets which tend to have much stickier prices and higher market power of sellers.
        Panel C presents estimates of the pass-through and the speed of price adjustment when U.S
and Canadian prices are compared within sellers (e.g., price quotes for the same good in Amazon.com
and Amazon.ca). While the pass-through is larger for intra-seller prices than for all price quotes in
the specification without fixed effects, the pass-through is smaller once we condition on good fixed
effects. This lower magnitude is consistent with the notion that sellers present in both online markets
can price discriminate consumers in Canada and the U.S. and reduce competition between their
branches in different countries. This result may explain why previous studies (e.g., Gopinath et al.
2011, Cavallo et al. 2014) using price comparisons across branches of the same seller in different
countries tend to find low pass-through.



C. Determinants of pass-through and speed of price adjustment
While in the previous section we focus on pooled estimates of pass-through and the speed of price
adjustment to present simple summary statistics, there is dramatic heterogeneity of these
characteristics across goods (Table 5) when we estimate          and    at the level of individual goods.
A key question is what factors are systematically related to the size of the pass-through and the
speed of price adjustment. Usually, it is hard to answer this question because the data are available
only at the aggregate level or little is known about the properties of goods and, as a result, previous
research (e.g., Yang 1997, Campa and Goldberg 2005) focused on macroeconomic determinants
(e.g., exchange rate regime, level of inflation) of pass-through. Fortunately, our dataset contains
information about a number of potentially important determinants at the micro level.
        First, Head et al. (2010), Richards et al. (2014) and others argue that the degree of pass-
through is negatively related to search costs. The return to search effort should be higher for expensive
goods. For example, consumers are more likely to search for better deals on computers and plasma
TVs than on toothpaste or beer. A higher search intensity should put a larger pressure on price
convergence across sellers and countries. Thus, one may expect that more expensive goods should
exhibit a larger pass-through and faster speed of price adjustment. Our dataset has a wide distribution
of goods in terms of their prices and we can exploit this variation to examine and quantify this
channel. Specifically, we can use the log median price over the sample to proxy for returns on search.
        Second, a number of studies (Rogoff 1996, Apslund and Friberg 2001, Bergin and Feenstra
2001, Imbs et al. 2005, Mayoral and Gadea 2011, Devereux and Yetman 2010, Takhtamanova 2010)
suggested that price stickiness could be an important force in determining how deviations from the
law of one price are eliminated. With flexible prices, adjustment could be deep and quick. In contrast,
sticky prices could delay price adjustment and make it incomplete. We can measure the degree of
price stickiness using the mean frequency of price changes for a given good in our sample. More
frequent price changes should be associated with larger pass-through and faster price adjustment.
        Third, the degree of synchronization in price changes can be important because pass-through
and speed of price adjustment could be affected not only by the degree of price stickiness at the level
of individual seller but also to what extent price setting is staggered (see Neiman 2010). Indeed, in
many macroeconomic models, one needs staggered price setting in addition to strategic
complementarity to generate gradual adjustment of prices. As argued by Bhaskar (2002) and others,
if prices are set simultaneously (i.e., synchronization is high), the reaction of prices to shocks is
stronger and departures from equilibrium levels are quickly eliminated.
        Fourth, Dornbusch (1987), Feenstra et al. (1996), Atkeson and Burstein (2008) and many
others emphasize that market power can affect the magnitude of pass-through. While the theory
often stresses market share, we do not have information on sales of individual stores and we will
use a proxy for the degree of market power. Specifically, the number of sellers should be indicative
of the degree of competition. With more sellers, one should expect a larger pass-through and the
speed of adjustment.
        Fifth, Gust et al. (2010) argue that firm entry can increase exchange rate pass-through.
Indeed, an easier entry into selling a good is likely to make competition stronger (e.g., hit-and-run
strategy) and, as a result, make pass-through larger and price adjustment faster. A stronger turnover
of sellers is likely to be indicative of how easy it is to start selling a given good. We proxy for the
turnover using our stability measure (a more stable set of sellers means a lower turnover) and hence
we should expect a negative correlation between stability and pass-through and between stability
and speed of price adjustment.
        Finally, reputation of sellers can influence pass-through and speed. Specifically, consumers
are more likely to take advantage of price differentials if sellers of a given good have high
reputation because price differentials then likely present a genuine opportunity to have a good deal
rather than capture a compensating differential for lack of reputation or heterogeneity in some other
dimension (see Imbs et al. 2010 for a discussion). This logic suggests that pass-through and speed
should be high if sellers have high reputation.
        To test these predictions, we estimate specifications (1) and (2) for each good separately
and then regress estimated    and    on the factors we describe above:
        log            log                               log                 log

                                                                                          (3)

        log            log                              log                 log

                                                                                          (4)
where i indexes goods,          is the median price of good i in Canada,                          is the mean
frequency of price changes in Canada,                   is the number of sellers of good i in the U.S. and
Canada,                          is the stability of sellers in the U.S. and Canada for good i,
                       is the degree of synchronization of price changes for good i in the U.S. and
Canada,                   is the average star rating of U.S. and Canadian sellers for good i, number of
     is a set of fixed effects for periods over which       and   are estimated,      is a set of fixed effects
for categories of goods. Each variable on the right-hand side is calculated as the time series average.
For example,                                ∑    ∑      ,                    .19 Table 6 reports estimated
coefficients for specification (3) in Panel A and specification (4) in Panel B by least squares for
various measures of prices at the country level.20
          We have conjectured a positive relationship between the size of pass-through and returns
on search proxied by the price of a good. The estimates suggest a non-linear relationship. For goods
with prices less than approximately $150 (which is close to the median price of goods in our data),
the relationship is positive, but it turns into a negative one for more expensive goods. This inverted-
U relationship suggests that pass-through and search have an interplay more complex than often
assumed. Indeed, pass-through and search are determined simultaneously in equilibrium and firms
can respond to endogenous search effort by pricing goods in such a way that returns to search are
reduced for expensive goods where search is likely to be most intensive and hence the elasticity of
demand can be particularly high. For example, a manufacturer can require online stores to sell its
good at a price set by the manufacturer rather than by retailers thus limiting price dispersion and
competition between stores. In addition, manufactures could be more likely to sell high-price goods
(e.g., laptops) directly to customers than low-price goods (e.g., cables) and they may be interested
in preserving sales through their websites again by limiting price dispersion. While we are not able
to test hypotheses of this type with our data, there is plenty of anecdotal evidence consistent with
this explanation.21
          Interestingly, we also find an inverted-U relationship between a good’s price and the speed
of price adjustment where the speed is the slowest for goods priced around $150, a price range where


19
   While and are generated variables, this does not pose an econometric problem for us as the errors in and
   are absorbed into the stochastic error terms on the right hand side of specifications (3) and (4).
20
   When estimating coefficients in Tables 5 and 6, we assign equal weights for all goods. However, the precision
of estimates for and varies across goods since the number of observations used to estimate and varies
across goods. Given considerable heterogeneity of and estimates, one may want to weigh observations based
on the precision of and . Although using standard errors of and may be a natural choice for weights, in
finite samples and and their standard errors may be correlated (see e.g. Abowd and Card (1989) and Altonji
and Segal (1996)) and thus these weights may be inappropriate. A simple alternative is to use the number of
observations used in estimation. When we use these as weight, results are similar.
21
   For example, Apple products sold in a broad array of online stores show little if any price dispersion across
online stores because Apple apparently coordinates prices across sellers (see an article on zdnet.net).
the estimated pass-through is the highest. Note that         and     are essentially uncorrelated and,
therefore, it is unlikely that this pattern arises mechanically from the way we estimate these
parameters. A plausible explanation is likely to stem from incentives to make price adjustments.
Intuitively, if pass-through is close to 100 percent, returns to arbitrage are second-order as the profit
function is approximately flat. As a result, the speed of price adjustment is slow. In contrast, when
pass-through is low, returns to arbitrage are high (the slope of the profit function is steep) and, thus,
the speed is fast.
        There is also a non-linear relationship between the number of sellers and pricing dynamics.
Specifically, raising the number of sellers from two sellers (the minimum number) to 4-5 sellers
(approxaimtely, the average number of sellers) is associated with increased pass-through and the
speed of price adjustment. Further increases in the number of sellers are associated with decreasing
pass- through and the speed of price adjustment.
        There is a strong negative relationship between the size of the pass-through and price
stickiness. Specifically, a one standard deviation increase in the frequency of price changes (0.32)
increases pass-through by about 50 percentage points. Consistent with theoretical predictions,
goods with stickier prices have a lower speed of price adjustment.
        Greater synchronization of price changes is weakly associated with larger pass-through. A
one standard deviation increase in the degree of synchronization (0.167) increases pass-through by
2 to 8 percentage points. At the same time, we find evidence that synchronization decelerates price
adjustment. This result suggests that synchronization is likely to indicate market power enabling
coordination of price changes and limiting the ability of online sellers to eliminate arbitrage
opportunities.
        The stability of sellers is significantly negatively correlated with the speed of price
adjustment: a lower turnover of sellers (higher stability) reduces the speed (i.e.,     becomes larger
and closer to zero). This finding is consistent with the view that easy entry into a market and limited
time-horizons for sellers, which limits the scope for collusion, are likely to eliminate arbitrage
opportunities and mis-pricing of goods faster. The quantitative effect of seller stability is large. A
one standard deviation increase in stability (approximately 0.2) would reduce the speed ( ) by
about 0.1 which is enough to severely limit convergence to equilibrium.
        However, the stability of sellers is also positively correlated with the size of pass-through.
Quantitatively this relationship is strong: goods with a stable pool of sellers tend to have a nearly
complete pass-through. This surprising result suggests that, while the stability of sellers can proxy
for entry costs and thus provide a natural explanation of slower price adjustment for goods with a
stable pool of sellers, the stability is also likely to capture other important dimensions of how online
markets operate. For example, a stable set of sellers can be associated with increased horizons over
which sellers set prices so that they have enough time to eventually respond to movements of the
nominal exchange rate. In contrast, a rapidly changing pool of sellers may indicate that online stores
focus on short-term factors (e.g., inventory) and thus fail to respond to macroeconomic forces.
Another possibility is that increased stability is determined by large inventories held by online
sellers, which yields slow price adjustment, and by manufacturers using producer-currency pricing
rather than pricing to market, which gives a deep pass-through.



D. Margins of price adjustment
While the previous section documents that pass-through and the speed of price adjustment are high
in online markets, one can learn more about these two objects by exploring what margins of price
adjustment are used in response to movements in the nominal exchange rate. We use our
specification (1) to construct a measure of the deviation from equilibrium EC:

                log                                 .                                                                                                (5)

where, as before, i and t index goods and time (weeks),                                                                     is a measure of a price (e.g., median
price, mean price, minimum price),                                  is the nominal exchange rate. Note that                                      is estimated for
each price measure separately.
        We measure the intensive margin of price adjustment as the average price change
(conditional on price change) across sellers of good i in country and week :
                ∑                                                                           .
                                ,                                       ,
                                                                                                        .                                            (6)
                        ∑                                                   .
                                                        ,


We also calculate the mean size of price increases and price decreases separately:
                        ∑                                                                                       .
                                                ,                                       ,
                                                                                                                        ,                            (6’)
                                    ∑                                                       .
                                                                    ,


                        ∑                                                                                   .
                                            ,                                       ,
                                                                                                                    .                                (6’’)
                                    ∑                                                   .
                                                                ,


        The extensive margin of price adjustment—again with the distinction for any price change,
price increase, and price decreases—is measured as
                                        ∑                                                           .
                                                                                ,
        Pr          0                                                                                                                                (7)
                            ∑
                                                            ,


                                        ∑                                                       .
                                                                                ,
        Pr          0                                                                                                                                (7’)
                            ∑
                                                            ,
                                             ∑                     .
                                                           ,
              Pr        0                                                                                        (7’’)
                                     ∑
                                                     ,


and is thus a fraction of sellers that change their prices in the set of sellers that have listed good i
in weeks and                1.
              Finally, stores with the best prices may run out of inventories faster than other stores and
thus cheap stores can be more likely to exit the market until they replenish their inventories. We
calculate the probability of exit as follows:
                                 ,
                            ∑                             ∩    ,
         Pr                                  ,
                                                                                  .                              (8)
                                         ∑       ,


              Using these measures, we estimate the following generic specification with a pricing
moment given in (6)-(8) as the dependent variable:

                                     ,                                        ,                            .     (9)

Note that specification (9) is estimated for each country separately as the direction of the change in
the pricing moment can depend on whether equilibrium error                                    is positive or negative and thus
estimated coefficients may move in opposite directions for Canada and the U.S. For example, if
          0 (goods in Canada are relatively expensive), one may expect prices in Canada to decrease
(i.e.,         ,   ,   0) and prices in the U.S. to increase (i.e.,                   ,   ,       0) and hence            0 and
              0.
              Table 7 presents estimates of              , which is the key parameter in specification (9), for various
pricing moments and measures of prices. For the response of the mean price change                                      , we find
consistently (column 1) that if prices in Canada are 10 percent above equilibrium level, prices in
Canada fall by 0.8 to 1.4 percent per week while prices in the U.S. increase by 0.4 to 0.7 percent per
week. Consistent with our previous findings, these results suggest fast adjustment of prices to
equilibrium levels. This pattern also applies to both price increases (column 2) and price decreases
(column 3). For example, if we focus on the mean prices in the U.S. and Canada, a positive
equilibrium error               (i.e., prices are more expensive in Canada), price increases in Canada become
smaller while price decreases become larger (more negative). Likewise, a positive equilibrium error
    tends to lead to larger price increases and smaller (i.e., less negative) prices decreases in the U.S.
Hence, we do not observe strong asymmetric effects in the size of price adjustment as prices appear
to be equality flexible in terms of increases and decreases. The magnitude of the response is
generally larger for Canada than for the U.S. which is consistent with the view that price adjustment
is likely to be larger in smaller markets.
              The frequency of price adjustment for all price changes (column 4) does not exhibit a robust
relationship to equilibrium errors. However, this lack of correlation reflects that movements in
frequencies of price increases and frequencies of price decreases roughly offset each other. Once
we focus on the frequency of price increases (column 5) and the frequency of price decreases
(column 6) separately, the data indicates a strong link between the frequencies of price adjustment
and equilibrium errors. Consider the frequency of price increases when we use mean prices. A
positive 10 percent equilibrium error        reduces the frequency of prices increases in Canada by
0.79 percent and increases the frequency of price increase in the U.S. by 0.24 percent. This finding
is in line with the price adjustments along the intensive margin where positive         leads to smaller
price increases in Canada and larger price increases in the U.S. The effect is in the opposite
direction for the frequency of price decreases: a positive 10 percent equilibrium error        increases
the frequency of prices decreases in Canada by 0.77 percent and decreases the frequency of price
decrease in the U.S. by 0.16 percent. One can immediately see that since the movements of the
frequency of price increases and the frequency of price decreases have similar magnitudes and thus
the effect on the frequency of all price changes becomes weak. Similar to the results for the
intensive margin, the response of the extensive margin is stronger for Canada than for the U.S.
        The exit of goods with cheap prices is not strongly correlated with equilibrium errors. In only
one case with minimum prices, we find significant statistical evidence that a positive equilibrium
error makes exit of stores less likely in Canada and more likely in the U.S. While one should expect
this pattern, we conjecture that we do not find the same patterns for other price measures because the
consumer pressure arising from price differentials is likely to be the highest for stores offering lowest
prices. Indeed, price sensitive consumers are likely to buy at the cheapest prices and thus are more
likely to respond to arbitrage opportunities when relative prices shift. At the same time, given fairly
large dispersion of prices within countries, mean or median prices at the level of countries may be
too coarse to detect changes in demand arising from shifts in relative prices.
        To further explore margins of price adjustment, Figure 5 plots the time series of mean price
changes (all price changes, price increases, and price decreases in Panels A, B, and C) when we
aggregate across goods (with equal weights) to the country level. We also report the estimated slope
from regressing each series on the nominal exchange rate. In general, price increases (decreases) in
Canada are negatively (positively) correlated with the nominal exchange rate (CAD/USD) and the
pattern of correlations is reversed for the U.S. One can also observe that the correlation between the
size of price decreases in the U.S. and in Canada is negative.
        In similar spirit, we aggregate frequencies of price adjustment across goods to the country
level (Panels D, E, and F). These aggregate frequencies for the U.S. and especially for Canada tend
to be positively correlated with the nominal exchange rate. However, a decomposition of price
changes into price increases (Panel D) and price decreases (Panel F) suggests that the correlation
with the nominal exchange rate is the strongest for price increases in Canada and equally weak for
price increases and price decreases in the U.S.
        The frequency of price increases and decreases in Canada was the highest in late 2008 and
early 2009 when the Canadian dollar was strongly appreciating. The fact that the frequency of price
changes rose for both price increases and price decreases highlights that the exchange rate
movements induced firms to review their prices with possible adjustment in either direction rather
than move all Canadian prices in one direction. In other words, firms appeared to be re-optimizing
their prices rather than mechanically adjusting their prices by changes in the exchange rate.
Obviously, these price adjustments happened during the Great Recession, so perhaps this
“churning” of price changes reflects increased intensity of price adjustment in recessions rather
than responsiveness of prices to exchange rate fluctuations. However, we observe only a moderate
to weak increase in the frequency of price adjustment for U.S. retailers and therefore it is hard to
see the contribution of the Great Recession to increased frequency of price adjustment in Canada.
        To explore this issue further, we regress the frequency of price increases and the frequency
of price decreases on the CAD/USD exchange rate over the period that excludes the Great
Recession; that is, we use data after June 2009. We find that the frequency of price decreases in
Canada is not statistically or economically sensitive to the exchange rate while the frequency of
price increases continues to stay highly significant in statistical and economic terms. At the same
time, the frequency of price decreases in the U.S. is positively related to the CAD/USD exchange
rate (although the sensitivity is smaller than that for Canada) while the frequency of price increases
in the U.S. does not exhibit a significant correlation with the exchange rate. This pattern of
responses is consistent with the predictions of economic theory on how firms should adjust their
prices and therefore it corroborates our findings in Table 7.
        The exit frequency (Figure 6) is positively correlated with the nominal exchange rate for both
the U.S. and Canada but, similar to other margins, the exit margin in Canada is more sensitive to
fluctuations in the nominal exchange rate. Some of the positive correlation is determined by the
coincidence of high turnover of sellers and goods (i.e., high exit frequency) and depreciation of the
Canadian dollar in the Great Recession. If we exclude the Great Recession, the exit frequency in the
U.S. shows no sensitivity to the exchange rate, while the exit frequency in Canada is even more
strongly positively related to the CAD/USD exchange rate. It appears that, when the Canadian dollar
depreciates, the U.S. consumers take advantage of cheap Canadian prices and deplete inventories of
Canadian stores while the pool of Canadian customers is unable to exercise the same pressure on U.S.
stores when the Canadian dollar appreciates.
5. Concluding remarks
While the law of one price is an appealing concept, the vast majority of previous research has
emphasized various frictions that prevent the law from holding over relative long periods. These
frictions can take a variety of forms but the most popular barriers leading to violations of the law
are search costs, costs of nominal price adjustment, and transportation costs. Assessing the
contribution of these frictions has been remarkably difficult as these frictions are ubiquitous in
standard markets with brick-and-mortar stores.
        Online markets have unusual characteristics such as low search costs, irrelevance of
physical locations of buyers and sellers, and negligible physical costs of price changes. Thus,
studying price setting in online markets offers a unique opportunity to rule out the prominent
frictions and explore whether the law of one price holds in this close to ideal setting.
        We construct a new, massive dataset of online price quotes in the U.S. and Canada. This
dataset has a number of desirable features such as long time series, large cross sections, and multiple
sellers. We document that, relative to prices in regular stores, prices in online markets are more
flexible as well as exhibit stronger pass-through and faster convergence in response to movements
of the nominal exchange rate. Multiple margins of adjustment (frequency of price changes, direction
of price changes, size of price changes, exit of sellers) are active in the process of responding to
nominal exchange rate shocks. Furthermore, we use the richness of our dataset to show that the
sensitivity of prices to changes in the nominal exchange rate can be systematically related to the
fundamental characteristics of goods and markets (e.g., the degree of competition). To the extent
future retail will shift to the internet, one can therefore expect that cross-country price differentials
are going to be smaller and less persistent, bringing the law of one price closer to reality.
        We also demonstrate that online markets do have imperfections. For example, a large cross-
sectional dispersion of prices for identical goods and incomplete pass-through for some types of
goods appear inconsistent with the notion of an ideal marketplace. What prevents internet shopping
from being frictionless is an open question. Perhaps, consumers and firms have significant
informational frictions. For example, consumers may prefer to buy goods from a fixed store
because this “habit” saves them time by not having to learn the details of how transactions are
processed by alternative sellers (e.g., shipping time and cost, return policy, accepted means of
payment). In a similar spirit, online stores may be overwhelmed with information flows and thus
may resort to using simple rules and periodic reviews to economize on costs of processing
information. We hope that future research will shed more light on why imperfections may persist
in online markets.
        This paper has a number of implications for data collection. For example, the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and other statistical agencies should sample online prices at higher frequencies since
these prices are more flexible and responsive to shocks. There is a distribution of prices even for
precisely defined goods and, therefore, statistical agencies should sample prices from multiple stores
to ensure that one can construct a good measure of transaction prices. Scraping of online prices is a
cheap and fast approach to collect price quotes but scraping cannot provide a measure of quantities.
Using the number of clicks may provide a simple proxy for quantities of goods sold in online stores,
but the quality of this and similar proxies should be verified with alternative information.




References
Abowd, John M., and David Card, 1989. “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
        Changes,” Econometrica 57(2), 411-445.
Altonji, Joseph G.. and Lewis M. Segal, 1996. “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
        Covariance Structures,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 353-366.
Asplund, Marcus, and Richard Friberg, 2001. “The Law of One Price in Scandinavian Duty-Free
        Stores,” American Economic Review 91(4), 1072-1083.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Ariel Burstein, 2008. “Pricing-to-Market, Trade Costs, and International
        Relative Prices,” American Economic Review 98(5), 1998-2031.
Barhoumi, Karim, 2005. “Long Run Exchange Rate Pass-Through Into Import Prices In
        Developing Countries: An Homogeneous or Heterogeneous Phenomenon?” Economics
        Bulletin 6(14), 1-12.
Baye, Michael R. and John Morgan, 2004. “Price Dispersion in the Lab and on the Internet: Theory
        and Evidence,” RAND Journal of Economics 35(3), 449-466.
Baye, Michael R. and John Morgan, 2009. “Brand and Price Advertising in Online Markets,"
        Management Science 55(7), 1139-1151.
Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan, 2001. “Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and the
        Competitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets,” American Economic Review 91(3),
        454-474.
Baye, Michael R., J. Rupert J. Gatti, Paul Kattuman, and John Morgan, 2006. “Did the Euro Foster
        Online Price Competition? Evidence from an International Price Comparison Site.”
        Economic Inquiry 44(2), 265-279.
Baye, Michael R., J. Rupert J. Gatti, Paul Kattuman, and John Morgan, 2007. “A Dashboard for
        Online Pricing,” California Management Review 50(1), 202-216.
Baye, Michael R., J. Rupert J. Gatti, Paul Kattuman, and John Morgan, 2009. “Clicks,
        Discontinuities, and Firm Demand Online," Journal of Economics & Management Strategy
        18(4), 935-975.
Bergin, Paul R., and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001. “Pricing-to-market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
        Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54(2), 333-359.
Bhaskar, V., 2002. “On Endogenously Staggered Prices,” Review of Economic Studies 69(1), 97-
        116.
Bils, Mark, and Peter Klenow, 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal
        of Political Economy 112(5), 947-985.
Boivin, Jean, Robert Clark, and Nicolas Vincent, 2012. “Virtual Borders,” Journal of International
        Economics 86(2), 327-335.
Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein, 2008. “Understanding International Price Differences
        Using Barcode Data,” NBER Working Papers 14017, National Bureau of Economic
        Research, Inc.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Michael D. Smith, 2000. “Frictionless Commerce? A Comparison of
        Internet and Conventional Retailers,” Management Science 46(4), 563-585.
Campa, Jose Manuel, and Linda S. Goldberg, 2005. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import
        Prices,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4), 679-690.
Cao, Shutao, Wei Dong, and Ben Tomlin, 2012. “The Sensitivity of Producer Prices to Exchange
        Rates: Insights from Micro Data,” Working Papers 12-20, Bank of Canada.
Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Neiman, and Roberto Rigobon, 2014. “Currency Unions, Product
        Introductions, and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2), 529-
        595.
Chevalier, Judith A., and Anil K. Kashyap, 2011. “Best Prices,” NBER Working Paper 16680.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong, 2012. “The Cyclicality of Sales,
        Regular and Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications,” NBER Working
        Paper 18273.
Consumer Futures, 2013. Price comparison websites: Consumer perceptions and experiences.
        Available      at:   http://www.consumerfutures.org.uk/files/2013/07/Price-Comparison-
        Websites-Consumer-perceptions-and-experiences.pdf.
Crucini, Mario J., and Mototsugu Shintani, 2008. “Persistence in Law of One Price Deviations:
        Evidence from Micro-Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55(3), 629-644.
Deck, Cary A., and Bart J. Wilson, 2006. “Tracking Customer Search to Price Discriminate,”
        Economic Inquiry 44(2), 280-295.
Devereux, Michael B., and James Yetman, 2010. “Price Adjustment and Exchange Rate Pass-
        Through,” Journal of International Money and Finance 29(1), 181-200.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1987. “Exchange Rates and Prices,” American Economic Review 77(1), 93-
        106.
Driscoll, John C., and Aart C. Kraay, 1998. “Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimation With
        Spatially Dependent Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80(4), 549-560.
Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, Sergio Rebelo, and Josephine Smith, 2014. “How Frequent
        Are Small Price Changes?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6(2), 137-55.
Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996. “How Wide Is the Border?” American Economic Review
        86(5), 1112-1125.
Engel, Charles, 1993. “Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical Investigation,”
        Journal of Monetary Economics 32(1), 35-50.
Feenstra, Robert C., Joseph E. Gagnon, and Michael M. Knetter, 1996. “Market Share and
        Exchange Rate Pass-Through in World Automobile Trade,” Journal of International
        Economics 40(1-2), 187-207.
Gaulier, Guillaume, Amina Lahreche-Revil, and Isabelle Mejean, 2006. “Structural Determinants
        of the Exchange-Rate Pass-Through,” Working Papers 2006-03, CEPII research center.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Rebecca Hellerstein, 2013. “A Structural Approach to Identifying the
        Sources of Local-Currency Price Stability,” Review of Economic Studies 80(1), 175-210.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Michael M. Knetter, 1997. “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What
        Have We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature 35(3), 1243-1272.
Goldberg, Pinelopi K., and Frank Verboven, 2001. “The Evolution of Price Dispersion in the
        European Car Market,” Review of Economic Studies 68(4), 811-848.
Gopinath, Gita, and Roberto Rigobon, 2008. “Sticky Borders,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        123(2), 531-575.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li, 2011. “International
        Prices, Cost and Markup Differences,” American Economic Review 101(6), 2450-2486.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Linda L. Tesar, 2009. “Border Effect or Country Effect? Seattle May
        Not Be So Far from Vancouver After All,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
        1(1), 219-241.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, Viacheslav Sheremirov, and Oleksandr Talavera, 2014. “Price Setting in
        Online Markets: Evidence from A Major Shopping Platform,” manuscript.
Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert Vigfusson, 2010. “Trade Integration, Competition,
         and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through,” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(3),
         309-324.
Head, Allen, Alok Kumar, and Beverly Lapham, 2010. “Market Power, Price Adjustment, And
         Inflation,” International Economic Review 51(1), 73-98.
Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2005. “PPP Strikes Back:
         Aggregation and the Real Exchange Rate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1), 1-43.
Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morten O. Ravn, and Hélène Rey, 2010. “One TV, One Price?"
         Scandinavian Journal of Economics 112(4), 753-781.
Kardasz, Stanley W., and Kenneth R. Stollery, 2001. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through and Its
         Determinants in Canadian Manufacturing Industries,” Canadian Journal of Economics
         34(3), 719-738.
Kehoe, Patrick J., and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2010. “Prices Are Sticky After All,” NBER Working
         Paper 16364.
Lünnemann, Patrick, and Ladislav Wintr, 2011. “Price Stickiness in the US and Europe Revisited:
         Evidence from Internet Prices,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 73(5), 593-
         621.
Mayoral, Laura, and Maria D. Gadea, 2011. “Aggregate Real Exchange Rate Persistence through
         the Lens of Sectoral Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 58(3), 290-304.
Menon, Jayant, 1996. “The Degree and Determinants of Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Market
         Structure, Non-Tariff Barriers and Multinational Corporations,” Economic Journal
         106(435), 434-44.
Morgan, John, Henrik Orzen, and Martin Sefton, 2006. “An Experimental Study of Price
         Dispersion,” Games and Economic Behavior 54(1), 134-158.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson, 2008. “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
         Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1415-1464.
Neiman, Brent, 2010. “Stickiness, Synchronization, and Passthrough in Intrafirm Trade Prices,”
         Journal of Monetary Economics 57(3), 295-308.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
         Macroeconomics. Is There a Common Cause,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000,
         B.S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Richards, Timothy J., Miguel I. Gómez, and Jun Lee, 2014. “Pass-Through and Consumer Search:
         An Empirical Analysis,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, forthcoming.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature
         34(2), 647-668.
Statistics Canada. 2013. “Individual Internet use and e-commerce, 2012.” Ottawa, Canada.
Takhtamanova, Yelena F., 2010. “Understanding Changes in Exchange Rate Pass-Through,”
         Journal of Macroeconomics 32(4), 1118-1130.
Yang, Jiawen, 1997. “Exchange Rate Pass-Through In U.S. Manufacturing Industries,” Review of
         Economics and Statistics 79(1), 95-104.
Figure 1. Screenshots of typical web‐pages from price comparison websites.
                                                     Figure 2. Time series of CAD/USD exchange rate.




                              1.3
        Canadian Dollars to One U.S. Dollar, Daily
              1            1.1         1.2




                                                     Start of data collection
                              .9




                               01jul2008               01jul2009       01jul2010   01jul2011   01jul2012   01jul2013


Notes: Source: Board of Governors.
                                             Figure 3. Price quotes.


                         WD VelociRaptor 300GB Hard Drive, by seller, CA

                450




                                                                                             1.3
                                                                                             Nominal Exchange Rate, USD/CAD
                400




                                                                                                                  1.2
                 350
           Price
        300




                                                                                                   1.1
                250
                200




                                                                                             1
                       2008Oct   Jan   Apr      Jul
                                                      2009Oct    Jan   Apr   Jul
                                                                                   2010Oct



                         WD VelociRaptor 300GB Hard Drive, by seller, US
                400




                                                                                             1.3
                                                                                             Nominal Exchange Rate, USD/CAD
                350




                                                                                                                  1.2
                300
        Price
                250




                                                                                                   1.1
                200
                150




                                                                                             1




                       2008Oct   Jan   Apr      Jul
                                                      2009Oct    Jan   Apr   Jul
                                                                                   2010Oct


Notes: Solid, thick black line is the nominal exchange rate. All other lines are price quotes for
the WD VelociRaptor 300Gb hard drive.
                                                         Figure 4. Price quotes listed on the price comparison website and seller websites.

                                                          Panel A: log price quotes                                                        Panel B: average log prices




                                                                                                                                 7
                                                7
                       price comparison website




                                                                                                        price comparison website
                                                                                                                           6
                                          6




                                                                                                                      5
                                4    5




                                                                                                                 4
                           3




                                                                                                            3
                                     2




                                                                                                                      2
                                                    2       3           4        5        6       7                                  2        3         4         5          6   7
                                                                       seller website                                                                  seller website
                                                        Panel C: IQR log price quotes                                                    Panel D: st.dev. log price quotes




                                                                                                                                .5
                                              .8
                       price comparison website




                                                                                                        price comparison website
                                                                                                                          .4
                                        .6




                                                                                                                      .3
                                 .4




                                                                                                                .2
                            .2




                                                                                                            .1
                                     0




                                                                                                                      0
                                                    0      .2     .4         .6      .8       1   1.2                                0            .2         .4         .6       .8
                                                                       seller website                                                                  seller website

Notes: Panel A shows price quotes listed on the price comparison website and seller websites for each good, that is, each point is a good-seller
price quote. In Panel B, average log price quote is calculated for each source of price information, that is, each point shows an average log price
for a good. Panel C shows the interquantile range of log prices across sellers for each good in both sources of price information. Panel D shows
the standard deviation of log prices across sellers for each good in both sources of price information.


                                                                                                                                                                                      31
                                                           Figure 5. Intensive and extensive margins of price adjustment.

                                             Panel A: All price changes                                                                                                          Panel D: All price changes




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.3
                 .04




                                                                                                   1.3




                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                              CA = 0.06 (0.01)                                                                                                                 CA = 0.96 (0.09)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)
                                                                                                   Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)
                                                              US = 0.00 (0.01)                                                                                                                 US = 0.12 (0.03)




                                                                                                                                     frequency of price adjustment
                         .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.2
                                                                                                                          1.2




                                                                                                                                                             .3
        mean dlog(price)
                0




                                                                                                               1.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1.1
                                                                                                                                                   .2
      -.02




                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                 -.04




                                                                                                   .9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .9
                                                                                                                                                    0
                  01jul2008                   01jul2010                 01jul2012                                                                    01jul2008                    01jul2010                01jul2012
                                01jul2009                   01jul2011               01jul2013                                                                        01jul2009                01jul2011                  01jul2013

                                 Canada                  U.S.A.           X-rate (CAD/USD)                                                                            Canada              U.S.A.              X-rate (CAD/USD)



                                             Panel B: Price increases                                                                                                             Panel E: Price increases




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.3
                                                                                                  1.3




                                                                                                                                                     .3
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA = 0.58 (0.05)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)
                                                                                                  Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)


                                                                                                                                     frequency of price adjustment


                                                                                                                                                                                                   US = 0.05 (0.01)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                                                                                                                         1.2
 mean dlog(price)
              .15




                                                                                                                                                          .2




                                     CA = -0.17 (0.04)
                                     US = 0.06 (0.01)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.1
                                                                                                              1.1




                                                                                                                                           .1
 .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     1
           .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .9
                                                                                                  .9




                                                                                                                                                     0




            01jul2008                        01jul2010                  01jul2012                                                                    01jul2008                    01jul2010                 01jul2012
                               01jul2009                    01jul2011               01jul2013                                                                        01jul2009                01jul2011                   01jul2013

                                Canada               U.S.A.               X-rate (CAD/USD)                                                                            Canada               U.S.A.             X-rate (CAD/USD)



                                            Panel C: Price decreases                                                                                                             Panel F: Price decreases




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.3
         -.05




                                                                                                1.3




                                                                                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA = 0.38 (0.09)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   US = 0.08 (0.02)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)
                                                                                                Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)


                                                                                                                                    frequency of price adjustment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                                                       1.2
 mean dlog(price)
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                           CA = 0.12 (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.1
                                                                                                            1.1




                                           US = -0.05 (0.02)
-.15




                                                                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   1
         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .9
                                                                                                .9




                                                                                                                                                   0




          01jul2008                          01jul2010                  01jul2012                                                                  01jul2008                      01jul2010                  01jul2012
                               01jul2009                   01jul2011                01jul2013                                                                        01jul2009                01jul2011                   01jul2013

                                Canada               U.S.A.               X-rate (CAD/USD)                                                                            Canada               U.S.A.             X-rate (CAD/USD)


                               Notes:     and      show estimated slopes of regressing a given variable for Canada and the
                               U.S. on the nominal CAD/USD exchange rate. Newey-West standard errors are in
                               parentheses. See section 5.D for further details.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32
                               Figure 6. Exit margin of price adjustment.




                                                                                         1.3
               .25
                                                      CA = 0.36 (0.05)
                                                      US = 0.22 (0.06)




                                                                                         Nominal exchange rate (X-rate)
               .2




                                                                                                                1.2
        exit frequency
                  .15




                                                                                                     1.1
         .1




                                                                                           1
               .05




                                                                                         .9
               0




               01jul2008               01jul2010                 01jul2012
                           01jul2009                01jul2011                01jul2013

                            Canada              U.S.A.             X-rate (CAD/USD)



Notes:     and       show estimated slopes of regressing a given variable for Canada and the
U.S. on the nominal exchange rate. Newey-West standard errors are in parentheses. See
section 5.D for further details.
                              Table 1. Description of categories.

Category                          Type
Cameras (10 categories)           35mm SLR lens Accessories, Bags and Cases, Binoculars,
                                  Camcorders, Camcorder Batteries, Camcorder Accessories,
                                  Dedicated Flashes, Digital Cameras, SLR Lenses, Tripods

Computers (20 categories)         Cases, Desktops, Flash Memory, Flat Panel LCD monitors,
                                  Hard Drives, Hubs, Keyboards, Laptop, Laptop Memory,
                                  Microphones and Headsets, Modems, Motherboards, Network
                                  Adapters, Power Supply, Processors, Scanners, Speakers,
                                  Storage Media, UPSS, Webcams

Electronics (13 categories)       Audio Cables, AV Accessories, Calculators, Cash Registers,
                                  GPS, Headphones, MP3 players, Portable Device Accessories,
                                  Projectors, Projection Screens, Plasma/LCD TV, TV
                                  Accessories, Video Cables

Software (12 categories)          Anti-Virus, Audio/Video Utilities, Computer Games,
                                  Engineering and Design, Databases, Financial and Legal
                                  Software, Graphics and Publishing, Office Suites,
                                  Programming, Security, System Utilities, Windows Operating
                                  Systems
                                 Table 2. Descriptive statistics.

                                             Mean     St.Dev    Median    P25     P75
                                               (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)     (5)
                                          Panel A: Canada
 Cross-sectional distribution of prices
     St.dev. log(Price)                       0.128    0.105     0.103    0.057    0.162
     IQR log(Price)                           0.095    0.097     0.067    0.024    0.141
     Median log(Price)                        5.077    1.488     5.011    3.994    6.113
 Median duration of price spell (weeks)
     procedure A                              1.350    1.657     1.000    1.000    1.000
     procedure B                              1.731    2.309     1.000    1.000    2.000
     procedure C                              2.974    9.615     1.000    1.000    2.000
 Frequency of price changes                   0.324    0.210     0.285    0.163    0.456
 Size of price changes
     Median dlog(Price)                     -0.007    0.030    -0.004    -0.009   -0.002
     Median abs(dlog(Price))                0.041     0.058     0.022     0.014    0.044

 Synchronization of price changes           0.299     0.213    0.272     0.132    0.456
 Properties of sellers
    Number of sellers                       2.399     1.318    2.037     1.304    3.213
    Stability                               0.423     0.213    0.360     0.283    0.500

                                        Panel B: USA
 Cross-sectional distribution of prices
     St.dev. log(Price)                   0.151   0.123        0.115     0.069    0.195
     IQR log(Price)                       0.160   0.151        0.115     0.065    0.205
     Median log(Price)                    4.979   1.471        4.912     3.906    5.999
 Median duration of price spell (weeks)
     procedure A                          1.487   1.504        1.000     1.000    2.000
     procedure B                          2.079   2.470        2.000     1.000    2.000
     procedure C                          4.112   9.335        2.000     1.500    3.000
 Frequency of price changes               0.191   0.114        0.179     0.106    0.263
 Size of price changes
     Median dlog(Price)                 -0.005    0.031        -0.003    -0.010   0.001
     Median abs(dlog(Price))             0.042    0.048         0.030     0.017   0.051

 Synchronization of price changes           0.190     0.121    0.176     0.109    0.252
 Properties of sellers
    Number of sellers                       3.627     1.983    3.276     2.186    4.569
    Stability                               0.405     0.188    0.366     0.263    0.507

Notes: The number of goods is 12,657.
                                  Table 3. International Price Differentials

                                                                                  AR1      AR1
                                                                          AR1
                           Mean      St.Dev    Median     P25     P75             Type     Good          N
                                                                          OLS
                                                                                   FE       FE
                            (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)     (7)      (8)          (9)

                                              Panel A: Mean prices
Relative exchange rate    0.083      0.236     0.062    -0.030   0.199   0.923    0.918   0.816    1,709,011
Real exchange rate        0.052      0.231     0.035    -0.051   0.150   0.917    0.912   0.806    1,709,011

                                              Panel B: Median prices
Relative exchange rate    0.088      0.238     0.065    -0.025   0.204   0.913    0.908   0.801    1,708,982
Real exchange rate        0.057      0.233     0.038    -0.045   0.154   0.907    0.902   0.790    1,708,982

                                             Panel C: Minimum prices
Relative exchange rate    0.133      0.279     0.096    -0.003   0.255   0.912    0.906   0.801    1,708,960
Real exchange rate        0.102      0.276     0.070    -0.029   0.219   0.909    0.903   0.795    1,708,960

                         Panel D: Star-weighted prices (imputation A, missing = 1)
Relative exchange rate    0.080      0.278     0.069    -0.035   0.210   0.919    0.914   0.834    1,708,969
Real exchange rate        0.049      0.275     0.040    -0.061   0.167   0.916    0.911   0.830    1,708,969

                         Panel E: Star-weighted prices (imputation B, missing = 2.5)
Relative exchange rate    0.073      0.274     0.062    -0.040   0.200   0.920    0.916   0.836    1,708,979
Real exchange rate        0.042      0.271     0.036    -0.059   0.154   0.917    0.913   0.832    1,708,979

  Notes: Relative exchange rate is calculated as log       /     where i and t index goods and weeks.
  The real exchange rate is calculated as log              /       where        is the nominal CAD/USD
                                                              th        th
  exchange rate. P25 and P75 in columns (4) and (5) show 25 and 75 percentile of the statistics
  indicated in the first column. Column (6) shows the AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled
  sample. Column (7) shows the AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled sample with category fixed
  effects. Column (8) shows the AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled sample with good fixed
  effects. The sample of goods is the same as in Table 2. See text for further details.
                    Table 4. Pass‐through and speed of price adjustment.

                                           No Fixed       Type Fixed       Good Fixed                  N
                                            effects         effects          effects
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)                     (4)

                                            Panel A: Pass-through
 Mean Price                                0.761***       0.736***          0.698***            1,709,011
                                          (0.105)        (0.096)           (0.080)
 Median Price                              0.743***       0.719***          0.698***            1,708,982
                                          (0.106)        (0.097)           (0.082)
 Minimum Price                             0.667***       0.669***          0.677***            1,708,960
                                          (0.067)        (0.056)           (0.042)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)         0.676***       0.634***          0.614***            1,708,969
                                          (0.098)        (0.088)           (0.077)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)       0.691***       0.668***          0.642***            1,708,979
                                          (0.089)        (0.082)           (0.071)

                                        Panel B: Speed of Adjustment
 Mean Price                              -0.060***      -0.064***          -0.158***             885,150
                                         (0.004)        (0.004)            (0.005)
 Median Price                            -0.067***      -0.072***          -0.170***             884,835
                                         (0.004)        (0.003)            (0.005)
 Minimum Price                           -0.067***      -0.072***          -0.169***             883,912
                                         (0.003)        (0.003)            (0.005)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)       -0.062***      -0.066***          -0.135***             886,115
                                         (0.007)        (0.007)            (0.012)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)     -0.061***      -0.064***          -0.133***             886,292
                                         (0.007)        (0.007)            (0.012)

                                          Panel C: Intra-seller prices
 Pass-through                             0.905***        0.627***          0.284***             118,680
                                         (0.029)         (0.080)           (0.050)
 Speed of Adjustment                     -0.000          -0.046***         -0.116***              54,795
                                         (0.005)         (0.009)           (0.013)

Notes: Panel A presents estimates of in specification (1). Panel B presents estimates of in
specification (2). Panel C reports estimates of (the first row) and (the second row) for the sample
of price quotes by the same seller in the U.S. and Canada. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors
are in parentheses. ***, **, * show statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
 Table 5. Descriptive statistics of estimated pass‐through and speed of price adjustment by good.

 Price measure              Variable      Mean       St.Dev.     Median        P25          P75
 Mean Price                              -0.214       0.222      -0.159       -0.298       -0.069
                                          0.616       2.218       0.698       -0.192        1.460

 Median Price                            -0.232       0.232       -0.175      -0.326       -0.076
                                          0.647       2.253        0.719      -0.164        1.469

 Minimum Price                           -0.229       0.236       -0.170      -0.322       -0.071
                                          0.632       2.568        0.716      -0.265        1.609

 Star-weighted Price                     -0.219       0.244       -0.162      -0.306       -0.069
    (missing = 1)                         0.558       2.512        0.666      -0.205        1.459

 Star-weighted Price                     -0.215       0.247       -0.158      -0.298      -0.067
    (missing = 2.5)                       0.544       2.490        0.675      -0.206       1.448

Notes: The table shows moments of and estimated for each good separately. The last two
columns show 25th and 75th percentiles. The number of goods is 12,657.
                       Table 6. Determinants of pass‐through and speed of price adjustment.

                                                                 Price measure
                                                                                   Star-weighted      Star-weighted
Regressors
                               Mean price       Median price   Minimum price            Price              Price
                                                                                   (missing = 1)     (missing = 2.5)
                                  (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)

                                                Panel A: Pass Through

Log(Median Price)                 0.154*             0.260***       0.546***          -0.074              0.072
                                 (0.092)            (0.097)        (0.124)            (0.143)            (0.104)
Log(Median Price)2               -0.020**           -0.028***      -0.054***           0.000             -0.012
                                 (0.008)            (0.008)        (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.009)
Freq. of price change             1.511***           1.515***       1.882***           1.525***           1.537***
                                 (0.172)            (0.155)        (0.236)            (0.155)            (0.153)
Log(Sellers)                      1.435***           1.563***       2.152***           1.673***           1.535***
                                 (0.317)            (0.348)        (0.400)            (0.348)            (0.338)
Log(Sellers)2                    -0.441***          -0.469***      -0.666***          -0.528***          -0.470***
                                 (0.092)            (0.099)        (0.123)            (0.100)            (0.098)
Stability of Sellers              0.677**            0.851**        0.903**            0.138              0.329
                                 (0.329)            (0.365)        (0.398)            (0.305)            (0.308)
Synchronization                  -0.024             -0.140         -0.474*            -0.189             -0.130
                                 (0.255)            (0.262)        (0.265)            (0.221)            (0.234)
Average Reputation                0.039              0.040          0.139**            0.046              0.032
                                 (0.047)            (0.048)        (0.053)            (0.046)            (0.046)
Observations                     11,747            11,731          11,713             11,749             11,750
R2                                0.09               0.09           0.11               0.09               0.09
                                             Panel B: Speed of Adjustment

Log(Median Price)                 0.033***          0.041***         0.007             0.022**            0.025**
                                 (0.011)           (0.012)          (0.010)           (0.010)            (0.011)
Log(Median Price)2               -0.003***         -0.004***        -0.001            -0.002**           -0.002**
                                 (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)
Freq. of price change            -0.079***         -0.092***        -0.073***         -0.079***          -0.087***
                                 (0.022)           (0.020)          (0.026)           (0.021)            (0.021)
Log(Sellers)                     -0.173***         -0.156***        -0.147**          -0.169***          -0.167***
                                 (0.054)           (0.053)          (0.060)           (0.057)            (0.057)
Log(Sellers)2                     0.054***          0.047***         0.044**           0.053***           0.052***
                                 (0.017)           (0.017)          (0.018)           (0.018)            (0.018)
Stability of Sellers              0.280***          0.385***         0.337***          0.282***           0.261***
                                 (0.071)           (0.072)          (0.052)           (0.067)            (0.071)
Synchronization                   0.059***          0.047*           0.039             0.075***           0.075***
                                 (0.022)           (0.025)          (0.028)           (0.024)            (0.022)
Average Reputation               -0.003            -0.005           -0.005            -0.000             -0.002
                                 (0.004)           (0.004)          (0.005)           (0.004)            (0.004)
Observations                     11,743            11,724           11,713            11,740             11,741
R2                                0.13              0.12             0.13              0.13               0.13

        Notes: Panels A and B report estimated specifications (3) and (4) respectively. Category fixed effects
        Ci and time fixed effects Ti are included but not reported. The regressions are run on samples where
        top and bottom 2 percent of estimated and are truncated. Standard errors are clustered by good
        type. ***, **, * show statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
                                                               Table 7. Margins of price adjustment

                                                                  Mean price change                      Probability of price adjustment               Probability
                                                        Any         Increase       Decrease            Any          Increase         Decrease            of exit
                                                                                                    Pr      0     Pr         0     Pr       0           Pr
                                                         (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)                 (7)

Mean price                                CA          -0.137***      -0.048***    -0.091***           -0.002         -0.079***        0.077***          -0.010
                                                        (0.016)        (0.014)      (0.010)           (0.014)          (0.009)        (0.012)           (0.007)
                                          US           0.067***       0.042***     0.050***            0.008          0.024***       -0.016***          -0.006
                                                        (0.007)        (0.008)      (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.005)        (0.004)           (0.008)

Median price                              CA          -0.113***      -0.030***    -0.072***           -0.001         -0.074***        0.072***          -0.010
                                                        (0.015)        (0.013)      (0.009)           (0.013)          (0.008)        (0.012)           (0.006)
                                          US           0.058***       0.026***     0.047***            0.004          0.023***       -0.019***          -0.003
                                                        (0.006)        (0.007)      (0.006)           (0.006)          (0.005)        (0.004)           (0.007)

Minimum Price                             CA          -0.080***      -0.038***    -0.053***            -0.011        -0.052***        0.042***          -0.043***
                                                        (0.010)       (0.006)       (0.008)            (0.011)         (0.005)        (0.010)           (0.004)
                                          US           0.038***       0.059***       0.002            0.009***        0.020***       -0.011***           0.027***
                                                        (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.004)            (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.002)           (0.004)

Star-weighted Price                       CA          -0.086***      -0.034***    -0.055***           -0.009         -0.049***        0.040***          -0.001
(missing = 1)                                           (0.015)        (0.011)      (0.010)           (0.009)          (0.010)        (0.008)           (0.004)
                                          US           0.036***       0.014***     0.035***            0.007*         0.015***       -0.008***          -0.002
                                                        (0.007)        (0.005)      (0.006)           (0.004)          (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.003)

Star-weighted Price                       CA          -0.092***      -0.035***    -0.060***           -0.005         -0.048***        0.043***          -0.001
(missing = 2.5)                                         (0.017)        (0.012)      (0.011)           (0.009)          (0.010)        (0.009)           (0.004)
                                          US           0.037***       0.016***     0.036***            0.007*         0.015***       -0.008***          -0.004
                                                        (0.007)        (0.005)      (0.006)           (0.004)          (0.004)        (0.002)           (0.004)

Notes: The table reports estimated in specification (9). Good fixed effects are included but not reported. Newey-West standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **,
* show statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.



                                                                                                                                                                  40
APPENDIX




           1
                  Appendix Figure 1. Distribution of prices in the full and estimation samples.


                                                          Canada




                           .3
                  kdensity logPrice
                   .1      0    .2




                                      0                   5                                10
                                                              x

                                              Whole Sample             Estimation Sample




                                                              US
                           .3
                  kdensity logPrice
                   .1      0    .2




                                      0   2           4            6             8              10
                                                              x

                                              Whole Sample             Estimation Sample


Notes: The figures show kernel densities for the distribution of prices (Epanechnikov kernel with optimal
width). Log price is on the horizontal axis.
              Appendix Table 1. Pricing moments for the full and estimation sample.

                                                     U.S.A.                       Canada
                 Moment                      Estimation     Full          Estimation     Full
                                              sample      sample           sample      sample
                                                 (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)
Mean price                                      5.20        5.27             5.04        5.13
Average cross-sectional st.dev. log price       0.16        0.16             0.12        0.12
Average freq. of price changes                  0.21        0.19             0.34        0.34
Average absolute size of price change           0.05        0.06             0.05        0.05
Average turnover of sellers                     0.90        0.91             0.89        0.92
Average seller rating                           3.06        3.08             2.60        2.70
Number of sellers                               5.95        5.36             4.10        3.26
           Appendix Table 2. Descriptive statistics for gross prices that include taxes and shipping costs.

                                                                                        AR1      AR1
                                                                               AR1
                               Mean    St.Dev.       Median    P25      P75             Type     Good         N
                                                                               OLS
                                                                                         FE       FE
                                (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)         (9)

                                                 Panel A: Mean prices
   Relative exchange rate     0.107    0.205       0.097      0.006    0.180   0.929   0.922    0.738     830,169
   Real exchange rate         0.064    0.205       0.052      -0.038   0.138   0.928   0.921    0.741     830,169

                                                 Panel B: Median prices
   Relative exchange rate     0.109    0.205       0.098      0.009    0.181   0.919   0.911    0.719     830,167
   Real exchange rate         0.065    0.206       0.053      -0.036   0.141   0.918   0.911    0.724     830,167

                                                Panel C: Minimum prices
   Relative exchange rate     0.166    0.253       0.135      0.020    0.284   0.920   0.912    0.731     830,216
   Real exchange rate         0.123    0.255       0.095      -0.026   0.237   0.920   0.913    0.742     830,216

                            Panel D: Star-weighted prices (imputation A, missing = 1)
   Relative exchange rate     0.117    0.210       0.090      0.006    0.222   0.933   0.927    0.745     830,180
   Real exchange rate         0.073    0.211       0.047      -0.040   0.176   0.932   0.926    0.747     830,180

                            Panel E: Star-weighted prices (imputation B, missing = 2.5)
   Relative exchange rate     0.108    0.205       0.086      0.009    0.193   0.933   0.926    0.743     830,127
   Real exchange rate         0.064    0.205       0.042      -0.035   0.154   0.931   0.925    0.745     830,127

Notes: Relative exchange rate is calculated as log       /     where i and t index goods and weeks. The real exchange
rate is calculated as log             /      where      is the nominal CAD/USD exchange rate. P25 and P75 in
                            th       th
columns (4) and (5) show 25 and 75 percentile of the statistics indicated in the first column. Column (6) shows the
AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled sample. Column (7) shows the AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled
sample with category fixed effects. Column (8) shows the AR(1) coefficient estimated on the pooled sample with
good fixed effects. The sample of goods is the same as in Table 2. See text for further details.
          Appendix Table 3. Pass‐through and speed of price adjustment for gross and net prices.

                                                                Panel A: Pass-through
                                                   Gross Prices                            Net Prices
                                          Good Fixed                            Good Fixed
                                                                  N                                      N
                                            effects                                effects
                                              (3)                (4)                 (3)                (4)
 Mean Price                                 0.166             481,719              0.212*             481,710
                                           (0.105)                                (0.111)
 Median Price                               0.201**           481,716              0.253**            481,652
                                           (0.096)                                (0.100)
 Minimum Price                              0.126             480,759              0.169*             480,691
                                           (0.091)                                (0.085)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)          0.428***          481,669              0.454***           481,690
                                           (0.098)                                (0.100)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)        0.252**           481,739              0.291**            481,724
                                           (0.106)                                (0.111)

                                                           Panel B: Speed of Adjustment
                                                   Gross Prices                          Net Prices
                                          Good Fixed                           Good Fixed
                                                                 N                                     N
                                            effects                              effects
                                              (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)
 Mean Price                                -0.216***          335,958           -0.210***           336,010
                                           (0.010)                              (0.010)
 Median Price                              -0.235***          335,801           -0.228***           335,806
                                           (0.009)                              (0.009)
 Minimum Price                             -0.235***          334,773           -0.231***           334,710
                                           (0.011)                              (0.010)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)         -0.216***          335,768           -0.209***           335,834
                                           (0.009)                              (0.009)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)       -0.213***          335,942           -0.206***           335,969
                                           (0.009)                              (0.009)

Notes: The table presents estimates of pass-through and the speed of price adjustment for gross prices (net price +
shipping/handling costs) in column (1). The specification reported in the table corresponds to column (3) in Table 4.
Column (3) presents results for net prices where the estimation sample of goods is identical to the sample in column
(1). All data are at weekly frequency. Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * show
statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels.
  Appendix Table 4. Pass‐through and the speed of price adjustment for gross and net prices, monthly
                                             frequency.

                                                            Panel A: Pass-through
                                                 Gross Prices                        Net Prices
                                         Good Fixed            N            Good Fixed             N
                                           effects                             effects
                                             (3)              (4)                (3)              (4)
 Mean Price                                0.399**          140,385            0.446**          140,356
                                          (0.160)                             (0.161)
 Median Price                              0.437***         140,369            0.485***         140,360
                                          (0.150)                             (0.149)
 Minimum Price                             0.071            140,055            0.133            140,031
                                          (0.146)                             (0.131)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)         0.672***         140,348            0.692***         140,358
                                          (0.158)                             (0.155)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)       0.507***         140,396            0.544***         140,386
                                          (0.166)                             (0.168)

                                                         Panel B: Speed of Adjustment
                                                  Gross Prices                       Net Prices
                                         Good Fixed             N            Good Fixed            N
                                            effects                            effects
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)
 Mean Price                               -0.381***          111,610          -0.366***         111,568
                                         (0.035)                              (0.035)
 Median Price                             -0.423***          111,535          -0.406***         111,531
                                         (0.036)                              (0.033)
 Minimum Price                            -0.422***          111,027          -0.417***         110,993
                                         (0.038)                              (0.038)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)        -0.397***          111,531          -0.381***         111,523
                                         (0.031)                              (0.031)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)      -0.382***          111,617          -0.363***         111,572
                                         (0.033)                              (0.034)


Notes: The table replicates results of Appendix Table 2 on data aggregated to monthly frequency (instead of weekly).
See notes to Appendix Table 2 for more details.
Appendix Table 5. Pass‐through and speed of price adjustment, net prices, monthly frequency.

                                           No Fixed       Type Fixed          Good Fixed              N
                                            effects         effects             effects
                                              (1)             (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                           Panel A: Pass-through
 Mean Price                                 0.788***        0.773***             0.754***         309,328
                                           (0.154)         (0.141)              (0.123)
 Median Price                               0.760***        0.755***             0.748***         309,303
                                           (0.151)         (0.141)              (0.127)
 Minimum Price                              0.600***        0.612***             0.664***         308,629
                                           (0.077)         (0.061)              (0.050)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)          0.621***        0.643***             0.627***         309,289
                                           (0.128)         (0.128)              (0.112)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)        0.684***        0.699***             0.680***         309,336
                                           (0.118)         (0.120)              (0.101)

                                        Panel B: Speed of Adjustment
 Mean Price                                -0.098***        -0.106***           -0.257***         248,077
                                           (0.012)          (0.012)             (0.012)
 Median Price                              -0.113***        -0.121***           -0.278***         247,973
                                           (0.011)          (0.011)             (0.014)
 Minimum Price                             -0.114***        -0.126***           -0.283***         246,974
                                           (0.010)          (0.009)             (0.015)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)         -0.199***        -0.210***           -0.374***         247,930
                                           (0.061)          (0.062)             (0.073)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)       -0.195***        -0.206***           -0.370***         247,999
                                           (0.061)          (0.063)             (0.074)


Notes: The table replicates results of Table 4 on data aggregated to monthly frequency (instead of weekly). See notes
to Table 4 for more details.
                        Appendix Table 6. Pass‐through and speed of price adjustment.


                                             Panel A: Pass-through
                                          Include only sellers with four            All sellers (Table 4)
                                               or more star reviews
                                          Good Fixed             N           Good Fixed               N
                                             effects                            effects
                                               (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)
 Mean Price                                 0.639***      671,598             0.698***            1,709,011
                                           (0.093)                           (0.080)
 Median Price                               0.634***      671,553             0.698***            1,708,982
                                           (0.094)                           (0.082)
 Minimum Price                              0.559***      670,272             0.677***            1,708,960
                                           (0.056)                           (0.042)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)          0.524***      671,047             0.614***            1,708,969
                                           (0.123)                           (0.077)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)        0.524***      671,047             0.642***            1,708,979
                                           (0.123)                           (0.071)

                                         Panel B: Speed of Adjustment
                                        Include only sellers with four or           All sellers (Table 4)
                                               more star reviews
                                         Good Fixed              N           Good Fixed               N
                                            effects                             effects
                                              (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)
 Mean Price                             -0.158***        426,045             -0.158***             885,150
                                        (0.007)                              (0.005)
 Median Price                           -0.179***        425,695             -0.170***             884,835
                                        (0.007)                              (0.005)
 Minimum Price                          -0.160***        424,749             -0.169***             883,912
                                        (0.006)                              (0.005)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 1)      -0.146***        425,428             -0.135***             886,115
                                        (0.008)                              (0.012)
 Star-weighted Price (missing = 2.5)    -0.146***        425,428             -0.133***             886,292
                                        (0.008)                              (0.042)

Notes: Panel A presents estimates of in specification (1). Panel B presents estimates of in specification (2).
Driscoll and Kraay (1998) standard errors are in parentheses. ***, **, * show statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels.
             Appendix Table 7. Descriptive statistics for standard deviation log(Price).

                    Category                               Canada                       US
                                                  Mean      SD       N       Mean     SD     N
35mm slr lens accessories                         0.181    0.094        14   0.079   0.049      35
Antivirus software                                0.187    0.095        20   0.150   0.123      39
Audio cables                                      0.277    0.167        82   0.361   0.179      86
Audio video utilities                             0.162    0.148        75   0.084   0.073     107
AV accessories                                    0.114    0.061        40   0.142   0.051      49
Bags cases                                        0.169    0.114        26   0.150   0.094      25
Binoculars                                        0.273    0.098        18   0.107   0.064      83
Calculators                                       0.124    0.058        24   0.164   0.099      25
Camcorder accessories                             0.238    0.122        15   0.138   0.067      18
Camcorder batteries power                         0.273    0.139        22   0.186   0.122      30
Camcorders                                        0.089    0.043        19   0.089   0.041      20
Cases                                             0.118    0.077       243   0.145   0.064     260
Cash registers pos equipment                      0.102    0.044        49   0.064   0.032      49
Computer games                                    0.446    0.268        45   0.304   0.263      78
Database management software                      0.116    0.053        59   0.070   0.091      73
Dedicated flashes                                 0.169    0.108        23   0.079   0.053      44
Desktop computers                                 0.050    0.019        13   0.040   0.014      13
Digital cameras                                   0.114    0.057        44   0.095   0.047      48
Engineering and home design software              0.187    0.163         9   0.134   0.096      18
Financial and legal software                      0.217    0.250        11   0.154   0.117      23
Flash memory                                      0.179    0.094       917   0.240   0.136     953
Flat panel and lcd monitors                       0.058    0.028       275   0.067   0.024     282
GPS                                               0.106    0.064        58   0.126   0.069      69
Graphics and publishing software                  0.123    0.101       623   0.119   0.103     678
Hard drives                                       0.103    0.058       161   0.167   0.076     168
Headphones                                        0.203    0.133       214   0.182   0.147     271
Hubs                                              0.095    0.080       674   0.127   0.085     706
Keyboards                                         0.122    0.055       242   0.172   0.073     244
Laptop                                            0.053    0.026        79   0.036   0.014      90
Laptop memory                                     0.151    0.074     1,248   0.178   0.091   1,275
Microphones and headsets                          0.162    0.071        73   0.222   0.142      82
Miscellaneous programming software                0.179    0.178       109   0.083   0.106     115
Modems                                            0.156    0.166        89   0.177   0.139      98
Motherboards                                      0.098    0.098       655   0.090   0.069     708
Mp3 players                                       0.124    0.088        27   0.098   0.037      27
Network adapters                                  0.115    0.113       226   0.211   0.153     236
Office suites software                            0.188    0.128        78   0.159   0.147     115
Plasma lcd televisions                            0.088    0.031        25   0.084   0.047      32
Portable device accessories                       0.195    0.130       226   0.235   0.168     262
Power supplies                                    0.100    0.065       402   0.126   0.081     444
Processors in retail box                          0.062    0.049       518   0.131   0.096     544
Projection screens                                0.185    0.105        29   0.171   0.064      29
Projectors                                        0.083    0.058       390   0.083   0.046     416
Scanners                                          0.066    0.044       602   0.081   0.052     650
Security software                                 0.095    0.081       118   0.159   0.096     125
SLR lenses                                        0.094    0.053       171   0.055   0.037     386
Speakers                                          0.128    0.068       157   0.152   0.091     171
Storage media                                     0.145    0.086       245   0.250   0.118     247
System utilities software                         0.110    0.101        49   0.115   0.088      33
Tripods                                           0.211    0.068        22   0.123   0.097      22
Tv accessories and mounts                         0.128    0.056        26   0.164   0.059      27
UPSS                                              0.067    0.038       657   0.101   0.051     694
Video cables                                      0.240    0.148       545   0.324   0.168     595
Webcams                                           0.158    0.102        65   0.151   0.079      69
Windows operating system software                 0.132    0.125       155   0.110   0.102     213
                 Appendix Table 8. Descriptive statistics for median log(Price).
                    Category                            Canada                        US
                                                Mean     SD       N      Mean       SD     N
35mm slr lens accessories                       4.936   0.940       35   4.687     1.088      35
Antivirus software                              3.996   0.907       52   3.942     0.864      52
Audio cables                                    2.960   0.837       86   3.012     0.722      86
Audio video utilities                           5.170   0.810      113   5.141     0.838     113
AV accessories                                  5.237   0.944       57   5.187     0.990      57
Bags cases                                      4.455   0.889       29   4.268     0.913      29
Binoculars                                      5.155   1.043       90   5.209     0.995      90
Calculators                                     3.800   0.989       26   3.456     1.010      26
Camcorder accessories                           4.553   0.819       18   4.369     0.881      18
Camcorder batteries power                       4.497   0.474       30   4.322     0.455      30
Camcorders                                      5.601   1.052       20   5.555     1.044      20
Cases                                           4.822   0.735      261   4.707     0.739     261
Cash registers pos equipment                    5.272   0.405       49   5.220     0.394      49
Computer games                                  2.745   0.823      144   2.475     0.987     144
Database management software                    7.088   1.641      100   7.006     1.662     100
Dedicated flashes                               5.115   0.778       49   5.060     0.694      49
Desktop computers                               6.863   0.638       13   6.753     0.601      13
Digital cameras                                 6.028   0.707       48   5.900     0.697      48
Engineering and home design software            5.851   1.583       24   5.902     1.496      24
Financial and legal software                    5.525   1.319       26   5.444     1.332      26
Flash memory                                    3.688   0.871      976   3.645     0.838     976
Flat panel and lcd monitors                     5.906   0.803      283   5.833     0.789     283
GPS                                             5.186   0.722       70   5.075     0.775      70
Graphics and publishing software                5.850   1.027      734   5.760     0.991     734
Hard drives                                     5.291   0.779      168   5.187     0.687     168
Headphones                                      4.076   0.936      274   3.814     1.064     274
Hubs                                            6.449   1.741      710   6.330     1.714     710
Keyboards                                       4.058   0.655      244   3.977     0.658     244
Laptop                                          6.169   0.539       90   6.172     0.499      90
Laptop memory                                   4.395   0.831    1,285   4.290     0.778   1,285
Microphones and headsets                        3.865   0.918       82   3.692     0.906      82
Miscellaneous programming software              7.066   1.222      147   6.923     1.245     147
Modems                                          4.230   1.299       99   4.174     1.211      99
Motherboards                                    5.195   0.674      721   5.136     0.685     721
Mp3 players                                     4.737   0.766       27   4.719     0.754      27
Network adapters                                5.118   1.299      236   4.964     1.248     236
Office suites software                          5.409   0.663      121   5.280     0.665     121
Plasma lcd televisions                          6.337   0.749       32   6.270     0.725      32
Portable device accessories                     3.504   0.926      277   3.482     0.893     277
Power supplies                                  4.872   0.868      452   4.780     0.823     452
Processors in retail box                        6.144   0.901      570   5.950     0.816     570
Projection screens                              5.498   0.869       30   5.410     0.932      30
Projectors                                      6.938   0.748      418   6.852     0.729     418
Scanners                                        5.801   0.972      654   5.715     0.950     654
Security software                               3.816   1.205      168   3.752     1.115     168
SLR lenses                                      6.434   0.710      390   6.348     0.710     390
Speakers                                        4.252   0.872      174   4.159     0.858     174
Storage media                                   3.669   0.949      247   3.435     0.978     247
System utilities software                       5.646   1.683       63   5.592     1.708      63
Tripods                                         5.295   0.982       24   5.084     1.054      24
Tv accessories and mounts                       4.922   0.761       27   4.782     0.698      27
UPSS                                            6.135   1.155      698   6.026     1.158     698
Video cables                                    3.172   0.913      601   3.131     0.840     601
Webcams                                         4.124   0.617       72   4.001     0.617      72
Windows operating system software               6.009   1.095      223   5.902     1.124     223
               Appendix Table 9. Descriptive statistics for frequency of price chance.

                    Category                               Canada                        US
                                                   Mean     SD        N       Mean       SD       N
35mm slr lens accessories                          0.422    0.398        35   0.067      0.041      35
Antivirus software                                 0.222    0.206        52   0.138      0.144      52
Audio cables                                       0.185    0.119        86   0.102      0.040      86
Audio video utilities                              0.453    0.310       113   0.135      0.126     113
AV accessories                                     0.288    0.170        57   0.125      0.106      57
Bags cases                                         0.189    0.240        29   0.111      0.090      29
Binoculars                                         0.723    0.256        90   0.063      0.047      90
Calculators                                        0.174    0.096        26   0.064      0.038      26
Camcorder accessories                              0.342    0.243        18   0.113      0.093      18
Camcorder batteries power                          0.422    0.269        30   0.148      0.077      30
Camcorders                                         0.390    0.167        20   0.271      0.165      20
Cases                                              0.286    0.143       261   0.169      0.082     261
Cash registers pos equipment                       0.515    0.112        49   0.094      0.038      49
Computer games                                     0.248    0.193       144   0.107      0.111     144
Database management software                       0.149    0.172       100   0.116      0.101     100
Dedicated flashes                                  0.581    0.348        49   0.089      0.072      49
Desktop computers                                  0.373    0.202        13   0.421      0.122      13
Digital cameras                                    0.190    0.129        48   0.212      0.113      48
Engineering and home design software               0.240    0.219        24   0.154      0.111      24
Financial and legal software                       0.241    0.172        26   0.176      0.123      26
Flash memory                                       0.298    0.162       976   0.214      0.113     976
Flat panel and lcd monitors                        0.360    0.157       283   0.306      0.109     283
GPS                                                0.266    0.160        70   0.109      0.058      70
Graphics and publishing software                   0.328    0.214       734   0.165      0.103     734
Hard drives                                        0.329    0.159       168   0.282      0.089     168
Headphones                                         0.239    0.222       274   0.081      0.060     274
Hubs                                               0.324    0.197       710   0.209      0.082     710
Keyboards                                          0.308    0.159       244   0.188      0.074     244
Laptop                                             0.373    0.125        90   0.282      0.121      90
Laptop memory                                      0.440    0.187     1,285   0.316      0.105   1,285
Microphones and headsets                           0.241    0.126        82   0.135      0.069      82
Miscellaneous programming software                 0.200    0.202       147   0.169      0.149     147
Modems                                             0.335    0.184        99   0.163      0.075      99
Motherboards                                       0.312    0.167       721   0.227      0.104     721
Mp3 players                                        0.447    0.166        27   0.134      0.066      27
Network adapters                                   0.328    0.164       236   0.213      0.092     236
Office suites software                             0.209    0.141       121   0.209      0.124     121
Plasma lcd televisions                             0.405    0.226        32   0.242      0.124      32
Portable device accessories                        0.253    0.176       277   0.135      0.090     277
Power supplies                                     0.275    0.149       452   0.179      0.082     452
Processors in retail box                           0.287    0.154       570   0.211      0.095     570
Projection screens                                 0.242    0.139        30   0.099      0.073      30
Projectors                                         0.291    0.202       418   0.217      0.098     418
Scanners                                           0.460    0.183       654   0.144      0.102     654
Security software                                  0.217    0.142       168   0.088      0.094     168
SLR lenses                                         0.627    0.311       390   0.080      0.056     390
Speakers                                           0.297    0.187       174   0.169      0.081     174
Storage media                                      0.170    0.105       247   0.133      0.068     247
System utilities software                          0.155    0.158        63   0.114      0.145      63
Tripods                                            0.273    0.131        24   0.078      0.076      24
Tv accessories and mounts                          0.377    0.260        27   0.127      0.048      27
UPSS                                               0.295    0.154       698   0.205      0.069     698
Video cables                                       0.188    0.161       601   0.146      0.066     601
Webcams                                            0.317    0.180        72   0.203      0.092      72
Windows operating system software                  0.218    0.160       223   0.181      0.101     223
     Appendix Table 10. Descriptive statistics for median duration of price spell (procedure C).

                    Category                               Canada                       US
                                                  Mean      SD        N       Mean       SD      N
35mm slr lens accessories                         11.200   23.842        35    7.343    6.905      35
Antivirus software                                 6.510    6.485        52   15.529   24.453      52
Audio cables                                       1.657    0.768        86    3.942    4.846      86
Audio video utilities                              2.221    4.844       113    6.783    9.795     113
AV accessories                                     1.763    1.418        57   12.553   18.544      57
Bags cases                                        12.776   23.004        29    6.741    7.074      29
Binoculars                                         1.017    0.117        90    7.706   10.330      90
Calculators                                        2.462    0.811        26    5.731    7.319      26
Camcorder accessories                              1.222    0.732        18    6.194    9.204      18
Camcorder batteries power                          1.083    0.324        30    2.750    1.696      30
Camcorders                                         1.200    0.523        20    2.500    2.969      20
Cases                                              1.981    2.594       261    2.852    2.668     261
Cash registers pos equipment                       1.061    0.242        49    4.469    2.875      49
Computer games                                     2.840    3.190       144    9.660   13.934     144
Database management software                      15.635   25.329       100   15.455   25.393     100
Dedicated flashes                                  1.469    2.218        49   10.827   23.029      49
Desktop computers                                  1.692    0.855        13    1.000    0.000      13
Digital cameras                                    6.438   16.192        48    2.375    1.925      48
Engineering and home design software               4.062    4.121        24    8.250   19.383      24
Financial and legal software                       4.808    8.138        26    7.904   14.679      26
Flash memory                                       2.599    8.124       976    2.877    4.922     976
Flat panel and lcd monitors                        1.269    0.723       283    1.299    0.601     283
GPS                                                4.879   20.092        70    4.086    2.364      70
Graphics and publishing software                   5.372   15.696       734    7.824   19.640     734
Hard drives                                        1.348    1.324       168    1.262    0.713     168
Headphones                                         3.858    7.591       274    8.048   12.839     273
Hubs                                               2.342    4.782       710    2.258    1.295     710
Keyboards                                          1.740    2.792       244    2.242    1.389     244
Laptop                                             1.156    0.523        90    1.550    0.868      90
Laptop memory                                      1.496    4.822     1,285    1.508    0.878   1,285
Microphones and headsets                           2.128    2.577        82    3.012    2.839      82
Miscellaneous programming software                15.524   26.633       147   14.255   26.459     147
Modems                                             2.045    2.600        99    2.702    3.033      99
Motherboards                                       2.298    3.443       721    2.550    2.712     721
Mp3 players                                        1.000    0.000        27    3.667    3.442      27
Network adapters                                   1.695    1.202       236    2.216    1.535     236
Office suites software                             4.492    8.485       121    4.570    9.960     121
Plasma lcd televisions                             1.891    2.249        32    1.672    1.082      32
Portable device accessories                        4.078    9.910       277    4.567    8.136     277
Power supplies                                     2.134    2.680       452    3.009    3.589     452
Processors in retail box                           5.584   21.903       570    2.735    3.549     570
Projection screens                                 1.483    0.951        30   11.450   16.587      30
Projectors                                         4.124   18.846       418    1.914    1.894     418
Scanners                                           1.440    2.225       654    3.640    4.183     654
Security software                                  4.024    4.678       168   22.057   25.694     168
SLR lenses                                         1.121    1.282       390    7.362    8.772     390
Speakers                                           3.124   11.433       174    3.264    5.928     174
Storage media                                      2.119    1.490       247    2.682    1.626     247
System utilities software                          6.008   10.259        63   15.317   16.684      63
Tripods                                            6.271   24.662        24   12.458   22.951      24
Tv accessories and mounts                          2.519    3.059        27    2.519    1.114      27
UPSS                                               1.742    1.291       698    2.332    2.883     698
Video cables                                       2.810    4.265       601    3.193    4.949     601
Webcams                                            1.951    2.140        72    1.986    0.866      71
Windows operating system software                  4.103    5.158       223    3.818    4.164     223
               Appendix Table 11. Descriptive statistics for median abs(dlog(Price)).

                    Category                              Canada                        US
                                                  Mean     SD         N      Mean       SD       N
35mm slr lens accessories                         0.072    0.182        30   0.085      0.048      33
Antivirus software                                0.063    0.074        50   0.070      0.074      43
Audio cables                                      0.069    0.077        86   0.052      0.053      85
Audio video utilities                             0.031    0.057       111   0.067      0.106     105
AV accessories                                    0.031    0.049        57   0.032      0.035      44
Bags cases                                        0.041    0.036        27   0.044      0.044      29
Binoculars                                        0.014    0.008        90   0.077      0.071      87
Calculators                                       0.065    0.041        26   0.058      0.050      26
Camcorder accessories                             0.021    0.021        18   0.042      0.036      17
Camcorder batteries power                         0.013    0.007        30   0.047      0.036      30
Camcorders                                        0.059    0.051        20   0.070      0.054      20
Cases                                             0.055    0.082       260   0.038      0.028     259
Cash registers pos equipment                      0.016    0.003        49   0.022      0.013      49
Computer games                                    0.121    0.135       144   0.176      0.160     131
Database management software                      0.036    0.046        86   0.036      0.044      86
Dedicated flashes                                 0.013    0.014        49   0.051      0.037      45
Desktop computers                                 0.018    0.007        13   0.016      0.006      13
Digital cameras                                   0.083    0.080        47   0.063      0.034      48
Engineering and home design software              0.061    0.054        24   0.065      0.090      23
Financial and legal software                      0.072    0.192        26   0.057      0.049      24
Flash memory                                      0.049    0.060       969   0.053      0.045     969
Flat panel and lcd monitors                       0.023    0.013       283   0.025      0.014     283
GPS                                               0.043    0.036        68   0.042      0.023      70
Graphics and publishing software                  0.025    0.036       701   0.028      0.037     683
Hard drives                                       0.038    0.029       168   0.043      0.016     168
Headphones                                        0.113    0.135       270   0.080      0.069     266
Hubs                                              0.037    0.062       704   0.025      0.021     710
Keyboards                                         0.037    0.037       244   0.038      0.020     244
Laptop                                            0.022    0.013        90   0.020      0.010      90
Laptop memory                                     0.044    0.042     1,284   0.054      0.021   1,285
Microphones and headsets                          0.057    0.057        82   0.051      0.043      81
Miscellaneous programming software                0.026    0.023       128   0.026      0.031     127
Modems                                            0.041    0.045        99   0.033      0.024      98
Motherboards                                      0.036    0.048       710   0.026      0.020     717
Mp3 players                                       0.018    0.009        27   0.039      0.021      27
Network adapters                                  0.030    0.035       236   0.030      0.024     236
Office suites software                            0.052    0.087       121   0.052      0.089     119
Plasma lcd televisions                            0.059    0.039        32   0.034      0.016      32
Portable device accessories                       0.066    0.092       269   0.063      0.079     270
Power supplies                                    0.046    0.039       449   0.035      0.032     449
Processors in retail box                          0.028    0.040       554   0.034      0.048     570
Projection screens                                0.020    0.011        30   0.031      0.016      25
Projectors                                        0.030    0.040       409   0.019      0.017     418
Scanners                                          0.019    0.018       653   0.020      0.020     647
Security software                                 0.030    0.037       168   0.076      0.053     131
SLR lenses                                        0.014    0.008       390   0.065      0.046     388
Speakers                                          0.042    0.037       173   0.054      0.070     173
Storage media                                     0.057    0.042       247   0.056      0.044     247
System utilities software                         0.030    0.040        61   0.028      0.032      52
Tripods                                           0.026    0.033        23   0.079      0.068      22
Tv accessories and mounts                         0.066    0.120        27   0.039      0.038      27
UPSS                                              0.021    0.024       698   0.020      0.015     696
Video cables                                      0.072    0.071       599   0.045      0.034     598
Webcams                                           0.047    0.039        72   0.053      0.032      71
Windows operating system software                 0.043    0.066       221   0.047      0.083     223
           Appendix Table 12. Descriptive statistics for synchronization of price changes.

                    Category                               Canada                      US
                                                   Mean     SD        N       Mean     SD       N
35mm slr lens accessories                          0.052    0.185        13   0.099    0.101      33
Antivirus software                                 0.335    0.253        20   0.175    0.099      37
Audio cables                                       0.166    0.101        82   0.097    0.068      85
Audio video utilities                              0.238    0.171        73   0.109    0.096      98
AV accessories                                     0.204    0.198        40   0.186    0.116      43
Bags cases                                         0.067    0.109        23   0.120    0.106      25
Binoculars                                         0.018    0.054        18   0.073    0.074      80
Calculators                                        0.225    0.156        24   0.093    0.056      25
Camcorder accessories                              0.095    0.132        15   0.135    0.099      17
Camcorder batteries power                          0.072    0.047        22   0.161    0.133      30
Camcorders                                         0.208    0.183        19   0.236    0.112      19
Cases                                              0.273    0.204       234   0.180    0.096     258
Cash registers pos equipment                       0.540    0.123        49   0.111    0.047      49
Computer games                                     0.205    0.207        46   0.066    0.143      62
Database management software                       0.248    0.245        57   0.157    0.136      70
Dedicated flashes                                  0.060    0.105        23   0.071    0.085      40
Desktop computers                                  0.396    0.176        13   0.277    0.194      13
Digital cameras                                    0.132    0.135        42   0.218    0.126      48
Engineering and home design software               0.288    0.319         9   0.110    0.105      18
Financial and legal software                       0.113    0.100        10   0.171    0.095      23
Flash memory                                       0.274    0.175       915   0.201    0.108     942
Flat panel and lcd monitors                        0.361    0.183       274   0.308    0.110     282
GPS                                                0.336    0.186        57   0.103    0.059      69
Graphics and publishing software                   0.324    0.204       606   0.144    0.093     643
Hard drives                                        0.367    0.164       161   0.326    0.089     168
Headphones                                         0.119    0.139       212   0.086    0.096     260
Hubs                                               0.315    0.235       670   0.186    0.085     706
Keyboards                                          0.284    0.157       240   0.201    0.079     244
Laptop                                             0.283    0.148        78   0.290    0.128      90
Laptop memory                                      0.458    0.186     1,248   0.347    0.119   1,273
Microphones and headsets                           0.242    0.159        73   0.114    0.061      81
Miscellaneous programming software                 0.238    0.228       100   0.194    0.147     112
Modems                                             0.296    0.234        89   0.146    0.079      98
Motherboards                                       0.311    0.211       647   0.196    0.106     706
Mp3 players                                        0.304    0.155        27   0.162    0.097      27
Network adapters                                   0.360    0.218       227   0.183    0.079     235
Office suites software                             0.183    0.163        76   0.182    0.122     113
Plasma lcd televisions                             0.376    0.244        25   0.249    0.162      32
Portable device accessories                        0.203    0.200       224   0.127    0.094     259
Power supplies                                     0.264    0.204       402   0.166    0.100     440
Processors in retail box                           0.277    0.186       508   0.186    0.088     541
Projection screens                                 0.174    0.206        29   0.147    0.084      25
Projectors                                         0.259    0.207       381   0.216    0.102     413
Scanners                                           0.464    0.212       601   0.130    0.087     644
Security software                                  0.169    0.161       118   0.173    0.096     121
SLR lenses                                         0.075    0.156       170   0.134    0.099     381
Speakers                                           0.246    0.176       157   0.158    0.097     171
Storage media                                      0.262    0.108       245   0.149    0.077     247
System utilities software                          0.097    0.175        49   0.134    0.190      33
Tripods                                            0.040    0.069        22   0.113    0.124      21
Tv accessories and mounts                          0.336    0.220        26   0.130    0.059      27
UPSS                                               0.334    0.189       656   0.190    0.065     690
Video cables                                       0.136    0.139       541   0.119    0.073     591
Webcams                                            0.208    0.162        65   0.199    0.077      69
Windows operating system software                  0.238    0.176       154   0.168    0.120     210
                   Appendix Table 13. Descriptive statistics for number of sellers.

                    Category                               Canada                     US
                                                   Mean     SD         N      Mean    SD       N
35mm slr lens accessories                          1.204    0.298        35   2.053   0.910      35
Antivirus software                                 1.344    0.988        52   2.572   2.000      52
Audio cables                                       1.865    0.572        86   2.474   0.765      86
Audio video utilities                              1.769    1.023       113   2.938   1.740     113
AV accessories                                     2.015    0.963        57   3.434   2.026      57
Bags cases                                         1.562    0.565        29   2.308   1.104      29
Binoculars                                         1.127    0.530        90   2.327   0.939      90
Calculators                                        2.053    0.987        26   3.273   1.116      26
Camcorder accessories                              1.692    0.617        18   2.321   0.789      18
Camcorder batteries power                          1.876    0.917        30   2.583   0.857      30
Camcorders                                         1.657    0.546        20   2.293   1.305      20
Cases                                              2.338    1.437       261   3.823   1.373     261
Cash registers pos equipment                       1.755    0.244        49   3.298   0.788      49
Computer games                                     1.158    0.429       144   1.438   0.857     144
Database management software                       1.669    1.364       100   2.025   1.181     100
Dedicated flashes                                  1.385    0.594        49   1.960   1.191      49
Desktop computers                                  2.768    1.223        13   2.453   1.215      13
Digital cameras                                    1.843    0.725        48   3.017   1.497      48
Engineering and home design software               1.794    1.821        24   2.353   1.913      24
Financial and legal software                       1.710    1.384        26   3.771   2.111      26
Flash memory                                       2.518    1.214       976   3.014   1.266     976
Flat panel and lcd monitors                        2.246    0.867       283   2.620   0.838     283
GPS                                                2.233    1.099        70   4.467   1.929      70
Graphics and publishing software                   2.641    1.653       734   4.030   2.733     734
Hard drives                                        2.489    1.144       168   4.564   2.421     168
Headphones                                         1.675    0.989       274   2.994   1.353     274
Hubs                                               2.406    1.111       710   5.832   2.875     710
Keyboards                                          2.814    1.083       244   4.082   1.276     244
Laptop                                             1.844    0.670        90   2.097   0.623      90
Laptop memory                                      3.313    1.226     1,285   3.623   1.463   1,285
Microphones and headsets                           2.784    1.905        82   3.418   1.213      82
Miscellaneous programming software                 2.102    1.873       147   3.014   2.967     147
Modems                                             2.182    1.251        99   3.358   1.282      99
Motherboards                                       2.752    1.520       721   3.207   1.258     721
Mp3 players                                        1.550    0.352        27   2.408   1.211      27
Network adapters                                   2.688    1.065       236   4.716   2.322     236
Office suites software                             1.976    1.654       121   3.377   2.311     121
Plasma lcd televisions                             1.685    0.772        32   1.859   0.416      32
Portable device accessories                        1.909    0.937       277   3.068   1.402     277
Power supplies                                     2.300    1.207       452   3.096   1.436     452
Processors in retail box                           2.529    1.294       570   3.761   1.819     570
Projection screens                                 1.779    0.783        30   2.845   1.217      30
Projectors                                         2.518    1.131       418   4.329   1.604     418
Scanners                                           2.009    1.054       654   4.300   1.746     654
Security software                                  1.406    0.652       168   2.057   1.504     168
SLR lenses                                         1.254    0.391       390   2.415   1.164     390
Speakers                                           2.842    1.836       174   3.192   1.297     174
Storage media                                      3.244    0.950       247   5.474   2.563     247
System utilities software                          1.336    0.672        63   1.824   1.435      63
Tripods                                            1.846    0.687        24   1.808   0.743      24
Tv accessories and mounts                          1.744    0.525        27   4.371   1.597      27
UPSS                                               2.874    1.361       698   4.810   1.887     698
Video cables                                       2.236    0.889       601   3.364   1.094     601
Webcams                                            2.459    1.692        72   4.201   1.788      72
Windows operating system software                  1.816    1.123       223   2.924   1.800     223
                   Appendix Table 14. Descriptive statistics for stability of sellers.

                    Category                                 Canada                      US
                                                     Mean     SD         N       Mean    SD       N
35mm slr lens accessories                            0.706    0.281         35   0.373   0.155      35
Antivirus software                                   0.569    0.229         52   0.531   0.277      52
Audio cables                                         0.304    0.135         86   0.285   0.097      86
Audio video utilities                                0.597    0.287        113   0.466   0.216     113
AV accessories                                       0.374    0.128         57   0.402   0.133      57
Bags cases                                           0.470    0.115         29   0.373   0.130      29
Binoculars                                           0.830    0.234         90   0.438   0.209      90
Calculators                                          0.258    0.062         26   0.319   0.171      26
Camcorder accessories                                0.421    0.136         18   0.348   0.184      18
Camcorder batteries power                            0.439    0.207         30   0.291   0.136      30
Camcorders                                           0.358    0.184         20   0.331   0.073      20
Cases                                                0.399    0.152        261   0.424   0.170     261
Cash registers pos equipment                         0.391    0.098         49   0.580   0.092      49
Computer games                                       0.806    0.268        144   0.639   0.305     144
Database management software                         0.653    0.305        100   0.624   0.269     100
Dedicated flashes                                    0.684    0.304         49   0.378   0.221      49
Desktop computers                                    0.411    0.143         13   0.338   0.086      13
Digital cameras                                      0.491    0.188         48   0.412   0.140      48
Engineering and home design software                 0.740    0.266         24   0.546   0.295      24
Financial and legal software                         0.742    0.288         26   0.497   0.235      26
Flash memory                                         0.396    0.173        976   0.419   0.192     976
Flat panel and lcd monitors                          0.253    0.069        283   0.273   0.083     283
GPS                                                  0.346    0.193         70   0.361   0.119      70
Graphics and publishing software                     0.493    0.233        734   0.503   0.219     734
Hard drives                                          0.285    0.083        168   0.290   0.080     168
Headphones                                           0.451    0.222        274   0.369   0.152     274
Hubs                                                 0.386    0.163        710   0.422   0.180     710
Keyboards                                            0.324    0.109        244   0.340   0.126     244
Laptop                                               0.366    0.073         90   0.367   0.073      90
Laptop memory                                        0.410    0.138      1,285   0.356   0.136   1,285
Microphones and headsets                             0.355    0.156         82   0.323   0.129      82
Miscellaneous programming software                   0.556    0.281        147   0.523   0.292     147
Modems                                               0.354    0.181         99   0.350   0.134      99
Motherboards                                         0.466    0.174        721   0.449   0.162     721
Mp3 players                                          0.285    0.114         27   0.307   0.092      27
Network adapters                                     0.312    0.140        236   0.323   0.136     236
Office suites software                               0.590    0.306        121   0.414   0.198     121
Plasma lcd televisions                               0.326    0.107         32   0.283   0.076      32
Portable device accessories                          0.423    0.201        277   0.473   0.194     277
Power supplies                                       0.399    0.182        452   0.396   0.163     452
Processors in retail box                             0.386    0.182        570   0.397   0.182     570
Projection screens                                   0.397    0.220         30   0.356   0.185      30
Projectors                                           0.403    0.167        418   0.391   0.127     418
Scanners                                             0.358    0.170        654   0.431   0.169     654
Security software                                    0.443    0.128        168   0.654   0.223     168
SLR lenses                                           0.716    0.272        390   0.343   0.134     390
Speakers                                             0.392    0.187        174   0.374   0.177     174
Storage media                                        0.295    0.073        247   0.303   0.090     247
System utilities software                            0.582    0.244         63   0.718   0.304      63
Tripods                                              0.600    0.242         24   0.397   0.238      24
Tv accessories and mounts                            0.340    0.173         27   0.397   0.146      27
UPSS                                                 0.291    0.132        698   0.283   0.124     698
Video cables                                         0.409    0.172        601   0.452   0.176     601
Webcams                                              0.423    0.161         72   0.448   0.172      72
Windows operating system software                    0.541    0.312        223   0.416   0.200     223
