                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT CALLS TO ARMS? INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE ON INTEREST RATES
           AND THE CHOICE OF ADJUSTABLE-RATE MORTGAGES

                                            Cristian Badarinza
                                            John Y. Campbell
                                            Tarun Ramadorai

                                          Working Paper 20408
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w20408


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




We gratefully acknowledge the Sloan Foundation for financial support. We thank Gene Amromin,
Simon Gilchrist, Urban Jermann, Ralph Koijen, Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, and participants at the European
Conference on Household Finance for many useful comments, and Joshua Abel and Gaurav Kankanhalli
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Cristian Badarinza, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Calls to ARMs? International Evidence on Interest Rates and the Choice of Adjustable-Rate
Mortgages
Cristian Badarinza, John Y. Campbell, and Tarun Ramadorai
NBER Working Paper No. 20408
August 2014, Revised September 2015
JEL No. D14,E43,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

The relative popularity of adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) and fixed-rate mort- gages (FRMs) varies
considerably both across countries and over time. We ask how movements in current and expected
future interest rates affect the share of ARMs in total mortgage issuance. Using a nine-country panel
and instrumental variables methods, we present evidence that near-term (one-year) rational expectations
of future movements in ARM rates do affect mortgage choice, particularly in more recent data since
2001. However longer-term (three-year) rational forecasts of ARM rates have a relatively weak effect,
and the current spread between FRM and ARM rates also matters, suggesting that households are concerned
with current interest costs as well as with lifetime cost minimization. These conclusions are robust
to alternative (adaptive and survey-based) models of household expectations.


Cristian Badarinza                                 Tarun Ramadorai
Said Business School                               University of Oxford
University of Oxford                               Said Business School
Park End Street                                    Park End St.
Oxford, OX1 1HP                                    Oxford OX1 1HP
UK                                                 United Kingdom
cristian.badarinza@sbs.ox.ac.uk                    tarun.ramadorai@sbs.ox.ac.uk

John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w20408
1     Introduction

The structure of housing …nance is highly variable both across countries and over time. One
of the most important aspects of this structure from the perspective of macroeconomics is the
interest rate schedule applicable over the life of a mortgage loan. Mortgage rate provisions
can broadly be categorized into two groups. Fixed-rate mortgages (FRMs) entail a con-
stant nominal interest rate throughout the life of the mortgage. Adjustable-rate mortgages
(ARMs) have an interest rate that varies over the life of the contract in relation to mar-
ket conditions. The share of mortgages issued that are ARMs (the “ARM share”) exhibits
signi…cant cross-country and time-series variation. In the US, for example, the dominant
mortgage is normally a 30-year FRM, but ARMs were unusually popular in the late 1980s,
mid 1990s, and mid 2000s; whereas in the UK, it is di¢ cult to …nd an interest rate …xation
period that is much above 5 years.
    These di¤erences in the structure of housing …nance in‡uence the monetary policy trans-
mission mechanism (Bernanke and Gertler 1995), as movements in short-term market interest
rates directly a¤ect the budgets of all ARM borrowers, while FRM borrowers are only af-
fected by long-term interest rates, and then only if rates fall and these borrowers are able
to re…nance their mortgages (Taylor 1995, Miles 2004, Villar Burke 2015). In the period of
declining interest rates since the Great Recession, there is some evidence that monetary pol-
icy has had a stronger stimulative e¤ect in areas of the US where ARMs are more commonly
used (Di Maggio, Kermani, and Ramcharan 2015, Keys, Piskorski, Seru, and Yao 2014).
While this might lead central banks to prefer a high ARM share, as suggested in a widely
publicized speech by Alan Greenspan (2004), the ARM share is an outcome of household
choice albeit in‡uenced by housing …nance regulation.
    Our goal in this paper is to understand the determinants of the cross- and within-country
variation in the ARM share, with an emphasis on households’reactions to movements in inter-
est rates. Our analysis also sheds light on the extent to which households are forward-looking
when choosing the form of their mortgages. This question of households’forward-looking
behavior has been studied extensively in macroeconomics, often in relation to consumption-
smoothing (e.g. Souleles 1999, Agarwal, Liu, and Souleles 2007, and Parker 2014).


                                              1
   Reasoning based on simple rational optimization o¤ers guidance about the likely de-
terminants of household mortgage choice between ARMs and FRMs. Absent borrowing
constraints, the rational decision between …xed- and variable-rate mortgages depends on the
expected future costs borne by the borrower over the life of the loan, in relation to the risks
that these costs will be higher or lower than expected. If the relative risks of ARMs and
FRMs are relatively stable, the primary determinant of variation in the ARM share over
time should be the spread between the current …xed rate and the expectation of the average
adjustable rate over the life of the mortgage.
   Empirical research (Koijen, Van Hemert, and Van Nieuwerburgh, KHN 2009, and Botsch
and Malmendier 2015) has provided evidence which is broadly consistent with this reasoning,
in the sense that households appear to estimate costs over the duration of the loan when
choosing mortgages. However this research adds a behavioral twist to the theory, deviating
from the premise that households form their expectations of mortgage costs rationally. For
example, KHN (2009) posit that households estimate the future path of adjustable rates
using a simple rule of thumb which is well approximated by a backward moving average
of realized ARM rates. They …nd evidence using US data that appears consistent with
this hypothesis.   A di¤erent deviation from rational expectation formation is posited by
Botsch and Malmendier (2015), who suggest that households who place greater subjective
probability on the possibility of high future in‡ation are more likely to choose …xed rate
mortgages. They measure these subjective probabilities using the in‡ation experienced by
households over their lifetimes, under the assumption that high experienced in‡ation causes
increases in households’subjective probability of high future in‡ation.
   An alternative theoretical perspective is o¤ered by Campbell and Cocco (2003, 2015),
who explore household mortgage choice in the presence of borrowing constraints.           Such
constraints will cause households to care primarily about current interest costs, rather than
costs over the life of the loan. This line of reasoning implies that the spread between the
FRM rate and the current ARM rate should be the primary determinant of mortgage choice.
Households may also focus on the current rate spread if they are constrained in the size of
house they can buy by bank limitations on the maximum interest-payment-to-income ratio



                                                 2
at the origination of the mortgage.1
   It is plausible that both current cost minimization and forward-looking behavior (whether
behavioral or rational) are important determinants of mortgage choice. However, it is di¢ cult
to ascertain their relative weights in household mortgage choice using time-series data from
a single country, because interest rates are persistent and the available time-series on the
ARM share is relatively short. This problem may be exacerbated by inertia among market
participants. For example, it may take time for banks to shift their marketing strategies
gradually towards mortgage forms that they think will have greater customer appeal in
current market conditions. In turn, households may be slow to respond to movements in
rates if they tend to copy other households who have taken out mortgages recently, or simply
if their expectations adjust gradually over time.
   To surmount these obstacles, and to arrive at a more precise understanding of the deter-
minants of household mortgage choice, we compile panel data on the ARM share, average
interest rate …xation periods, ARM and FRM rates, interbank rates, government bond yields,
and survey forecasts of interest rates from nine countries. This helps to alleviate the con-
straints imposed by a single country study, and allows us to bring more statistical power to
bear on the problem. While there are numerous comparative studies of mortgage market
structure across countries (for example, Lea 2011, Lea and Sanders 2011, IMF 2011, Bard-
han, Edelstein, and Kroll 2012), we are unaware of any study that uses cross-country data
to study time-variation in average …xation periods or the ARM share.
   Using our nine-country panel, we estimate a series of reduced-form econometric models
that evaluate the relative weights of current cost minimization and longer-term cost mini-
mization as determinants of mortgage product choice. Each model allows both the spread of
the FRM over the current ARM rate, and the spread of the FRM rate over average expected
future ARM rates to in‡uence the current ARM share and …xation period.                      The models
di¤er in the way they model household expectations of future ARM rates.


   1
     Consistent with this, empirical papers by Brueckner and Follain (1988), Coulibaly and Li (2009), and
Dhillon, Shilling, and Sirmans (1987) use household-level data on mortgage choice and include the current
interest spread as an explanatory variable. Johnson and Li (2011) use data from the US Consumer Expen-
diture Survey to argue that adjustable-rate mortgage borrowers appear particularly likely to be borrowing-
constrained.

                                                    3
   Our …rst approach assumes that households have rational expectations. Using a panel
instrumental variables (IV) method, we instrument realized future ARM rates (over horizons
between one and three years, assuming stationary as well as I(1) interest rate processes)
with current and past mortgage rates and government bond yields. This setup allows us to
test both the hypothesis that expected future changes in ARM rates have no in‡uence on
current mortgage choice (as implied by current cost minimization) and the hypothesis that
the current spread correlates with the ARM share only to the extent that it predicts future
ARM rates (as implied by longer-term cost minimization).
   In our full sample, while our results suggest that current cost minimization is the proxi-
mate driver of household mortgage choice, we also …nd that households anticipate movements
in ARM rates within the …rst year after mortgage origination. Within the last decade, there
is more evidence for the relevance of longer-term cost minimization. These results are robust
to the inclusion of time …xed e¤ects.
   Our second approach assumes that households have adaptive expectations, forecasting
average future ARM rates with a backwards moving average of ARM rates. We do con…rm
in the US data studied by KHN 2009 that a backwards moving average of ARM rates helps
to determine the ARM share. However we …nd little evidence of this mechanism for the other
countries in the panel.
   Our third approach uses one-year-ahead professional survey forecasts of short-term nomi-
nal interest rates. Short-term interest rates in‡uence ARM rates both directly (for tracker or
index-linked mortgages) and indirectly (through the cost structure of banks), so their future
path is a substantial determinant of the expected relative costs of FRM and ARM contracts
over the life of the mortgage. After verifying that the survey forecasts are near-rational
predictors of short-term interest rate movements, we use the forecasts both as additional in-
struments in our basic rational expectations model, and as additional explanatory variables
that may directly a¤ect household mortgage choice.
   In a model where households are assumed to look forward one year, survey forecasts
correlate with the ARM share only because they predict movements in future ARM rates
over the next year.   In a longer-term (three-year) forecasting model, however, the survey



                                              4
forecasts have direct explanatory power for the ARM share, implying that households react
more strongly to survey forecasts than to other variables that predict future ARM rates.
This may be because households neglect the ability of our other instruments to predict
future ARM rates, or because they react to noise in the survey forecasts that is not relevant
for predicting ARM rates over a three-year horizon.
   Our panel analysis is focused on uncovering the determinants of relatively short-term
variation in the ARM share. Of course, there are likely broader macroeconomic determinants
of preferred mortgage form across countries, which help to determine the country-average
ARM share. One potentially important determinant is in‡ation volatility.         If a …xed-rate
mortgage cannot be prepaid without penalties, as in Germany or in the US in an environment
of falling house prices, then a FRM is risky to the extent that in‡ation is volatile and
persistent. If it can be prepaid without penalties, as in the US in an environment of rising
house prices, then in‡ation volatility increases the FRM rate that banks will want to charge.
While in‡ation volatility also makes an ARM risky for a borrowing-constrained household,
because it makes the timing of required payments more volatile in real terms, it is likely that
the net e¤ect is to shift demand away from FRMs and toward ARMs (Campbell and Cocco
2003, Campbell 2013). While this is not our primary focus, we do …nd suggestive evidence
for the role of historical country-speci…c in‡ation volatility in explaining the country-average
ARM share using 14 countries including the nine countries in our panel analysis.
   The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the cross-country data that
we compile and employ in our study. Section 3 describes the econometric methodology that
we use to evaluate the roles of current cost minimization and longer-term cost minimization in
household mortgage choice. Section 4 estimates these models. Section 5 explores robustness
and presents cross-country evidence on the role of historical in‡ation volatility in explaining
the cross-country average ARM share. Section 6 concludes. An online appendix, Badarinza,
Campbell, and Ramadorai (2014), provides additional details about our data sources and
econometric procedures, and additional empirical results.




                                               5
2     Data

Our panel analysis covers nine countries: Australia, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States. For these countries, we compile data on
mortgage issuance volumes of both FRMs and ARMs, and mortgage interest rates, which
we measure as the average e¤ective annual interest rates on new residential mortgage loans,
distinguishing between ARM and FRM contracts. In order to insure comparability across
countries, we classify any mortgage loan which either pays a variable interest rate until it
matures, or has an initial …xation period of up to and including one year as an ARM. This
includes “tracker” contracts with interest rates which are linked to underlying indices or
benchmark interest rates.
    More speci…cally, for countries which are part of the Eurozone, we obtain aggregate
monthly data on mortgage volumes and interest rates on new mortgage loans from the statis-
tical repositories of respective national central banks. These data are part of the harmonized
system, introduced by the European Central Bank in 2003, which reports and aggregates
credit volumes from country-level mortgage …nance institutions.
    For Sweden, we use the Swedish statistical agency’s Financial Market Statistics report,
which contains monthly series of volumes and interest rates on new housing credit agreements,
and goes back to 1996.      For Australia, we use data released by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics, which covers the period from 1991 to the present.        For Denmark, we use the
historical time series of …nancial statistics reported by the Danmarks Nationalbank, which
begins in 2003.
    Our mortgage data for the US are taken from the Monthly Interest Rate Survey, collected
since 1992 by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. Towards the end of the sample, the share
of adjustable-rate mortgages becomes very low in the US market and we therefore impute
values for the corresponding interest rates, in order to insure representativeness and time
series comparability. We verify that our results are not driven by this imputation of rates,
and give further details of this procedure in the online appendix.
    As a robustness check in the paper, we employ average interest-rate …xation periods rather
than a simple binary classi…cation of mortgages as FRMs or ARMs. For this analysis, for


                                              6
the US, we calculate monthly population-weighted averages of interest rate …xation periods
at the individual loan level, using data from the Monthly Interest Rate Survey. For all
other countries, we approximate the time series of interest rate …xation periods by using the
market share of mortgages for three di¤erent …xation period categories: 1 to 5 years, 5 to 10
years and above 10 years. We calculate the average …xation periods as weighted averages of
interval means, i.e., 1-year for ARMs, and 3, 7 and 20 years for FRMs, respectively.2
   Another source of data that we employ in the paper is variables which proxy for variation
in broader funding costs. We employ the 3-month interbank lending rate and the 5-year
sovereign bond yield in all countries, as well as the in‡ation rate, which we measure as the
monthly year-on-year change of the consumer price index (CPI). The data source for both
interest rates and CPI statistics is Datastream.
   We obtain data on professional interest rate forecasts from Consensus Economics, as
reported in their “Consensus Forecasts Report”. The Report is based on surveys of local
economists, primarily employed by large …nancial institutions. These economists predict the
evolution of nominal 3-month interest rates over the 12-month period following the survey
date. We compute country-level monthly time series by cross-sectionally averaging forecasts
across the set of respondents in each country. The disaggregated data are not available for
Denmark, Belgium, Ireland and Greece. We therefore drop Denmark from any analysis which
uses survey forecast data. For Belgium, Ireland, and Greece, we use data on survey forecasts
for the Eurozone.
   Towards the end of the paper, we conduct a pure cross-sectional analysis of the determi-
nants of the ARM share, and include additional countries in this analysis. For these countries
which are not part of our panel analysis (but are included in our pure cross-country analysis),
we source ARM share and in‡ation data from national central banks and Datastream. Addi-
tional details about all data employed in the paper are provided in the online appendix. We
also present broader institutional information about these mortgage markets in a separate
institutional appendix, Badarinza et al. (2014), also available online.




   2
       The data for Australia, Ireland and Sweden do not allow for the computation of these series.

                                                      7
2.1     Cross-sectional and time-series variation in the ARM share

Table 1 reports summary statistics on the ARM share— the percentage share of adjustable-
rate mortgages in the total volume of new mortgage loans issued to households— and, for
countries where the data are available, the average period of initial interest rate …xation
in years. We divide our countries into two groups, using the following algorithm. If the
volatility (time-series standard deviation) of the ARM share exceeds …ve percentage points,
and if the volatility of the average initial interest rate …xation period is either unmeasured
or at least equal to 1 year, then we classify the country as one with signi…cant time-series
variation in mortgage choice.
    The top panel of the table shows the nine countries that satisfy both of these conditions,
and which we include in our panel estimation: Australia, Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the USA. The bottom panel of the table shows countries
that do not satisfy these conditions, in other words countries where there is a dominant
mortgage form with minimal time-variation: Finland, Germany, Portugal, Spain, and the
UK. Most of these countries have mortgage systems dominated by ARMs, but the mortgage
system in Germany is dominated by FRMs. The UK and Spain are two countries where the
ARM share does vary through time, but in a fashion that is not economically meaningful
because mortgage loans in these countries have very low average …xation periods (far less than
three years, on average) which hardly vary over time. In other words, “…xed-rate”mortgages
in these countries have such short …xation periods that they are barely distinguishable from
“adjustable-rate”mortgages.
    Table 1 documents considerable time-series variation in the ARM share within the coun-
tries selected by our algorithm. The time-series standard deviation of the ARM share ranges
from roughly 80% of the mean ARM share in the US to roughly 6% of the mean in Australia.
Figure 1 plots the history of the ARM share in each of these nine countries, along with the
contemporaneous spread between FRM and ARM rates. The …gure shows both temporary
‡uctuations in the ARM share that are typically correlated with the FRM-ARM spread,
and some longer-term movements that vary across countries.3 For example Sweden moves
   3
    An increase in long-term borrowing costs after the crisis is especially pronounced in Ireland. Irish banks
experienced higher funding costs as of October 2008, which led to a signi…cant increase in the spread between

                                                      8
towards a greater average ARM share over the sample period, whereas the US moves towards
a lower average ARM share.


2.2     Survey forecasts of interest rates

In Table 2, we assess the information contained in Consensus Economics survey forecasts
for future realizations of interest rates using the following regression speci…cation, which we
estimate both country-by-country and in a panel with …xed e¤ects:


                            f          f                    f;S          f
                           Ri;t+12    Ri;t =    i   +   i (Ri;t;t+12    Ri;t ) + "i;t+12 :                    (1)


       f                                                              f;S
Here, Ri;t is the 3-month interest rate in country i in period t and Ri;t;t+12 is the 12-month
ahead average consensus survey forecast in country i in period t. The hypothesis that the
survey forecasts are primarily rational expectations of future interest rates in country i implies
that we should estimate an intercept            i   = 0 and a slope coe¢ cient           i   = 1. More generally,
if the survey forecasts contain relevant information about future interest rate changes but
are quite far from rational, then we should …nd                i   > 0 even if    i   6= 0 and   i   6= 1.
    Table 2 estimates equation (1) for each country separately, and then for the panel as a
whole. The …rst column of Panel A of the table reports uniformly negative intercepts that
are statistically signi…cant in Sweden, the Netherlands and the Eurozone. In other words,
survey respondents tend to predict slightly higher changes in interest rates than the ones
that actually materialize one year later. The second column of Panel A reports uniformly
positive slope coe¢ cients that are signi…cantly di¤erent from zero in all countries except
Australia, and insigni…cantly di¤erent from one in all countries except the Eurozone.4 The
third column of Panel A shows that the rational expectations hypothesis that the intercept
and slope coe¢ cients equal zero and one, respectively, can be rejected at the 5% level or
better for all countries except the US and Italy.5

FRMs and ARMs. A comprehensive discussion of developments in the Irish mortgage market around the
crisis period is given by Goggin et al. (2012).
     4
       The data sample for short-term interest rate forecasts at the level of the Eurozone only covers the period
after 2005, as indicated in Table 1. In this case, the rapid decline of interest rates during the …nancial crisis
leads us to observe a slope coe¢ cient higher than one.
     5
       For robustness, we also check the relationship between Consensus professional forecaster data and house-

                                                         9
    Panel B of Table 2 imposes a common slope across countries but allows country-speci…c
…xed e¤ects, and shows that the estimated slope is 1.02, insigni…cantly di¤erent from one.
For the purposes of our analysis, the slight upwards bias in the forecasts observed in Panel A
appears not to be particularly important, only a¤ecting the estimated regression constants
and country …xed e¤ects.         We conclude that the one-year ahead survey forecasts contain
relevant information about future interest rates, and are close to rational forecasts of one-
year changes in these short rates.



3        Methodology

In this section we present the methodology that we use to discover whether the positive
correlation between the ARM share and the spread between FRM and ARM rates, illustrated
in Figure 1, is driven by short-term cost minimization, or by rational forecasts of future ARM
rates.
    We propose a simple model to distinguish between alternative explanations for variation
in the ARM share across countries i and months t:


             ARM SHAREi;t =          i   + ARM SHAREi;t        1   +   C (F RMi;t    ARMi;t )

                                         +   L   F RMi;t   ^ i;t [ARM i;t;t+T ] +
                                                           E                        i;t :                  (2)


In this equation, ARM SHAREi;t is the percent share of ARMs in total mortgage issuance
in each month, and ARMi;t and F RMi;t are country-speci…c monthly mortgage interest rates
on ARMs and FRMs respectively. ARM i;t;t+T is the forward-looking simple moving average
of the ARM rate in country i, evaluated between time t and time t + T , where T is measured
in calendar years.6
    In our panel estimation, we allow for country-speci…c intercept terms                   i,   which control


hold interest rate survey expectations (the Michigan survey data) for the US. We discuss these results more
fully below and in the online appendix.
    6
      The horizon T at which future payment streams are evaluated should, in theory, correspond to the
average …xation period for …xed-rate mortgages in each country. However, as Table 1 shows, we have
relatively short sample periods so we do not extend T beyond 3 years as doing so would leave us with a
remaining sample which is too short for accurate estimation.

                                                     10
for the possibility that there may be pure time-invariant cross-country variation in the ARM
share. We also include the lagged dependent variable ARM SHAREi;t 1 , in order to capture
the e¤ect of inertia on the part of households or mortgage providers. As mentioned earlier,
it may take time for banks to shift their marketing strategies gradually towards mortgage
forms that they think will work better, or for households to respond to movements in interest
rates.
   Interest rates are allowed to a¤ect mortgage choice in two ways. Current cost minimiza-
tion implies a positive contemporaneous relationship between the mortgage rate spread and
the share of ARMs, and this channel is captured by the coe¢ cient                  C.   On the other hand,
if households rationally forecast variation in ARM rates over the longer-term to evaluate the
trade-o¤ between ARMs and FRMs, the relevant variable is the spread between current FRM
rates and expectations about average ARM rates over the horizon T . We therefore interpret
a positive and statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient          L   as evidence for rational long-term cost
minimization by households.
   This setup requires us to estimate household expectations of future average ARM rates,
^ i;t [ARM i;t;t+T ]. We consider three alternative models for household expectations— rational
E
expectations, adaptive expectations, and survey proxies for expectations— each of which leads
to its own empirical speci…cation.


3.1      Rational household expectations

If household expectations are rational, we can use a panel instrumental variables approach,
replacing expected future ARM rates in equation (2) with realized future ARM rates, and
then instrumenting these future rates with current and lagged interest rates. This approach
can be described as a two-stage procedure.
   The …rst-stage regression uses current and past mortgage rates, as well as nominal short-
term interest rates and government bond yields, to predict ARM i;t;t+T :


                                                                                  5            f
    ARM i;t;t+T =   i   +   1 ARMi;t   +   2 F RMi;t   +   3 ARM i;t K;t   +   4 Bi;t   +   5 Ri;t   + "i;t :   (3)




                                                   11
Employing the same notation as earlier, ARM i;t;t       K   is the backward-looking moving average
of the ARM rate in country i, evaluated between time t and time t               K, where K is once
                                                                             f
again measured in calendar years. We also include the 3-month interest rate Ri;t and the
                              5
5-year government bond yield Bi;t as explanatory variables. Their separate inclusion allows
for benchmark rates and the excess of the ARM or F RM rates over these benchmark rates
to forecast future ARM rates with di¤erent coe¢ cients.
     A variant of this approach modi…es equation (3) to account for potential non-stationarity
in interest rates. We assume that in the case of such non-stationarity, all interest rates are
cointegrated, with a coe¢ cient of cointegration equal to 1 for any given pair of interest rates.
Campbell and Shiller (1987) show that such cointegration arises if there is a unit root in the
short-term interest rate and the expectations hypothesis holds; the same will be true in the
presence of time-varying risk premia, provided that risk premia follow a stationary process.
Under this set of assumptions, in order to forecast ARM i;t;t+T we estimate the following
equation in which both right- and left-hand-side variables are stationary:


      ARM i;t;t+T   ARMi;t = 'i +       1 (F RMi;t      ARMi;t ) +     2 (ARM i;t K;t   ARMi;t )
                                        5      f
                                  + 3 (Bi;t   Ri;t )+   i;t :                                        (4)


                          ^ i;t [ARM i;t;t+T ] is the …tted value from estimation of (3) or (4),
     In the second stage, E
which is then substituted back into equation (2).
     Our identi…cation strategy is straightforward. If the current spread between FRM and
ARM rates (F RMi;t       ARMi;t ) predicts ARM SHAREi;t only to the extent that the spread
forecasts ARM i;t;t+T , this will “knock out”any role for       C   in equation (2) given our instru-
mental variables approach. However if current cost minimization drives the ARM share, then

 C   will continue to be important. The relative signi…cance of the two coe¢ cients        C   and    L

in equation (2) allows us to measure the relative importance of current and longer-term cost
minimization in household mortgage choice.
     A few notes on our estimation procedure and results: First, we set T = 3 years and
K = 1 year in the benchmark case in our estimation. We also consider values of T = 1; 2
and K = 2; 3 years, and show results in the paper for T = 1, in the interest of preserving

                                               12
clarity of exposition. The results for K = 2; 3 and T = 2 years are available in the online
appendix.
   Second, estimation of equation (3) requires measuring a backward moving average of
ARM rates. Since our sample periods are quite short for many countries, we wish to avoid
shortening them further for models with a high K. For this reason, when K > 1, we
impute (“back-cast”) ARM rates prior to the beginning of our sample using nominal short-
term interest rates, which are available earlier than ARM rates, and provide details of this
procedure in the online appendix. This allows us to present all results for a common sample
period. Our results are very similar if we shorten the sample as K increases rather than
using this imputation approach.
   Third, we calculate standard errors for all coe¢ cients using a non-parametric bootstrap
procedure, along the lines of Politis and Romano (1994), and as employed by Ramadorai
(2012). These errors are robust to contemporaneous cross-country correlation of the error
terms, in addition to being robust to heteroskedasticity. Details are provided in the online
appendix.


3.2    Adaptive household expectations

An alternative approach follows KHN (2009) in assuming that household expectations follow
                           ^ i;t [ARM i;t;t+T ] = ARM i;t
a simple adaptive process, E                                     K;t ,   which we simply substitute back
into equation (2). In this case we use OLS to estimate the following speci…cation:


            ARM SHAREi;t =        i   + ARM SHAREi;t             1   +   C (F RMi;t        ARMi;t )

                                      +   L   F RMi;t    ARM i;t         K;t   +   i;t :              (5)


Current cost minimization implies that         C   > 0 and   L       = 0, while KHN’s adaptive forward-
looking cost minimization implies that        C    = 0 and   L   > 0.




                                                    13
3.3      Survey proxies for household expectations

Finally, we consider survey-based data on professional interest rate forecasts. These direct
measures of agents’expectations are well suited to serve as instruments for expected future
ARM rates, as they are forward-looking in nature, and potentially re‡ect more relevant
information than current realizations of term structure variables.                          We also allow for the
possibility that the survey-based interest rate forecasts in‡uence mortgage choice directly—
a possibility if household expectations are not fully rational, but are correlated with survey
forecasts.
                                                                      f;S
     We alter our …rst-stage regressions to include survey forecasts Ri;t;t+12 :


                                                                                                           5
             ARM i;t;t+T =        i   +     1 ARMi;t   +   2 F RMi;t       +    3 ARM i;t K;t   +       4 Bi;t

                                     f               f;S
                                + 5 Ri;t +        6 Ri;t;t+12   + "i;t ;                                                 (6)


and:


       ARM i;t;t+T   ARMi;t = 'i +              1 (F RMi;t        ARMi;t ) +       2 (ARM i;t K;t          ARMi;t )
                                                5       f              f;S            f
                                          + 3 (Bi;t    Ri;t )+     4 (Ri;t;t+12      Ri;t )+    i;t :                    (7)


     Similarly, we alter our main regression to include the survey forecast of the future change
in the short-term interest rate:


         ARM SHAREi;t =               i   + ARM SHAREi;t             1   +     C (F RMi;t      ARMi;t )
                                                                                      f      f;S
                                 +        L (F RMi;t     ARM i;t;t+T ) +          S (Ri;t   Ri;t;t+12 )+         i;t ;   (8)


     To the extent that households have rational expectations of future interest rates, the sur-
vey forecasts should only be useful instruments in the …rst-stage regressions and should have
no additional explanatory power for the ARM share when included directly in equation (8).
That is, we should …nd     S   = 0. We test this exclusion restriction in both the stationary and
the unit-root panel models. Alternatively, a positive and statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient

 S   implies that a survey forecast of increasing short-term interest rates over the course of the

                                                        14
next year leads to a decrease in the ARM share, beyond any information that the one-year
forecasts may contain about the levels of future ARM rates.



4       Estimation of mortgage choice models

4.1     Rational expectations

Table 3 asks whether the ARM share is driven by the current FRM-ARM spread or by
the spread of the FRM rate over rational expectations of an average of future ARM rates.
We estimate equation (2) by instrumental variables, where equation (3) is our …rst-stage
regression, assuming that interest rates are stationary.7
    The table is divided into two sets of rows, each corresponding to a di¤erent sample:
the full sample, and a more recent sample beginning in 2001. We also di¤erentiate across
two sets of columns, between panel regressions that do and do not include the US. The
exclusion of the US is intended to provide an “out-of-sample” evaluation of the model—
several studies including Brueckner and Follain (1988), KHN (2009), and Moench et al.
(2010) have attempted to explain the ARM share in the US, but to our knowledge, ours is
the …rst academic study attempting to explain such variation in the additional 8 countries
in our panel.
    In our benchmark presentation of the results, we set T = 3 years, and show estimated
coe¢ cients     C   and   L.   As described earlier,     C   measures the impact of the current spread
between FRM and ARM rates on the ARM share, while                    L   measures the role of longer-term
forecasts, i.e., the impact of the spread between the current FRM rate and the average of
expected future ARM rates, on the ARM share.
    Across all speci…cations, we obtain a large coe¢ cient           C   that is always signi…cant at the
1% level. Moreover, we …nd almost no evidence for longer-term forward-looking behavior
in the full sample: the coe¢ cient       L   is small and statistically insigni…cant. If we shorten the
sample to start in 2001, we do estimate           L   to be statistically signi…cant, but its magnitude

    7
      In the online appendix, we also report panel estimation results assuming that interest rates have a
common unique unit root. In this case, we estimate equation (2) by instrumental variables, where equation
(4) is our …rst-stage regression.

                                                       15
is still roughly half the magnitude of       C.   In the online appendix, we show that our results
are una¤ected by the choice of K, the backward window for averaging ARM rates.
   We consider the alternative case T = 1 in the last two columns of Table 3. That is,
we compare a FRM-ARM spread that includes the current ARM rate with a near-term
alternative that includes an average expected ARM rate over the next year.                  In contrast
with the benchmark T = 3 case, when T = 1, we typically obtain a small and statistically
insigni…cant coe¢ cient     C   and a larger coe¢ cient     L   which is signi…cant at the 1% level.
This provides evidence for near-term forward-looking behavior on the part of households,
especially in recent data. This contrast suggests that households may experience greater dif-
…culty making accurate longer-term forecasts, which are more relevant for lifetime mortgage
cost comparisons.
   The results assuming a unit-root interest rate process, which we report in the online ap-
pendix, are broadly consistent with those discussed above. In the benchmark case T = 3, the
coe¢ cient   C   on the current spread remains strongly statistically signi…cant for the post-2001
sample, while the coe¢ cient      L   on the forward-looking spread is variable both in magnitude
and statistical signi…cance. The coe¢ cients are less stable in the case T = 1, probably
re‡ecting the fact that fewer instruments are available in the …rst-stage regression for the
unit-root case, so the …tted forward-looking FRM-ARM spread is more highly correlated
with the current FRM-ARM spread in the second stage.
   In summary, there is some evidence that household mortgage choice responds to rational
forecasts of future ARM rates.         This evidence is stronger for near-term forecasts of rates
within the next year than for longer-term three-year forecasts, and stronger in recent data
since 2001. However there is also evidence that the current FRM-ARM spread in‡uences
mortgage choice, and in most of our speci…cations the current spread has a greater in‡uence
than the anticipated future spread.
   Table 4 estimates country-speci…c regressions and provides more details about the un-
derlying coe¢ cients from equations (2) and (3) when K = 1 year and T = 3 years. The
…rst-stage regressions generate relatively consistent results across countries—         1   is positive
on average, which indicates that mortgage rates are persistent over the short-run. However,



                                                    16
 3   is negative, which suggests that controlling for short-run continuation, there is a ten-
dency for ARM rates to reverse over the longer run. In the online appendix , we repeat this
exercise under the assumption of a unit root in interest rates. We generally …nd evidence
that long-short spreads, both of FRM rates over ARM rates and of longer-term government
bond yields over short-term rates, tend to predict increases in ARM rates, and there is some
evidence of mean-reversion in changes in ARM rates.
     Our analysis also reveals that in the second stage regression, i.e., equation (2), the coef-
…cient on the lagged ARM share is high and statistically signi…cant. This is consistent with
a high degree of inertia in mortgage markets in every country in our sample. This inertia
could arise from sluggishness in the sales e¤ort of mortgage providers, in the sense that they
only gradually shift towards selling products that households are interested in buying. It
could also capture households’sluggish adjustment to interest rate movements, or spillovers
within the household sector— with households’ mortgage decisions strongly in‡uenced by
other households’recent choices.


4.2     Adaptive expectations

In Table 5, we drop the assumption of rational forecasting and instead estimate rule-of-thumb
models as suggested by KHN (2009).
     The left-hand side of the table estimates equation (2) under the assumption of simple
rule of thumb adaptive expectations. This speci…cation results in positive coe¢ cients         C

on the spread of the FRM rate over the contemporaneous ARM rate for all countries, and
for the panel as a whole. Current cost minimization seems therefore to be a consistent
feature of mortgage markets around the world, robustly estimated across our set of di¤erent
assumptions about the expectations formation process.
     In contrast, the coe¢ cient on the term capturing the rule-of-thumb behavior is estimated
to be negative and statistically signi…cant in most countries, suggesting that the backward-
looking nature of mortgage product choice at household level is a phenomenon restricted to
US households. Moreover, the results indicate that even in the US, the importance of past
ARM rates has decreased over time, with no statistically signi…cant e¤ects visible for the


                                                17
more recent post-2001 sub-period.
   The right-hand side of the table shows what happens when we exclude the lagged de-
pendent variable in these regressions. First, our previous …ndings in favour of current-cost
minimization remain robust and remarkably consistent across countries. Second, we con…rm
the strong evidence reported by KHN (2009) in favour of backward-looking behavior in the
US mortgage market: over the full sample, we …nd that the US ARM share rises by 9 per-
centage points in response to a one percentage point increase in the spread of FRM rates over
a one-year moving average of ARM rates.8 However, we again …nd that the strength of this
relationship is lower over the past decade, and reverses when we consider the cross-country
panel as a whole.


4.3     Survey expectations

In Table 6, we add professional survey forecasts of near-term interest rate movements to
our analysis. This table repeats the rational-expectations analysis of Table 3, but includes
the forecasted one-year change of the nominal 3-month interest rate both as an additional
explanatory variable, with coe¢ cient       S,   and as an additional instrument for future average
ARM rates.
   Once again the results are sensitive to the forecasting horizon that we consider. In the
benchmark case, the current FRM-ARM spread is always signi…cant and the survey forecast
of interest rate changes enters the regression directly in three out of four speci…cations, while
the rationally anticipated future spread is never statistically signi…cant. The current spread
and the survey forecasts appear to drive out the rational forecast of future ARM rates in
determining household mortgage choice. Thus, while households may be forward-looking in
the sense that they are responsive to survey expectations of future interest-rate movements,
this forward-looking behavior is not consistent with fully rational cost minimization over
horizons longer than one year.
   Given the evidence shown earlier in Table 2 that survey forecasts are rational predictors of
short-term interest rates over the next year, conditional on the information they contain, this
   8
    The choice of K does not a¤ect the estimated e¤ects qualitatively. In the online appendix, we also
report estimation results for the backward-looking horizon of K = 3 years, originally considered by KHN.

                                                    18
…nding suggests that households use some but not all the information available for predicting
future ARM rates over the next three years. The other instruments have independent fore-
casting power that is not incorporated in survey forecasts or re‡ected in household mortgage
choice.     Consistent with this, we show in the online appendix that the other instruments
are jointly signi…cant in a panel regression of one-year changes in short rates onto survey
forecasts and instruments.9
    The results for the case T = 1 strengthen the evidence that over a short one-year horizon,
rational interest-rate forecasts do a¤ect mortgage choice. The current FRM-ARM spread is
never signi…cant, while the rationally anticipated future spread is signi…cant in three out of
four speci…cations. It is also the case in these speci…cations that the survey forecasts enter
directly when we exclude US data.
    It is worth noting an important robustness check here. We check whether the use of
household expectations rather than professional survey forecasts makes a material di¤erence
to our results. Household survey expectations data are readily available for the US, where
categorical data on household interest rate expectations are available from the Michigan
survey.10     We check how these household expectations correlate with future interest rate
realizations, recoding the categorical variables as fractions of the set of surveyed households
expecting an interest rate decrease or increase. We …nd that household expectations in the
US do appear to contain information about the future path of interest rates, con…rming the
results of Ang et al. (2007). We then reconstruct the instrument in equation (6), substituting
these household expectations for the Consensus professional forecasts in the US. The resulting
instrument has a correlation of 0.97 over the full US sample with the instrument constructed
using only professional forecasts. Furthermore, the second-stage regression results for the US
do not di¤er greatly when this substitution is made.               Taken together, these results imply
that in the US at least, Consensus professional forecasts are adequate proxies for household

   9
      We also note that con…dence intervals are quite wide in Table 2, so it is possible that survey forecasts
contain some noise that in‡uences mortgage choice but does not predict future movements in interest rates.
   10
      The Eurosystem HFCS surveys which are normally used for work in household …nance do not contain
time series data on household interest rate expections. These data are available from other sources for Europe.
Where they are available, like the Michigan household surveys in the US, they simply ask categorical questions
about whether households expect interest rates to rise, fall, or remain the same in the future. We do not
acquire these data for Europe, but simply check the correlation between household survey expectations and
Consensus professional forecasts using the US Michigan data, recoded to permit numerical analysis.

                                                      19
expectations. These results are available in the online appendix to the paper.



5        Robustness and further analysis

5.1      Interest rate …xation periods

In most European countries and di¤erently from the US, …xed-rate mortgages are o¤ered for
a variety of initial …xation periods. As mentioned above, FRM contracts entail very di¤erent
repayment streams in Spain and Germany, with short-term …xation (below 5 years) more
common in the former and long-term …xation (above 10 years) typical for the latter.
     It is also interesting to note that in the nine countries constituting our estimation sample
(where the overall share of adjustable- vs. …xed-rate mortgages varies through time), we
observe substantial time-variation in the market share of mortgages corresponding to di¤erent
initial …xation periods.11
     For example, in the Netherlands, households increasingly opted for long-term FRMs
during the years preceding the …nancial crisis. More recently however, long-term FRMs have
virtually disappeared from the Dutch market, whereas the transaction volumes of FRMs
with lower …xation periods have remained broadly unchanged throughout the decade. In
contrast, the increase in FRM volumes in Greece between 2006 and 2008 is associated with
an increased preference for relatively shorter-duration FRMs.
     As a robustness exercise, we repeat our instrumental-variables panel analysis, replacing
the ARM share with the average …xation period.12 Our set of countries is substantially
reduced, since disaggregated data on mortgage transaction volumes are only available for
the United States, Denmark, and countries in the Eurozone (see Table 1). Nevertheless, in
Table 7 we show that our results carry through in this setup. In particular, we continue
to …nd evidence that households exhibit short-term forward looking behavior, as well as

    11
      In the appendix, we illustrate the dynamics of the monthly transaction volumes for residential …xed-rate
mortgage contracts with di¤erent initial …xation periods, grouped in three sub-categories: 1 to 5 years, 5 to
10 years and above 10 years.
   12
      In this context, it is no longer appropriate to compute the FRM-ARM spread as a weighted average
of rates across …xation periods, as this would, by construction, introduce a simultaneity bias. We therefore
construct our right-hand side explanatory variables in this robustness exercise using the interest rates on
contracts with …xation periods above 10 years.

                                                     20
evidence that time-variation in the current FRM-ARM spread explains a signi…cant portion
of the dynamics of average …xation periods.


5.2    Cross-country identi…cation: time …xed e¤ects

Our panel estimation approach uses ARM share dynamics in multiple countries as a way to
distinguish between alternative theories. The power of this approach depends on the extent
to which mortgage interest rates and yield curve data exhibit cross-sectional heterogeneity.
   Figure 1 shows that the …nancial crisis a¤ected the terms of mortgage loans in a broadly
similar fashion across countries: the FRM-ARM spread declines at …rst, picks up during 2009,
and then declines again. The ARM share mirrors these dynamics, with …xed-rate mortgages
being relatively more desirable before the onset of the crisis and the share of adjustable-rate
mortgages picking up thereafter. This raises the concern that our results may be a¤ected by
common shocks that move mortgage choice and interest rates in a similar fashion across all
countries, despite the fact that we control for any potential cross-country contemporaneous
correlation in our computation of standard errors.
   We therefore additionally control for this possibility by including time …xed e¤ects in
our benchmark speci…cations. The results, reported in the online appendix, con…rm the
dominant role of the contemporaneous spread. In the full sample of countries, the estimated
coe¢ cients   C   are barely a¤ected by the inclusion of the time …xed e¤ects and remain
statistically signi…cant at a 1% con…dence level. The magnitude of the forward-looking
component is also robust, especially for the post-2001 period, although this coe¢ cient is less
precisely estimated.


5.3    Cross-sectional patterns

Having explored the determinants of pure time-series variation in the shares of ARMs, we
conclude with a simple cross-country analysis of the determinants of the time-series average
ARM shares.
   In the top two panels of Figure 2, we plot the country-level average ARM shares and
interest rate …xation periods against the average FRM-ARM rate spread over the sample.


                                              21
The very strong relationship between interest rate spreads and ARM shares which we doc-
umented in the time series dimension seems not to hold when we analyze the cross section
of countries. If anything, higher spreads tend to be weakly associated with a lower share of
ARMs.
    We do not …nd this surprising, though, given that the institutional structures of the
di¤erent international mortgage markets are likely to be a¤ected by numerous legal and
regulatory factors, foreclosure and bankruptcy rules, di¤erent prepayment penalty regimes,
as well as supply-side constraints related to the cost structure of banks. We review these
factors in detail in the institutional appendix, Badarinza et al. (2014), and highlight the
challenges involved in generating comparable mortgage market statistics across countries.
    Following Campbell (2013), the bottom part of Figure 2 plots the average ARM share
and average interest rate …xation period versus the historical level of in‡ation volatility in
each country. The …gure shows that there is a strong positive cross-sectional relationship
between the average ARM share and the historical level of in‡ation volatility, and a negative
relationship between the average …xation period and historical in‡ation volatility. This sug-
gests that there is a signi…cant role for household perceptions of in‡ation risk in determining
household mortgage choice in the long run, consistent with the …ndings of Malmendier and
Nagel (2014). Viewed through this lens, the striking cross-country di¤erences in the structure
of mortgage markets seem plausible: in most of Northern and Western Europe and the US,
in‡ation has been contained over the last few decades, and …xed-rate mortgages are more
prevalent. In contrast, in Southern Europe and Australia in‡ation has been more volatile,
and higher ARM shares and lower …xation periods are more prevalent.



6     Conclusion

Mortgage markets are remarkably heterogeneous across countries, and also vary considerably
over time. In a number of countries, including the US, the market share of adjustable-rate
mortgages (the ARM share) co-moves with interest rates.        In this paper we ask whether
households choose the form of their mortgages in response to current interest rates, or also
in anticipation of future interest rates.

                                              22
   We uncover some evidence that households are forward-looking over relatively short pe-
riods of time.   The spread between the …xed-rate mortgage (FRM) rate and the average
rationally expected ARM rate over the next year is often a better predictor of the ARM
share than is the spread between the FRM rate and the current ARM rate. The evidence
for forward-looking behavior is particularly strong in more recent data since 2001.
   Over a longer three-year horizon, however, the current FRM-ARM rate spread tends to
have a larger in‡uence on the ARM share than the spread involving rationally expected
future rates. Thus households do not seem to anticipate longer-term rate movements in the
manner that would be required to minimize the lifetime costs of their mortgages. Instead
the current rate spread is an important in‡uence on mortgage choice, as would be implied
by a model in which borrowing-constrained households seek low rates in order to maintain
the level of current consumption, or to increase the size of the house they can buy when
constrained by bank limitations on mortgage interest-to-income ratios.
   There is substantial evidence that ARM borrowers in the US do not understand the extent
to which ARM rates can vary (Bucks and Pence 2008), and evidence for suboptimal mortgage
re…nancing in Denmark, the US, and the UK (Andersen et al. 2015, Campbell 2006, Miles
2004). However, we …nd little evidence in our international dataset supporting a model in
which households use an adaptive rule of thumb for forecasting future ARM rates.         This
does not imply that households are fully informed about the process driving interest rates,
or manage their mortgages optimally. We interpret this …nding as suggesting that household
expectations about future interest rates may require a more complex characterization than
simple rules.
   We also bring survey data on interest rate forecasts into our analysis and …nd that the
ARM share tends to increase when professional forecasters expect short-term interest rates to
decrease during the next year. However the current FRM-ARM spread remains statistically
signi…cant even in the presence of this e¤ect, and we continue to reject the hypothesis of
rational longer-term rate forecasting even when using survey forecasts as an instrument.
   Our analysis of time-series variation in the ARM share concentrates on interest rate
movements, but it is equally interesting to ask what drives persistent cross-country variation



                                             23
in this share. We have presented evidence that historical volatility in in‡ation is associated
with a high ARM share. This makes sense since in‡ation volatility makes long-term nominal
contracts risky for both borrowers and lenders, or risky for lenders and correspondingly
expensive for borrowers in the case where FRMs can be re…nanced with minimal prepayment
penalties. There are of course many other variables that should help to determine mortgage
choice, including, for example, the cost of default and the prevalence of borrowing constraints,
and some of these may vary both over time and across countries. These questions remain to
be explored in future research.




                                              24
References

Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. Souleles, 2007, Reaction of consumer spending and debt to
    tax rebates: Evidence from consumer credit data, Journal of Political Economy 115,
    986–1019

Andersen, S., J.Y. Campbell, K.M. Nielsen, and T. Ramadorai, 2015, Inattention and inertia
   in household …nance: Evidence from the Danish mortgage market, unpublished paper.

Ang, A., G. Bekaert and M. Wei, 2007, Do macro variables, asset markets, or surveys
    forecast in‡ation better?, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1163–1212.

Badarinza, C., J.Y. Campbell, G. Kankanhalli, and T. Ramadorai, 2014, Institutional ap-
   pendix to What calls to ARMs?, http://hhf.oxford-man.ox.ac.uk/node/804.

Badarinza, C., J.Y. Campbell, and T. Ramadorai, 2014, Online appendix to What calls to
   ARMs?, http://hhf.oxford-man.ox.ac.uk/node/804.

Bardhan, A., R.H. Edelstein, and C.A. Kroll (eds.), 2012, Global Housing Markets: Crises,
    Policies, and Institutions, John Wiley.

Bernanke, B. S., and M. Gertler, 1995, Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary
    policy transmission, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 27–48.

Botsch, M. J., and U. Malmendier, 2015, In‡ation experiences and contract choice – Evi-
    dence from residential mortgages, unpublished paper.

Brueckner, J.K. and J.R. Follain, 1988, The rise and fall of the ARM: An econometric
    analysis of mortgage choice, Review of Economics and Statistics 70, 93–102.

Bucks, B., and K. Pence, 2008, Do borrowers know their mortgage terms?, Journal of Urban
    Economics 64, 218–233.

Campbell, J.Y., 2006, Household …nance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553–1604.

Campbell, J.Y., 2013, Mortgage market design, Review of Finance 17, 1–33.

Campbell, J.Y. and J.F. Cocco, 2003, Household risk management and optimal mortgage
   choice, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 1449–1494.

Campbell, J.Y. and J.F. Cocco, 2015, A model of mortgage default, Journal of Finance 70,
   1495–1554.

Campbell, J.Y. and R.J. Shiller, 1987, Cointegration and tests of present value models,
   Journal of Political Economy 95, 1062–1088.

Coulibaly, B. and G. Li, 2009, Choice of mortgage contracts: Evidence from the Survey of
    Consumer Finances, Real Estate Economics 37, 659–673.

Dhillon, U.S., J.D. Shilling, and C.F. Sirmans, 1987, Choosing between …xed and adjustable
    rate mortgages: Note, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 19, 260–267.



                                           25
Di Maggio, M., A. Kermani, and R. Ramcharan, 2015, Monetary policy pass-through:
    Household consumption and voluntary deleveraging, unpublished paper.

Goggin, J., S. Holton, J. Kelly, R. Lydon, and K. McQuinn, 2012, The …nancial crisis and
   the pricing of interest rates in the Irish mortgage market: 2003-2011, Central Bank of
   Ireland.

Greenspan, A., 2004, Understanding household debt obligations, speech at the Credit Union
    National Association Governmental A¤airs Conference, Washington, DC, available on-
    line at http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040223/.

International Monetary Fund, 2011, Housing …nance and …nancial stability –back to basics?,
     in: Global Financial Stability Report, April 2011: Durable Financial Stability –Getting
     There from Here, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, pp. 111–142.

Johnson, K., and G. Li, 2011, Are adjustable-rate mortgage borrowers borrowing con-
    strained?, FEDS Working Paper 2011-21, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.

Keys, B., T. Piskorski, A. Seru, and V. Yao, 2014, Mortgage rates, household balance sheets,
    and the real economy, unpublished paper.

Koijen, R.S.J., O. Van Hemert, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh, 2009, Mortgage timing, Journal
    of Financial Economics, 93(2), 292–324.

Lea, M., 2011, Alternative forms of mortgage …nance: what can we learn from other coun-
    tries?, in: N. Retsinas and E. Belsky (eds.), Moving Forward: The Future of Consumer
    Credit and Mortgage Finance, Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University,
    Cambridge, MA, and Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 118–149.

Lea, M., and A. Sanders, 2011, Government policy and the …xed-rate mortgage, Annual
    Reviews of Financial Economics 3, 223–234.

Malmendier, U. and Nagel, S., 2014, Learning from in‡ation experiences, unpublished paper.

Miles, D., 2004, The UK Mortgage Market: Taking A Longer-Term View, HM Treasury,
    London.

Moench, E., J. Vickery, and D. Aragon, 2010, Why is the market share of adjustable rate
   mortgages so low? Federal Reserve Bank of New York: Current Issues in Economics
   and Finance, 16(8), 1–11.

Parker, J., 2014, Why don’t households smooth consumption? Evidence from a 25 million
    dollar experiment, unpublished paper.

Politis, D. N., and Joseph P. Romano, 1994, The stationary bootstrap, Journal of the
     American Statistical Association, 89, 1303–1313.

Ramadorai, T., 2012, The secondary market for hedge funds and the closed hedge fund
   premium, Journal of Finance, 67, 479-512.

Souleles, N., 1999, The response of household consumption to income tax refunds, American
    Economic Review 89, 947-958.



                                            26
Taylor, J. B., 1995, The monetary transmission mechanism: An empirical framework, Jour-
    nal of Economic Perspectives, 9, 11–26.

Villar Burke, J., 2015, Impact of loan contract characteristics on monetary transmission
     and consumer rent, unpublished paper.




                                          27
                                              Table 1
                                           Summary statistics
In Panel A, the table reports summary statistics on the share of adjustable-rate mortgages in percent of the
total volume of new loans to households, and the average period of initial interest rate …xation (in years).
Under the heading S.d., we report time series volatility, measured by the realized standard deviation. The top
panel contains the countries which we include in our main panel analysis, for which the time-series standard
deviation of the ARM share exceeds …ve percentage points and the standard deviation of the average initial
interest rate …xation period is either unmeasured or equal to at least one year. In Panel B, the table reports
selected moments of the time series of 3-month nominal interest rates, as well as corresponding one-year
ahead consensus forecasts. Disaggregated forecast data are not available for Denmark, Belgium, Greece and
Ireland. In our panel estimation, we use forecasts at the level of the Eurozone for the latter three of these
countries.

                                                 Panel A
                                           Mortgage market data

                                Share of ARMs                Interest rate …xation period        Sample
                        Mean      S.d.   Min  Max            Mean S.d.       Min    Max         coverage
   Australia            88.25    5.06    74.50   97.80                                          1991-2013
   Belgium              23.15   17.02     5.34   61.86       11.78   3.70    4.13   16.31       2003-2013
   Denmark              44.59   13.17    13.88   73.25        8.69   2.86    2.99   14.96       2003-2013
   Greece               63.14   23.25    20.55   93.12        3.38   1.00    1.84    5.57       2003-2010
   Ireland              81.55    9.14    52.91   94.17                                          2003-2013
   Italy                70.66   16.82    28.94   88.56        5.78   3.22    2.34   13.68       2003-2013
   Netherlands          24.30    7.43    11.27   47.26        6.37   1.95    4.07   11.49       2003-2013
   Sweden               53.62   17.67    14.47   90.76                                          1996-2013
   USA                   8.46    7.14     0.01   38.16       22.76   3.20   12.17   28.26       1992-2013
   Finland              96.11    2.53    89.59   99.32                                          2005-2013
   Germany              15.88    2.20    12.14   25.25        9.08   0.68    7.32   10.33       2003-2013
   Portugal             97.16    2.98    85.91   99.51                                          2003-2013
   Spain                85.32    7.81    64.62   94.16        1.54   0.23    1.20    2.07       2003-2013
   UK                   46.93   15.32    15.48   83.11        2.22   0.32    1.42    2.77       2004-2013

                                                  Panel B
                        Realizations and forecasts of 3-month nominal interest rates

                         Short-term interest rates              Consensus forecasts              Sample
                        Mean   S.d.    Min     Max           Mean S.d.    Min     Max           coverage
   Australia             5.69     1.86    2.58   15.81        6.05   1.94    2.56   15.10       1990-2013
   Belgium               2.04     1.57    0.19    5.28        2.19   1.35    0.27    4.57       2005-2013
   Italy                 5.25     4.11    0.19   18.22        5.04   3.66    0.22   13.27       1990-2013
   Netherlands           3.80     2.55    0.19    9.82        3.83   2.17    0.30    8.66       1990-2013
   Sweden                5.02     3.76    0.48   20.00        5.01   3.08    0.88   14.25       1990-2013
   USA                   3.68     2.36    0.24    8.57        3.65   2.11    0.12    7.79       1990-2013




                                                     28
                                              Table 2
                        Rationality of one-year ahead interest rate forecasts
The table reports estimation results from regressions of the form:
                              f          f                        f;S          f
                             Ri;t+12    Ri;t =    i   +       i (Ri;t;t+12    Ri;t ) + "i;t+12 :

                        f                                                              f;S
In this speci…cation, Ri;t is the 3-month interest rate in country i in period t and Ri;t;t+12 is the one-year
ahead average consensus forecast in country i in period t. Disaggregated forecast data are not available for
Denmark, Belgium, Greece and Ireland. In our panel estimation, we use forecasts at the level of the Eurozone
for the latter three of these countries. In Panel A, we estimate the coe¢ cients unrestricted country-by-
country. In Panel B, we consider the Eurozone to be a single unit and restrict the slope coe¢ cients to be
identical across i. Standard errors are reported in parentheses below the coe¢ cients. Statistical signi…cance
is indicated through at most three stars, referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.


                                                 Panel A
                                       Country-by-country estimation


                                  Intercept           Slope              p-Value               p-Value
                                        i                 i                i =1          i   = 0 and i = 1
               Australia          -0.55           0.55                       0.34                  0.01
                                  (0.34)         (0.47)
               Eurozone           -0.60**         2.30***                    0.01                  0.01
                                  (0.27)         (0.51)
               Italy              -0.25           1.36***                    0.14                  0.24
                                  (0.23)         (0.24)
               Netherlands        -0.45**         0.98***                    0.96                  0.05
                                  (0.19)         (0.31)
               Sweden             -0.50*          0.82***                    0.56                  0.03
                                  (0.28)         (0.31)
               USA                -0.28           1.16***                    0.69                  0.51
                                  (0.25)         (0.40)

                                               Panel B
                                   Panel estimation with …xed e¤ects


                                                  Slope                      p-Value
                                                                                =1
                                  Panel           1.02***                      0.92
                                                 (0.20)




                                                              29
                                           Table 3
                  Determinants of the ARM share in a cross-country panel:
                Current mortgage rates vs. rational expectations of future rates
The table reports estimation results from panel instrumental-variables regressions of the form:

ARM SHAREi;t =       i   + ARM SHAREi;t            1   +   C (F RMi;t      ARMi;t ) +       L (F RMi;t        ARM i;t;t+T ) +   i;t ;

where i are country-speci…c …xed e¤ects. ARMi;t , F RMi;t and ARM i;t K;t are used as instruments for
ARM i;t;t+T : In our benchmark case, T = 3 years:The …rst-stage model speci…cation is given by:
                                                                                               5             f
           ARM i;t;t+T =    i   +   1 ARMi;t   +       2 F RMi;t    +   3 ARM i;t K;t   +   4 Bi;t   +    5 Ri;t   + "i;t :

We show the results for K = 1 year. All estimations cover the same sample as the one with T = 3 years. We
report bootstrap standard errors in parentheses. Statistical signi…cance is indicated through at most three
stars, referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.



                                Benchmark (T = 3 years)                                  T = 1 year
                                    Panel                  Panel                Panel                Panel
                                                       excl. USA                                excl. USA

                Full sample

                 C                   0.74***                0.87***              -0.08               -0.11
                                    (0.25)                 (0.30)               (0.42)               (0.41)

                 L                   0.31                   0.46*                1.23***                 1.53***
                                    (0.26)                 (0.26)               (0.41)               (0.42)
                Post-2001

                 C                   0.83***                1.05***              -0.37               -0.22
                                    (0.31)                 (0.37)               (0.46)               (0.53)

                 L                   0.71***                0.74**               1.74***                 1.85***
                                    (0.24)                 (0.30)               (0.46)               (0.50)




                                                              30
                                            Table 4
                      Determinants of the ARM share at the country level:
                 Current mortgage rates vs. rational expectations of future rates
The table reports estimation results from country-by-country and panel instrumental-variables regressions
where ARMi;t , F RMi;t and ARM i;t K;t are used as instruments for ARM i;t;t+T , with T = 3 years
and K = 1 year:

                                                                                                    5              f
   ARM i;t;t+T =     i   +   i;1 ARMi;t   +       i;2 F RMi;t   +    i;3 ARM i;t K;t   +       i;4 Bi;t   +   i;5 Ri;t   + "i;t :

The second-stage model speci…cation is given by:

             ARM SHAREi;t =               i   +    i ARM SHAREi;t 1         +   i;C (F RMi;t              ARMi;t )
                                     +        i;L (F RMi;t        ARM i;t;t+T ) +      i;t :


Correlation coe¢ cients among regressors are reported under the column heading . Statistical signi…cance
is reported through at most three stars, referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively, based
on bootstrap standard errors.



                                                  First-stage estimation

                                      1                2             3              1; 2         1; 3
                                                                                                           R2            obs.
     Full sample
     Australia                     0.89***          0.12        -0.19**          0.91           0.84 0.66                 222
     Belgium                      -0.77*** -0.37                -0.17            0.87           0.75 0.83                  72
     Denmark                      -0.27            -0.44        -0.97***         0.95           0.77 0.61                  83
     Greece                       -0.05             0.03        -1.01***         -0.14          0.48 0.96                  47
     Ireland                      -0.55            -0.58**      -0.42***         0.94           0.75 0.77                  84
     Italy                         1.06            -1.04*** -0.56**              0.83           0.80 0.61                  84
     Netherlands                   0.81*** -1.57***               0.05           0.71           0.79 0.76                  84
     Sweden                       -0.01             1.28*** -0.33***             0.94           0.83 0.67                 166
     USA                           0.33**          -0.47*         0.29           0.74           0.84 0.70                 216
     Panel                         0.34***          0.25*** -0.28***             0.91           0.93 0.85                1058
     Panel (excl. USA)             0.62***          0.19**      -0.34***         0.95           0.94 0.87                 842
     Post-2001
     Australia                    -0.06            -0.07        -0.18*           0.82           0.58 0.17                 120
     Sweden                        0.75*            0.07        -0.36***         0.96           0.80 0.36                 120
     USA                           0.64**          -0.81          0.39           0.82           0.82 0.62                 120
     Panel                         0.40*           -0.15        -0.42***         0.91           0.90 0.84                 814
     Panel (excl. USA)             0.31**          -0.12        -0.43***         0.93           0.90 0.87                 694




                                                             31
                                     Table 4
               Determinants of the ARM share at the country level:
          Current mortgage rates vs. rational expectations of future rates
                                     (continued)



                              Second-stage estimation

                                        C            L          c    R2      obs.
                                                              C; L


Full sample
Australia                  0.90***    0.41      -0.05        0.22 0.84       222
Belgium                    0.84***    3.47***      2.43***   -0.11 0.97       72
Denmark                    0.81*** -0.41        -0.06        -0.47 0.63       83
Greece                     0.97***    1.04         2.66      0.69 0.98        47
Ireland                    0.88***    0.75         0.39      0.11 0.74        84
Italy                      0.96***    2.02*        0.05      0.09 0.99        84
Netherlands                0.92***    1.32**       0.49      0.22 0.93        84
Sweden                     0.96***    0.64         0.53      -0.56 0.93      166
USA                        0.92***    1.42**    -1.13**      0.63 0.93       216
Panel                      0.95***    0.74***      0.31      0.43 0.99       1058
Panel (excl. USA)          0.95***    0.87***      0.46*     0.29 0.98       842
Post-2001
Australia                  0.99*** -0.04           0.70      0.22 0.92       120
Sweden                     0.95*** -0.11           0.12      -0.67 0.89      120
USA                        0.95***    0.19      -0.58        0.36 0.94       120
Panel                      0.95***    0.83***      0.71***   0.28 0.99       814
Panel (excl. USA)          0.95***    1.05***      0.74**    0.27 0.98       694




                                         32
                                             Table 5
                       Determinants of the ARM share at the country level:
                  Current mortgage rates vs. adaptive expectations of future rates

The table reports estimation results from the panel speci…cation:

                    ARM SHAREi;t =     i   +   i ARM SHAREi;t 1       +   i;C (F RMi;t        ARMi;t )
                                      +    i;L (F RMi;t     ARM i;t   K;t )   +   i;t ;

which we estimate for each country separately, as well as in a pooled panel setup with country-speci…c …xed
e¤ects. In the two rightmost columns we report estimation results when excluding the lagged dependent
variable, i.e. imposing the restriction i = 0. Statistical signi…cance is reported through at most three stars,
referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively, based on bootstrap standard errors.



                                       Benchmark (K = 1 year)                     Excluding lagged term

                                               C               L                          C              L

          Full sample
          Australia                     0.33        0.05                            3.56***      -1.09***
          Belgium                       1.94**      -3.46***                      21.15***        0.67
          Denmark                       0.50        -1.62                           5.51***      -6.58***
          Greece                        6.61*       -4.83                         34.35***        8.52
          Ireland                       0.81        -2.62***                       -0.01        -12.94***
          Italy                         2.59***     -2.83***                        8.58***      15.87***
          Netherlands                   1.80***     -0.44                           7.10***       6.08***
          Sweden                        0.56        -0.95**                       10.94**        -1.24
          USA                           0.04        1.08**                         -1.75**        8.99***
          Panel                         1.17***     -0.53***                      10.23***       -1.01*
          Panel excl. USA               1.27***     -0.61***                      11.68***       -1.72***
          Post-2001
          Australia                     0.22        0.13                            6.82***      -2.52***
          Sweden                        0.13        -1.37***                      17.04***       -3.76**
          USA                          -0.24        0.26                           -3.40***       4.12
          Panel                         1.23***     -0.73***                      12.58***       -1.95***
          Panel excl. USA               1.48***     -0.80***                      14.45***       -2.37***




                                                          33
                                          Table 6
                  Determinants of the ARM share in a cross-country panel:
             Current mortgage rates vs. survey-based expectations of future rates
The table reports estimation results from panel regressions of the form:

   ARM SHAREi;t =            i   + ARM SHAREi;t            1   +    C (F RMi;t     ARMi;t ) +       L (F RMi;t          ARM i;t;t+T )
                                 f      f;S
                     +       S (Ri;t   Ri;t;t+12 )   +   i;t ;

                                               f;S
where i are country-speci…c …xed e¤ects and Ri;t;t+12  is the consensus forecast of the one-year ahead nominal
interest rate. The …rst-stage model speci…cation is given by:
                                                                                          5            f             f;S
     ARM i;t;t+T =   i   +       1 ARMi;t   +   2 F RMi;t   +      3 ARM i;t K;t   +   4 Bi;t   +   5 Ri;t   +    6 Ri;t;t+12   + "i;t :

We show the results for the case K = 1 year. We report bootstrap standard errors in parentheses. Statistical
signi…cance is indicated through at most three stars, referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and 1%
respectively.



                                       Benchmark (T = 3 years)                                  T = 1 year
                                       Panel                     Panel                 Panel                 Panel
                                                         excl. USA                                      excl. USA

              Full sample

               C                        0.92***                  1.59***               -0.08                     0.66
                                       (0.28)                  (0.33)                  (0.45)                 (0.48)

               L                        0.18                     0.22                   1.26***                  1.07***
                                       (0.25)                  (0.23)                  (0.43)                 (0.41)

               S                        0.48*                    1.32***                0.13                     0.86**
                                       (0.25)                  (0.36)                  (0.21)                 (0.34)
              Post-2001

               C                        1.08**                   2.11***               -0.18                     1.23
                                       (0.48)                  (0.48)                  (0.59)                 (0.96)

               L                        0.47                     0.15                   1.51***                  0.85
                                       (0.29)                  (0.37)                  (0.49)                 (0.78)

               S                        0.49                     1.76***                0.06                     1.21
                                       (0.38)                  (0.59)                  (0.42)                 (0.76)




                                                                   34
                                          Table 7
             Determinants of the average …xation period in a cross-country panel:
               Current mortgage rates vs. rational expectations of future rates
The table reports estimation results from panel instrumental-variables regressions of the form:

    AV GF IXi;t =    i   + AV GF IXi;t        1       C (F RMi;t       ARMi;t )     L (F RMi;t           ARM i;t;t+T ) +      i;t ;

with country-speci…c …xed e¤ects. AV GF IXi;t is the average …xation period and F RMi;t is the rate on
mortgage loans corresponding to a …xation period . For all countries, we choose =’above 10 years’.
ARMi;t , F RMi;t and ARM i;t K;t are used as instruments for ARM i;t;t+T . In our benchmark case, T = 3
years. The …rst-stage model speci…cation is given by:
                                                                                               5             f
           ARM i;t;t+T =     i   +   1 ARMi;t     +   2 F RMi;t    +   3 ARM i;t K;t   +    4 Bi;t   +    5 Ri;t   + "i;t :

We show the results for K = 1 year. All estimations cover the same sample as the one with T = 3 years.
Statistical signi…cance is reported through at most three stars, referring to con…dence levels of 10%, 5% and
1% respectively, based on bootstrap standard errors.



                                 Benchmark (T = 3 years)                                  T = 1 year
                                     Panel               Panel                    Panel              Panel
                                                      excl. USA                                 excl. USA

                Full sample

                 C                    0.18***             0.22***                 -0.10              -0.18
                                     (0.06)              (0.07)                   (0.10)             (0.12)

                 L                    0.16***             0.23***                  0.38***               0.50***
                                     (0.05)              (0.05)                   (0.09)             (0.09)
                Post-2001

                 C                    0.13**              0.22***                 -0.23**            -0.18
                                     (0.06)              (0.07)                   (0.10)             (0.12)

                 L                    0.22***             0.23***                  0.46***               0.50***
                                     (0.05)              (0.05)                   (0.09)             (0.09)




                                                             35
                                               Figure 1
                   Time series of ARM share and FRM-ARM spread at the country level
The …gure illustrates the dynamics of the share of adjustable-rate mortgages in percent of the total volume of
new loans to households (on the left axis) and the contemporaneous spread between the FRM and ARM rates
(on the right axis). For the US, imputed values are used for the ARM rate during the periods November 2008
to March 2009, August 2011 to November 2011 and October 2012 to April 2013. Details of the imputation
method are given in the online appendix . Mortgage interest rates correspond to volume-weighted averages
of new loans advanced during the respective month, in domestic currency and to domestic households.

                     Australia                              Belgium                               Denmark
          100                       3       100                              3       100                                3
           80                       2        80                              2        80                                2
Percent




                                                                                                                             Percent
           60                                60                                       60
                                    1                                        1                                          1
           40                                40                                       40
                                    0                                        0                                          0
           20                                20                                       20
            0                                 0                                        0
            1991   1999    2006   2013        2003     2007      2010     2013         2003     2006           2010   2013

                      Greece                                Ireland                                    Italy
          100                       3       100                              3       100                                3
           80                       2        80                              2        80                                2
Percent




                                                                                                                             Percent
           60                                60                                       60
                                    1                                        1                                          1
           40                                40                                       40
                                    0                                        0                                          0
           20                                20                                       20
            0                                 0                                        0
            2003   2005    2008   2010        2003     2006      2010     2013         2003     2006           2010   2013

                    Netherlands                             Sweden                                 USA
          100                       3       100                              3       100                                3
           80                       2        80                              2        80                                2
Percent




                                                                                                                             Percent
           60                                60                                       60
                                    1                                        1                                          1
           40                                40                                       40
                                    0                                        0                                          0
           20                                20                                       20
            0                                 0                                        0
            2003   2006    2010   2013        1996     2002      2008     2013         1992     1999           2006   2013

                                    ARM share (left axis)         FRM−ARM spread (right axis)




                                                            36
                                          Figure 2
      Cross-country patterns in mortgage market structure and historical in‡ation volatility
In‡ation volatility is measured as the realized standard deviation of the monthly year-on-year in‡ation rate
during the entire available sample period. For Australia, Belgium, Germany, Spain and the US, the series
starts in 1956, Italy in 1958, Greece in 1960, Finland, the Netherlands, Portugal and Sweden in 1961, Ireland
in 1970, Denmark in 1981 and the UK in 1989. Average …xation periods are derived based on the market share
of mortgages falling within di¤erent …xation period categories. The green dots are distinguishing countries
which are not included in the panel analysis. The FRM-ARM spread refers to the di¤erence between the
volume-weighted averages of interest rates on …xed-rate (FRM) versus adjustable-rate (ARM) mortgage loans
advanced during the respective month.


             100                                                                                         20
                         Australia                                                                                                           United States
                                           Ireland
              80
                                                                               Average fixation period

                                                          Italy                                          15
                                           Greece
                                                                                                                  Belgium
ARM share




              60
 (percent)




                                               Sweden
                                                                                      (years)




                                         Denmark                                                         10         Denmark
              40
                                                                                                                               Netherlands            Italy
                                             Netherlands
                                       Belgium
                                                                                                          5                 Greece
              20                                      United States

               0                                                                                          0
              −0.5         0         0.5      1                     1.5                                   0.4         0.6       0.8       1             1.2    1.4
                               FRM−ARM spread                                                                                 FRM−ARM spread
                                  (percent)                                                                                       (percent)

             100                                                                                         20
                         Finland Spain Portugal         Australia                                                            United States
              80                    Ireland
                                                                               Average fixation period




                                 Italy                                                                   15
                                          Greece
                                                                                                                              Belgium
ARM share




              60
 (percent)




                            Sweden
                                                                                      (years)




                       UKDenmark                                                                         10            Germany
                                                                                                                          Denmark
              40
                                                                                                                          Netherlands Italy
                         Netherlands
                          Belgium                                                                         5                                               Greece
              20         United States                                                                                 UK
                       Germany                                                                                                               Spain

               0                                                                                          0
                   0           5                 10                 15                                        0        2           4         6           8         10
                               Inflation volatility                                                                            Inflation volatility
                                    (percent)                                                                                       (percent)




                                                                          37
