                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   FROM ASSORTATIVE TO ASHORTATIVE COUPLING:
MEN’S HEIGHT, HEIGHT HETEROGAMY, AND RELATIONSHIP DYNAMICS IN THE UNITED STATES

                                             Abigail Weitzman
                                              Dalton Conley

                                            Working Paper 20402
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w20402


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         August 2014




     The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
     National Bureau of Economic Research.

     NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
     reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
     NBER publications.

     © 2014 by Abigail Weitzman and Dalton Conley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
     exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
     © notice, is given to the source.
From Assortative to Ashortative Coupling: Men’s Height, Height Heterogamy, and Relationship
Dynamics in the United States
Abigail Weitzman and Dalton Conley
NBER Working Paper No. 20402
August 2014
JEL No. J12

                                               ABSTRACT

Studies of online dating suggest that physical attraction is a key factor in early relationship formation,
but say little about the role of attractiveness in longer-term relationships. Meanwhile, assortative coupling
and exchange models widely employed in demographic research overlook the powerful sorting function
of initial and sustained physical attraction. This article observes the effects of one physical characteristic
of men—height—on various relationship outcomes in longer-term relationships, including spouses’
attributes, marriage entry and stability, and the division of household labor. Drawing on two different
cohorts from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, the authors show that (1) height-coupling norms
have changed little over the last three decades, (2) short, average, and tall men’s spouses are qualitatively
different from one another (3) short men marry and divorce at lower rates than others and (4) both
men’s height relative to other men and their height relative to their spouse are related to the within-couple
distribution of household labor and earnings. These findings depict an enduring height hierarchy among
men on in the spousal marriage market. Further, they indicate that at least one physical characteristic
commonly associated with physical attraction influences the formation, functioning, and stability of
longer-term relationships.


Abigail Weitzman
New York University
295 Lafayette Street, 4th Floor
New York, NY 10012
abigail.weitzman@gmail.com

Dalton Conley
New York University
249 West 29th Street #2E
New York, NY 10001-5230
and NBER
conley@nyu.edu
                         From Assortative to Ashortative Coupling:
      Men’s Height, Height Heterogamy, and Relationship Dynamics in the United States



                                       Abigail Weitzman1
                                        Dalton Conley2




Please direct all correspondence to:

Abigail Weitzman
295 Lafayette St, Fourth Floor
New York, NY 10012

Abigail.weitzman@gmail.com
(585)733-1427




1
    New York University, PhD Candidate, Department of Sociology
2
    New York University, Department of Sociology & National Bureau of Economic Research


                                                                                          1
Introduction

       A large body of literature indicates that people sort themselves in systematic ways on the

marriage market, from education to political ideology, and even genetics (Breen and Andersen

2012; Domingue et al. 2014; Dribe and Nystedt 2013; Gullickson and Torche 2014; Lichter et al.

1992). Emerging evidence from studies of online dating and relationship formation among young

adults suggests that physical attractiveness is often used as a form of capital on the dating market

and is therefore an important element of initial sorting among couples (Alterovitz and

Mendelsohn 2009; Hitsch, Hortaçsu and Ariely 2010; Toma and Hancock 2010). These newer

studies emphasize the preliminary stages of the sorting process, while studies of racial and

economic exchange tend to focus on married and cohabiting couples. It thus remains largely

unclear what role physical attributes play beyond dating, and whether attractiveness ultimately

contributes to marriage formation and stability. In this study, we address this missing link,

focusing on the effects of one particular characteristic of men—height.

       A recent emergence of economic scholarship on men’s height reveals a high degree of

similarity in women’s preferences for tall men across distinct racial and socioeconomic groups

(Belot and Fidrmuc 2010; Pierce 1996; Swami et al. 2008). Calling on these new findings, we

highlight how men’s height affects other types of spousal sorting, relationship exchange, and

marriage entry and stability. In this article, we advance an alternative approach to studying

assortative coupling in longer-term relationships in which we emphasize the importance of the

status assigned to physical characteristics. We argue that heterosexual couples typically pursue

male-taller arrangements because height differences between spouses are symbolic of traditional

power differentials and because gender ideals are linked to stature such that tallness is associated

with dominance, masculinity, and higher status among men (Bogaert and McCreary 2011). This




                                                                                                   3
relationship between men’s height and perceived social status should relegate short men to a

comparatively less desirable position on the spousal market; or conversely, bolster the position of

tall men.

        To document the pervasiveness of height coupling norms in the United States, and their

relationship to assortative coupling and status exchange, we draw on two mutually exclusive

cohorts from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We observe whether height coupling norms

have changed in recent years and investigate differences in relationship dynamics and formation

patterns between short, average, and tall men, and between men who are in normative and non-

normative height-coupling arrangements. Our results indicate that men’s individual height

affects the qualities of the partners they attract; has a particularly large effect on the likelihood of

entering an atypical height homogamous or hypogamous relationship (where the man is the same

height or shorter than his spouse); influences the timing of first-marriage and separation (net of

the effects of relative spousal height); and further impacts men’s relative share of combined

housework and income. We also find that the men’s height relative to their spouse impacts

relationship dynamics net of an effect of their individual height. Together, these results portray a

pattern of height-assortative coupling and height-based relationship exchange in which

characteristics granting one status outside of a relationship spillover to affect status and status

negotiation within a relationship. In this way, models of height-based sorting, and physical-

attribute sorting more broadly, appear similar to economic and racial sorting and exchange

models that have received far greater attention from scholars.



Height, Attractiveness, and Masculine Status




                                                                                                       4
       Social psychological research suggests that attractive people are favored in numerous

situations. These range from teachers’ favoritism of attractive students (Algozzine 1977; Ritts,

Patterson and Tubbs 1992), to a perception of attractive people, especially men, as more

competent (Jackson, Hunter and Hodge 1995; Langlois et al. 2000), and further, to employers’

favorable treatment of more attractive employees, including the offering of higher wages (Beehr

and Gilmore 1982; Hamermesh and Biddle 1994; Mobius and Rosenblat 2006).

       If physical attractiveness confers a premium even when it is not especially relevant to the

situation at hand, then it should result in a particularly pronounced advantage on the dating and

marriage market, where initial and sustained attraction are both important. In accordance with

this idea, attractive and physically fit men report going on more dates and having sex more

frequently than others (Bogaert and Fisher 1995; Brody 2004; Nettle 2002). Because of the

advantages afforded attractive individuals, many people manipulate photos of themselves on

online dating sites—evidence that they are aware of the benefits and bargaining power of being

attractive (Toma and Hancock 2010).

       Although some debate exists about scholars’ ability to accurately measure attractiveness

across distinct groups (Langlois and Stephan 1977; Ritts, Patterson and Tubbs 1992), one

attribute remains consistent across racial and socioeconomic groups—height. That is, most

heterosexual women prefer tall men, and men and women both generally prefer to be in

relationships where the man is taller (Belot and Fidrmuc 2010; Fink et al. 2007; Pawlowski

2003; Pierce 1996). We take advantage of generalizable height preferences and coupling norms

to conceptualize men’s height as an aspect of their attractiveness in the U.S.

       One potential explanation for pervasive height preferences and height coupling norms

can be found in the evolutionary psychology literature, some of which argues that physical




                                                                                                    5
attraction is rooted in primal instincts (Barber 1995; Fink and Penton-Voak 2002; Grammer et al.

2003). Specifically, if people seek out partners who they believe are healthy and will provide for

or protect them, then tall men should make particularly attractive candidates. This is because

tallness has historically been related to early-childhood health and has therefore also been a

symbol of class (Steckel 2009).3 Thus, according to evolutionary psychology, male tallness may

further signal one’s ability to dominate or intimidate rivals and thus to protect one’s kin (Barber

1995).

         Another plausible explanation for height hypergamy is that gendered height ideals are

socially inscribed such that people commonly associate tallness with masculinity, athleticism,

and dominance (Bogaert and McCreary 2011; Jackson and Ervin 1992; Melamed 1992). By

contrast, short men are often perceived as less masculine and less dominant (Jackson and Ervin

1992). Women who possess some semblance of a traditional gender ideology may therefore

prefer to be with tall men, or at the very least, with men who are relatively taller than them

(Salska et al. 2008; Shepperd and Strathman 1989). To overcome perceptions of them as

relatively less masculine, short men may bolster other normative displays of masculinity, such as

performing less housework. This type of compensation, often referred to as compensatory

gender display, has been found for example among men who violate other gender norms like

earning less than their spouse (Brines 1994).

         Even among women who do not adhere to pervasive gender ideologies, greater male

stature may be seen as desirable because of its association with higher status. That is, perceptions

of tall men as more masculine, competent, or physically able should lead them to be privileged

(Steckel 2009; Szklarska et al. 2007). Indeed, several studies have found that tall men are paid


3
  In some developing countries where stunting is still prevalent, height continues to be an indicator of childhood
disparities. However, this is less true in the United States, where wasting and stunting are rare.


                                                                                                                     6
more than shorter men, in part because they are seen as better leaders (Judge and Cable 2004).

Moreover, because most women tend to prefer tall men, and because sexual prowess is

associated with higher masculine status (Connell 1995), men’s tallness should engender higher

status among other men. In turn, men’s high status among both men and women may operate

cyclically to reinforce one another.



Assortative Coupling and Relationship Exchange

         Theories of long-term assortative coupling assume that most people seek out those who

are similar to them, forming homogamous relationships. An abundance of evidence supports this

notion. In 2010, 93 percent of married couples in the United States were racially homogamous

(Lofquist et al. 2012).4 People also tend to match themselves on education (Breen and Andersen

2012; Dribe and Nystedt 2013; Gullickson and Torche 2014; Torche 2010), parental wealth and

economic status (Charles, Hurst and Killewald 2013; Kalmijn 1994), and genetics (Domingue et

al. 2014).

         Sometimes, however, one partner may have implicitly higher status than the other,

usually with regard to race or class. Exchange theory suggests that in order for such a

relationship to still benefit both partners, a tacit negotiation must occur in which each partner

interchanges his or her distinct status advantages in ways that compensates for their status

disadvantages (Davis 1941; Merton 1941). Such exchanges are manifestations of extra-

relationship hierarchies, in that what provides one with status outside the relationship is also

assumed to provide them with status within the relationship.




4
  A similar paucity of racial heterogamy is echoed in studies on dating, although slightly less rare among cohabiting
and non-residing couples (Joyner and Kao 2005; Lin and Lundquist 2013).


                                                                                                                    7
       The most commonly studied version of status exchange has been racial-educational.

Starting in the 1940s, Davis (1941) and Merton (1941) argued that interracial marriages would

be most prevalent among couples where the black or lower-caste spouse was highly educated and

the white or upper-caste spouse less educated. The partner with lower racial status would be able

to use his relatively higher educational status to marry a woman of a higher racial status.

Further, they argued that the use of education as an exchange for racial status would be more

prevalent among couples in which the male spouse was black or lower-caste. Their rationale

reflected the division of labor at that time—education was believed to be more valuable among

the spouse who would presumably work outside the home. Although Davis (1941) and Merton

(1941) argued that potential female partners would be able to exchange their race or beauty for a

highly educated or economically productive spouse, most recent studies have emphasized only

the former (Lewis and Oppenheimer 2000; Lin and Lundquist 2013; Qian and Lichter 2007;

Torche 2010). Moreover, only one study considers whether men may exchange their beauty for

a better educated or higher earning spouse (McClintock 2014).

       Several studies of online dating markets, however, do consider the role of attractiveness

in initial sorting processes. These studies suggest that physical attractiveness is the strongest

determinant in online daters’ perceptions of one another and of solicitations for dates (Fiore et al.

2005; Fiore et al. 2010). The premium conferred to attractive online daters likely explains why

so many people manipulate their profile pictures and even lie about their personal characteristics

like height (Toma and Hancock 2010; Toma, Hancock and Ellison 2008).

       Like audit studies in employment with respect to race (Bertrand 2004), criminality

(Pager, Western and Bonikowski 2009), or educational credentials (Gaddis 2012), the above

mentioned research on dating markets only details the first step of a multistep process (dating).




                                                                                                    8
Individuals who are disadvantaged in the initial screening process may nonetheless ultimately

achieve the same status through repeated efforts or alternate pathways. For example in the case

of employment, studies of long-term effects of racialized names (Fryer and Levitt 2004) show no

ultimate economic cost to a “blacker” name in contrast to the steep penalties in terms of call-

backs revealed by audit studies (Bertrand 2004). Perhaps a similar dynamic occurs in dating and

marriage markets, where less physically attractive (or shorter) men do not end up disadvantaged

because they discover other ways to meet and attract partners and/or become better skilled and

more desired at later stages of the courtship process.

        In this article, we move from the study of attractiveness as a form of capital in dating

markets to the study of its relevance for longer-term relationships including marriages. In so

doing, we highlight how physical attributes confer status advantages and disadvantages among

heterosexual men in ways that reflect an extra-relationship attractiveness hierarchy depicted by

earlier literature.



Data and Methods

        Sample. We take advantage of one of the few datasets that measures both height and a

wide range of relationship outcomes—the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Since

1968, the PSID has collected panel data among the same 4,500 families, including information

on households, parents, children, and other individuals who enter into the family through

marriage. Height was first measured in the PSID in 1986 and then at every wave starting in

1999. To maximize our number of observations, we create two mutually exclusive cohorts of

coupled heads of household who were between the ages of 23 and 45 in 1986 or 2009 and whose

partners were within the same age range (N= 3,033 observations).




                                                                                                   9
         From this base sample, we create two additional samples. The first is used to observe the

hazard of marriage. In this sample we add uncoupled heads of household of the same age and

cohort criteria to our base sample (n=144). Using calendar data on the timing of marriage, we

then create a sample of person-years in which every year from birth until first-marriage or 2011

(the last year available) is observed (N=77,361). 232 respondents (7.3%) have not married by

2011 and are censored at their age at that time.

         The second additional sample is used to observe the hazard of separation. This sample is

limited to respondents from the base sample who were married at least once before 2011. Again

using calendar data, we transform individual-level data into a sample of married person-years in

which every year from first-marriage until separation or until 2011 is observed (N=41,130). The

2,054 respondents (75.1%) who have not separated by 2011 are censored at the number of years

since their first-marriage began.

         Predictors. Our first measure of men’s height is categorical, indicating whether men are

short, average, or tall, in comparison to other men. ‘Short’ is defined as one or more standard

deviations below the mean (<66” in 1986; <67” in 2009); ‘tall’ as one or more standard

deviations above it (>73” in 1986; >74” in 2009); and ‘average’ as within one standard deviation

of the mean.5 As a supplement we observe men’s height measured continuously in inches (from

54” - 84”).

         Our second predictor combines information on heads’ and spouses’ height to create a

measure of relative spousal height indicating whether the head is shorter, the same height, or

taller than his spouse.6 In 1986, 92.7% of men were taller than their spouses; in 2009, 92.2%

were taller (Figure 1). This decrease of 0.5 percentage points in height hypergamy is not

5
  Because height is measured in inches, the division of short, average, and tall men based on the within-year height
distribution does not produce categories containing exactly 17.5%, 65%, and 17.5% of the sample.
6
  Women’s height is measured in inches, the same as men’s.


                                                                                                                  10
statistically significant. The only evidence of a shift in height preferences we find is that the

modal difference between men and women decreased from 6” in 1986 to 5” in 2009 (Figure 2).

To put the power of this height-based sorting in perspective, the observed 7.5 percent of heads

that are the same height or shorter than their spouse (across cohorts), is only half the percentage

of heads we would expect to be in homogamous or height hypogamous relationships (15%) if

spousal height were randomly determined.7

        Again as a supplement we rerun our analysis using a continuous measure of spousal

height differences (ranging from when the head is 9” shorter than his spouse to 24” taller than

her) (Figure 2). The results from models employing this alternative measure are discussed after

the main findings.

                                               [Figures 1 and 2]

        Outcomes. We divide our outcomes into three groups: partner selection, marriage entry

and stability, and relationship dynamics.

        Partner selection. To observe partner selection, we measure spouses’ height and

educational background, as well as their relative height, relative age, and relative racial status. In

the PSID, women’s height is measured in inches, ranging from 48” to 77”. Women’s educational

background is defined as their highest level completed—less than high school, high school, or

college. Relative spousal height is the same variable as described above. Relative age is

categorized as the female spouse is within three years of her spouse (55% of couples), more than

three years younger (36%) and more than three years older (9%). Relative racial status is a

dummy indicating whether both the head and his spouse are the same race. A full explanation of

racial categories is provided in the description of controls (below).


7
 We calculate this estimate by randomly reassigning spouse’s height in the PSID, using the same distribution we
observe in the data.


                                                                                                                  11
        Marriage entry and stability. In our analyses of marriage entry and exit we include all

person-years until 2011 (the most recent year available) because this produces the most precise

estimates. However, this decision means that we include a longer window of observations

among the 1986 cohort than among the 2009 cohort. To test if this decision biases our results,

we rerun our analyses separately for both cohorts and find similar estimates to our main models

(Appendix B). We discuss this more fully after a presentation of the main findings.

        We observe men’s hazard of marriage by combining a dummy for ‘ever married’ with

calendar data measuring the number of years from the head’s year of birth to his first marriage. 8

Heads who have not married by 2011 are right-censored at their age in 2011 (n=208; 7%.). Of

those who marry, 90% do so by the age of thirty.

        Among heads who have ever been married (n=2,825), we observe the hazard of

separation by combining a dummy for ‘ever separated’ with yearly calendar data on the timing of

marriage and divorce or separation. If a head has not separated by 2011 then he is right-censored

at the number of years he has been married. We focus on the timing and likelihood of a first

separation only.

        Relationship dynamics. We measure relationship dynamics through housework and

earnings. Head’s and spouse’s absolute housework are measured in hours. Head’s relative

housework is divided into three categories: head does more; both do the same; and spouse does

more. As an alternative, we test a continuous measure of relative housework, defined as head’s

proportion of combined housework hours.




8
  Although measuring time in months would be more precise, a substantially higher number of observations are
missing information on the month of marriage. Year of marriage is therefore a more accurate indicator. The same
applies for separation.


                                                                                                                  12
        Absolute earnings, for both heads and spouses, are measured as the log of weekly income

(in dollars).9 Because we pool observations from two cohorts we adjust 1986 earnings to reflect

their value in 2009. Relative earnings are also divided into three categories indicating whether

the head earns less, both earn the same, or the head earns more. We also measure relative

earnings continuously by dividing a head’s absolute earnings by his and his spouse’s combined

earnings.

        Controls. In our analysis, we control for characteristics that others have shown to be

related to relationship formation and functioning. When observing partner selection and

marriage entry, we only control for heads’ demographic characteristics. These include his age;

race—white, black, Asian or Pacific, Native American, or other; educational background—less

than high school, high school, or at least some college; and his mother’s education (defined in

the same way as his education).10

        We include these same controls when observing marriage exit and relationship dynamics.

In these latter models, we also adjust for our aforementioned partner selection variables and for

spouse’s mother’s education (measured in the same way as head’s mother’s education), and the

number of children born to or adopted by the couple (0-10). In the analysis of marriage exit, we

further control for head’s age at first marriage (14-43 years). Descriptive statistics of all

measures are provided in Table 1.

                                                  [Table 1]

Analytic Strategy

        Our analysis begins with an investigation into whether the characteristics of female

partners systematically differ across men who are short, tall, or average height (Table 2). We use
9
 We calculate income by multiplying the hourly wage by the average number of hours worked.
10
  We substitute missing information on head’s mother’s education with head’s father’s education whenever
possible (n=75).


                                                                                                           13
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) to estimate the effect of men’s height on spouses’ height;

multinomial logistic regressions to estimate an effect on spouses’ education, relative height, and

relative age; and logistic regression to estimate an effect on relative racial status. In this set of

models, we cluster our standard errors by survey year and control only for heads’ background

characteristics (age, race, education, and mother’s education) and cohort year.

         We then move on to observe the effects of men’s height on their entry and exit from first-

marriage (Table 3). Here we use discrete-time hazard models. In the analysis of marriage entry,

men who have not married by 2011 are right-censored at their age (in 2011). In the analysis of

marriage exit, married men who have not separated or divorced by 2011 are right-censored at the

number of years since their first marriage began. In both analyses, standard errors are clustered

by respondent. Discrete-time hazard models of marriage entry are first run observing the effects

of men’s height relative to other men while controlling for their age, race, highest level of

education, mother’s education, and cohort. We then rerun our analysis of marriage entry

including an interaction term between men’s height relative to other men and a dummy for

whether the person-year is before or after year (age) 30. We test this interaction because plotted

Kaplan Meier curves depict differently shaped hazards of marriage for short, average, and tall

men after this year (Figure 3).

         In the analysis of marriage exit, we again begin by observing the effects of men’s height

relative to other men (Model I). This is followed by a second model in which we add a

categorical indicator of relative spousal height (Model II).11 Because we observe similar hazard

curves of separation across men, we do not test any interactions with time. In all models of


11
   Because a man’s height, defined as short, average, or tall may be correlated with whether his spouse is shorter,
the same height, or taller than him, we use the variance inflation factor (VIF) to test for multicollinearity. We find
that no variable has a VIF higher than 2, suggesting that our inclusion of both variables in the same model does not
present a problem.


                                                                                                                     14
marriage exit, we include the same controls as in our analysis of marriage entry, and further

adjust for spouses’ attributes; number of children; and heads’ age at first marriage.

         The last component of our analysis observes the effects of height on relationship

dynamics (Tables 4 and 5). These models cluster standard errors by survey year, include the

same controls as our analysis of marriage exit (except for heads’ age at first marriage, which we

do not control for here) and follow the same organizational strategy: Model (I) tests the effects of

men’s categorical height (relative to other men); Model (II) the effects of men’s height relative to

other men and relative to their spouse. In this block of regressions, we estimate heads’ and

spouses’ absolute housework hours and logged earnings using OLS. Head’s relative share of

housework and relative share of earnings are estimated with multinomial logistic regression.12

We then graph the predicted probabilities of men’s proportion of combined housework and

proportion of combined earnings (using the continuous measures of these outcomes) at every

inch, using lowess smoothing. In these graphs we group heads by whether they are shorter, the

same height, or taller than their spouse.



Multivariate Results

Men’s Height Relative to Other Men and Spousal Characteristics

         Table 2 presents the results of models observing the average partner attributes of short

and tall men, relative to average men. As the first row indicates, we find that short men have

partners who are an average of 1.58” shorter than average men, have 269% higher relative odds

of partnering with a woman who is their same height, and 1,450% higher relative odds of

partnering with a woman who is taller than them. Short men also have 43% higher odds of


12
   Multinomial logistic regressions are preferred to ordered logistic regressions because post-estimations likelihood
ratios tests indicate that the outcome violates the proportional odds assumption.


                                                                                                                   15
partnering with a woman who did not graduate high school relative to partnering with a high

school graduate, and 3% higher odds of partnering with a woman who is more than three years

their junior than of partnering with a woman who is within three years of their age. In sum, the

qualities of short and average men’s spouse are quite different.

       As can be seen in the second row of Table 2, the effects of tallness contrast sharply with

those of shortness. Specifically, we find that tall men have 95% lower relative odds of partnering

with a woman who is their same height and almost 100% lower odds of partnering with a woman

who is taller than them. Tall men also have 29% lower odds of partnering with a woman who did

not complete high school, compared to partnering with one who did. Additionally, they have

35% higher relative odds of coupling with a woman who is more than three years their senior

and 30% higher odds of coupling with a woman of the same race. Thus, the attributes of tall and

average men’s spouses also differ substantially.

                                              [Table 2]

Men’s Height, Height Coupling, and Marriage Entry and Stability

       Given that we find an effect of men’s height on the qualities of their partners, we suspect

men’s height should also affect the timing of first marriage. Table 3 provides the hazard ratios of

discrete-time hazard models examining this possibility. In these models, time is measured as

years from birth. The results of this analysis reveal that the hazards of marriage for short and tall

men are 18% and 9% lower, respectively, than the hazard of marriage for average men (Table 3,

Model I, column 1). Figure 3 depicts these disparities with the Kaplan-Meier hazard curve of

first-marriage risk, holding all other covariates at their mean. In this figure it can be seen that

before age 30, short men’s risk of marriage is lower than average men’s. After age 30, short

men’s risk of marriage sharply decreases, tall men’s risk continues to increase, and average




                                                                                                      16
men’s risk levels off. Because of this observed divergence, we rerun our analysis of marriage

entry including an interaction between a dummy for ‘after 30’ and men’s height relative to other

men (Table 3, column 2). This confirms what is depicted in Figure 3—after age 30, tall men

recoup the losses incurred before their thirties and their hazard of marriage becomes 45% higher

than among average men after this age.

                                            [Figure 3]

       In light of the fact that we find significant effects of men’s height relative to other men on

the hazard of marriage, we believe men’s height should also affect the hazard of separation. This

hypothesis is confirmed by the hazard ratios presented in Table 3. Specifically, we find the

hazard of separation to be 32% lower among short men than among average men (Model I),

which is robust to the inclusion of relative spousal height (Table 3, Model II). This can also be

seen in Figure 4, which graphs the smoothed Kaplan Meier hazard curve of first separation.

Together, the lower rate of separation and the lower rate of marriage among short men suggests

that these men and their spouses are more likely to select out of marriage before it begins.

Resultantly, married couples where the man is short appear more stable. Our results do not

suggest that relative spousal height has an effect on the hazard of separation (Models II).

                                      [Table 3 and Figure 4]

Men’s Height, Height Coupling, and Relationship Dynamics

       The results of the earlier components of this study give rise to the question; does men’s

height also affect their relationship dynamics? In Table 4, we provide a partial answer to this

question, offering the estimated effects of men’s height relative to other men and the effects of

relative spousal height on the amount and share of housework performed by each spouse. We

find no differences in the number of absolute housework hours performed by short, average, or




                                                                                                    17
tall men, nor by their spouses (columns 1 and 2). However, compared to average men, tall men

have 23% lower odds of performing more housework than their spouse, relative to performing

less (Model I). This effect of male tallness on relative housework is robust to controlling for

relative spousal height (Model II). We also find that, compared to men who are taller than their

spouses, men who are shorter have 32% lower odds of performing more housework relative to

performing less; while men who are the same height have 43% lower odds of performing the

same amount of housework relative to performing less.

                                             [Table 4]

       Figure 5 presents the predicted probabilities of men’s relative share of housework at

every inch, grouping men by whether they are shorter, the same height, or taller than their

spouse. At every inch, the predicted proportion of combined housework is lower among men

who are shorter than their spouse than among men who are taller. Moreover, the predicted

proportion of head-performed housework is between 25% and 30% greater among the tallest

heads than among the shortest. If it is true that at least some couples tacitly associate men’s

height with their perceived masculinity, then the observed differences between short and tall men

may indicate that tall men feel less threatened by housework. Alternatively, tall men may do a

greater share of housework because the nature of their housework is different (i.e. larger

undertakings that require more strength). This would most likely be true among couples who

specifically view tall men as stronger and more physically fit.

                                             [Figure 5]

       Table 5 presents the results of models observing a different type of relationship

dynamic—earnings. As can be seen in this table, we find the income of tall men to be 4% higher

than average men, but this effect is weak (p<.10) and only when controlling for relative spousal




                                                                                                  18
height (Model II). We find no effects of head’s height on their spouse’s income, and no effects of

relative spousal height on the income of either spouse (Model II).

       With regard to relative earnings, however, we find that compared to average-height men,

short and tall men respectively have 48% and 25% lower odds of earning the same as their

spouse. Short men also have 24% lower odds of earning less than her (relative to earning more)

(Table 5, Model I). These effects of shortness and tallness are not mediated by men’s height

relative to their spouse (Model II).

       Model II also indicates that men who are shorter than their spouse have 39% lower odds

of being an equal earner (relative to being a breadwinner) than men who are taller. Both the

effects of men’s height in relation to other men and in relation to their spouse provide evidence

of height-based exchange. That is, some men appear to compensate for their relative shortness

with higher relative earnings.

                                             [Table 5]

       Figure 6 plots head’s predicted proportion of combined earnings at every inch of height.

On the left side of the graph, it can be seen that short men consistently have the highest share of

income. Among men who are average height (in the middle of the graph), being shorter than

one’s spouse demonstrates a curvilinear relationship such that the proportion of income earned

by men increases with each additional inch after 69”. Likewise, each inch of individual height is

associated with higher proportional earnings among men who are the same height as their

spouse. For men who are taller than their spouses, height is negatively associated with relative

earnings. This further confirms an existence of height-based status exchange in which short men

compensate for their lower physical status with higher proportional earnings, while tall men

appear more likely to use their status to attract women with higher relative earnings.




                                                                                                   19
                                             [Figure 6]

Results of Supplementary Analyses

       As a supplement to our main inquiry, we test continuous measures of head’s height and

relative spousal height (Appendix A). This reveals a qualitatively similar story to our analysis

presented above, though the effects of both predictors become statistically weaker and smaller in

magnitude. This weakening confirms our theory of a height-based hierarchy in which the effects

of male height are concentrated among short men with low height status and among men who are

in atypical relationships where they are shorter than their spouse.

       We also supplement our analyses by rerunning our models in the 1986 and 2009 cohorts

separately (Appendix B). This is to ensure that neither cohort dominates our final results. This

supplement again leads to qualitatively similar conclusions with weaker statistical strength. In

this case, we attribute the weaker statistical strength to a smaller number of observations in each

model. We do find one exception, however—the effect of being short on coupling with a woman

who went to college reverses direction between 1986 and 2009. Because the effect is neither

significant in our main analysis nor in this supplement, we do not derive any substantive

interpretation from this reversal.

       As a last supplement, we rerun our analysis among black and white heads separately

(Appendix C1). This is also to check that neither group dominates the results observed in our

main models. Here the results indicate similar effects of men’s height among black and white

men, with two exceptions. The first is that short black men have significantly lower odds than

average black men of partnering with women who are more than three years their junior, while

the effect is nonsignificant and negative among white respondents. This finding is unexpected

and highlights the need for future research on how height affects various types of relationship




                                                                                                   20
sorting. The second racial difference we observe is in the effect of head’s height on the relative

odds of performing the same amount of housework as one’s spouse. However, a plot of the

predicted proportion of combined housework hours by heads’ height and race suggests that for

both black and white men, the effect of height is similar—positively correlated with heads’ share

of housework (Appendix C2).



Discussion

       This study seeks to elucidate the effects of men’s height—a physical attribute that

contributes to their perceived attractiveness—on the formation, stability, and functioning of

committed relationships. Motivated by studies of the status value assigned to physical

attractiveness and male height, and by a dearth of contemporary demographic research on the

role of physical attractiveness in spousal markets, we propose a height-hierarchy among men

seeking long-term spouses. Results from our analysis confirm that short men disproportionately

marry lower-educated and substantially younger women, get married at lower rates than average

and tall men, and once in relationships, compensate for their shortness by earning a higher

relative share of income. Together these findings expand theoretical models of spousal sorting

and exchange by demonstrating that the extra-relationship status value of male height, and

potentially other characteristics associated with physical desirability, confers a similar status

within relationships.

       This investigation makes contributions to the sociological literature on attractiveness,

stratification, status, and family formation and stability, and has direct implications for the future

study of assortative coupling and relationship exchange. Our demonstration that a single physical

attribute such as height has large consequences for family formation and stability is particularly




                                                                                                    21
important given that cohabitation, marriage, and divorce are some of the most widely recognized

ways in which inequality is perpetuated within and across generations.

       In this study, we test numerous potential effects of men’s height on relationship outcomes

and find that male stature significantly affects nearly all of them. First, the qualities of short,

average, and tall men’s spouses are dissimilar. For example, tall men have the highest odds of

coupling with a high school graduate, while short men have the lowest odds. From the

perspective of relationship exchange models, this indicates that the tallest men exchange their

attractive attribute (height) for better-educated spouses, while short men are unable to do so.

From this finding it can even be inferred that tall men may be better able to use intimate

partnerships as a form of social mobility than short or average height men.

       Another spousal characteristic that differs by male height is relative age—tall men appear

more likely to couple with older women, while shorter men couple with younger women. A

nuanced interpretation of this finding is that women’s perception of men’s maturity may be

related to men’s height such that short men are perceived to be comparatively less mature than

tall men. If this interpretation is correct, then short men may seek younger partners to evade this

perception of them. Regardless, the hypergamous age difference we observe between short men

and their spouses may further contribute to the less egalitarian division of household labor we

observe among them.

       Our findings also reveal that short men are also substantially more likely to enter height

homogamous and hypogamous relationships in which they are the same height or shorter than

their spouse. These types of relationships are rare—constituting less than 8 percent of cohabiting

and married couples. They are also distinctive. In relationships where the man is shorter than

his spouse, the division of household labor and earnings is less gender egalitarian. This may be




                                                                                                      22
because short men exchange their breadwinner status for less housework, or as theories of

compensatory gender display would suggest, because a lower share of housework or a higher

share of relative earnings allow short men to enact traditional gender ideals, thereby performing

their masculinity in the absence of symbolic anthropomorphic differences.

       Short men also tend to be in more stable marriages than average and tall men. This is

likely a function of the marriage entry process, as we additionally find that short men marry at

the lowest rates. Acknowledging that marriage and divorce have implications for socioeconomic

stratification and asset accumulation, our observed effects suggest that men’s height may

indirectly affect their economic status and socioeconomic mobility through these demographic

processes.

       Our findings demonstrate the persistence of similar height differentials across two

generations of men and their spouses. This hypergamous pattern of height-coupling reflects

historical gender power imbalances, and also perpetuates a longstanding height-hierarchy among

men. This, coupled with our findings on the myriad effects of men’s height relative to other men

on relationship functioning and stability, highlights how predetermined physical attributes can be

mobilized as a form of capital on the spousal market and then bargained with or compensated for

within relationships.




                                                                                                   23
References

Algozzine, Bob. 1977. "Perceived Attractiveness and Classroom Interactions." The Journal of
      Experimental Education 46(1):63-66.

Alterovitz, Sheyna Sears-Roberts, and Gerald A. Mendelsohn. 2009. "Partner preferences across
       the life span: Online dating by older adults." Psychology and Aging 24(2):513-17.

Barber, Nigel. 1995. "The evolutionary psychology of physical attractiveness: Sexual selection
       and human morphology." Ethology and Sociobiology 16(5):395-424.

Beehr, Terry A., and David C. Gilmore. 1982. "Applicant Attractiveness as a Perceived Job-
       Relevant Variable in Selection of Management Trainees." The Academy of Management
       Journal 25(3):607-17.

Belot, Michèle, and Jan Fidrmuc. 2010. "Anthropometry of love: Height and gender asymmetries
       in interethnic marriages." Economics & Human Biology 8(3):361-72.

Bertrand, Marianne. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A
       Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination." The American Economic Review
       94(4):991-1013.

Bogaert, Anthony F., and William A. Fisher. 1995. "Predictors of University Men's Number of
      Sexual Partners." The Journal of Sex Research 32(2):119-30.

Bogaert, Anthony, and Donald McCreary. 2011. "Masculinity and the Distortion of Self-
      Reported Height in Men." Sex Roles 65(7):548-56.

Breen, Richard, and SigneHald Andersen. 2012. "Educational Assortative Mating and Income
       Inequality in Denmark." Demography 49(3):867-87.

Brines, Julie. 1994. "Economic Dependency, Gender, and the Division of Labor at Home." The
        American Journal of Sociology 100(3):652-88.

Brody, Stuart. 2004. "Slimness is Associated with Greater Intercourse and Lesser Masturbation
       Frequency." Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 30(4):251-61.

Charles, KerwinKofi, Erik Hurst, and Alexandra Killewald. 2013. "Marital Sorting and Parental
       Wealth." Demography 50(1):51-70.

Connell, Raewyn. 1995. Masculinities. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Davis, Kingsley. 1941. "Intermarriage in Caste Societies." American Anthropologist 43(3):376-
       95.

Domingue, Benjamin W., Jason Fletcher, Dalton Conley, and Jason D. Boardman. 2014.
     "Genetic and educational assortative mating among US adults." Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences.


                                                                                                 24
Dribe, Martin, and Paul Nystedt. 2013. "Educational Homogamy and Gender-Specific Earnings:
       Sweden, 1990–2009." Demography 50(4):1197-216.

Fink, Bernhard, Nick Neave, Gayle Brewer, and Boguslaw Pawlowski. 2007. "Variable
       preferences for sexual dimorphism in stature (SDS): Further evidence for an adjustment
       in relation to own height." Personality and Individual Differences 43(8):2249-57.

Fink, Bernhard, and Ian Penton-Voak. 2002. "Evolutionary Psychology of Facial
       Attractiveness." Current Directions in Psychological Science 11(5):154-58.

Fiore, Andrew T., Lindsay S. Taylor, G.A. Mendelsohn, and Mrti Hearst. 2005. "Assessing
        Attractiveness in Online Dating Profiles." Pp. 797-806 in SIGCHI Conference on Human
        Factors in Computing Systems.

Fiore, Andrew T., Lindsay S. Taylor, Ziaomeng Zhong, G.A. Mendelsohn, and Coye Cheshire.
        2010. "Who's Right and Who Writes: People, Profiles, Contacts, and Replies in Online
        Dating." Pp. 1-10 in 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
        Washington, D.C.: IEEE Computer Society.

Fryer, Roland G. Jr., and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "The Causes and Consequences of Distinctively
        Black Names." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(3):767-805.

Gaddis, Michael S. 2012. "Discrimination in the Credential Society: An Audit Study of Race and
       College Selectivity in the Labor Market." in Population Association of America 2012
       Annual Meeting. San Francisco.

Grammer, Karl, Bernhard Fink, Anders P. MØLler, and Randy Thornhill. 2003. "Darwinian
     aesthetics: sexual selection and the biology of beauty." Biological Reviews 78(3):385-
     407.

Gullickson, Aaron, and Florencia Torche. 2014. "Patterns of Racial and Educational Assortative
       Mating in Brazil." Demography:1-22.

Hamermesh, Daniel S., and Jeff E. Biddle. 1994. "Beauty and the Labor Market." The American
     Economic Review 84(5):1174-94.

Hitsch, Günter J. , Ali Hortaçsu, and Dan Ariely. 2010. "What makes you click? Mate
        preferences in online dating." Quantitative Marketing and Economics 8(4):393-427.

Jackson, Linda A., and Kelly S. Ervin. 1992. "Height Stereotypes of Women and Men: The
       Liabilities of Shortness for Both Sexes." The Journal of Social Psychology 132(4):433-
       45.

Jackson, Linda A., John E. Hunter, and Carole N. Hodge. 1995. "Physical Attractiveness and
       Intellectual Competence: A Meta-Analytic Review." Social Psychology Quarterly
       58(2):108-22.




                                                                                                25
Joyner, Kara, and Grace Kao. 2005. "Interracial Relationships and the Transition to Adulthood."
       American Sociological Review 70(4):563-81.

Judge, Timothy A., and Daniel M. Cable. 2004. "The Effect of Physical Height on Workplace
       Success and Income: Preliminary Test of a Theoretical Model." Journal of Applied
       Psychology 89(3):428-41.

Kalmijn, Matthijs. 1994. "Assortative Mating by Cultural and Economic Occupational Status."
      American Journal of Sociology 100(2):422-52.

Langlois, Judith H., Lisa Kalakanis, Adam J. Rubenstein, Andrea Larson, Monica Hallam, and
       Monica Smoot. 2000. "Maxims or Myths of Beauty? A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical
       Review." Psychological Bulletin 126(3):390-423.

Langlois, Judith H., and Cookie Stephan. 1977. "The Effects of Physical Attractiveness and
       Ethnicity on Children's Behavioral Attributions and Peer Preferences." Child
       Development 48(4):1694-98.

Lewis, SusanK, and ValerieK Oppenheimer. 2000. "Educational assortative mating across
       marriage markets: Nonhispanic whites in the United States." Demography 37(1):29-40.

Lichter, Daniel T., Diane K. McLaughlin, George Kephart, and David J. Landry. 1992. "Race
       and the Retreat From Marriage: A Shortage of Marriageable Men?" American
       Sociological Review 57(6):781-99.

Lin, Ken-Hou, and Jennifer Lundquist. 2013. "Mate Selection in Cyberspace: The Intersection of
       Race, Gender, and Education." American Journal of Sociology 119(1):183-215.

Lofquist, Daphne, Terry Lugalia, Martin O'Connell, and Sarah Feliz. 2012. "Households and
       Families. 2010." in 2010 Census Briefs: U.S. Bureau of the Census.

McClintock, Elizabeth Aura. 2014. "Beauty and Status: The Illusion of Exchange in Partner
      Selection?" American Sociological Review.

Melamed, Tuvia. 1992. "Personality correlates of physical height." Personality and Individual
     Differences 13(12):1349-50.

Merton, Robert K. 1941. "Intermarriage and the Social Structure: Fact and Theory." Psychiatry
      4(3):361-74.

Mobius, Markus M., and Tanya S. Rosenblat. 2006. "Why Beauty Matters." The American
      Economic Review 96(1):222-35.

Nettle, Daniel. 2002. "Height and reproductive success in a cohort of british men." Human
        Nature 13(4):473-91.

Pager, Devah, Bruce Western, and Bart Bonikowski. 2009. "Discrimination in a Low-Wage
       Labor Market: A Field Experiment." American Sociological Review 74(5):777-99.


                                                                                                26
Pawlowski, Boguslaw. 2003. "Variable preferences for sexual dimorphism in height as a strategy
      for increasing the pool of potential partners in humans." Proceedings of the Royal Society
      of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 270(1516):709-12.

Pierce, Charles A. 1996. "Body height and romantic attraction: A meta-analytic test of the male-
        taller norm." Social Behavior and Personality 24(2):143-49.

Qian, Zhenchao, and Daniel T. Lichter. 2007. "Social Boundaries and Marital Assimilation:
       Interpreting Trends in Racial and Ethnic Intermarriage." American Sociological Review
       72(1):68-94.

Ritts, Vicki, Miles L. Patterson, and Mark E. Tubbs. 1992. "Expectations, Impressions, and
        Judgments of Physically Attractive Students: A Review." Review of Educational
        Research 62(4):413-26.

Salska, Irmina, David A. Frederick, Boguslaw Pawlowski, Andrew H. Reilly, Kelsey T. Laird,
        and Nancy A. Rudd. 2008. "Conditional mate preferences: Factors influencing
        preferences for height." Personality and Individual Differences 44(1):203-15.

Shepperd, James A., and Alan J. Strathman. 1989. "Attractiveness and Height." Personality and
      Social Psychology Bulletin 15(4):617-27.

Steckel, Richard H. 2009. "Heights and human welfare: Recent developments and new
       directions." Explorations in Economic History 46(1):1-23.

Swami, Viren, Adrian Furnham, Nereshnee Balakumar, Candy Williams, Kate Canaway, and
      Debbi Stanistreet. 2008. "Factors influencing preferences for height: A replication and
      extension." Personality and Individual Differences 45(5):395-400.

Szklarska, Alicja, Slawomir Koziel, Tadeusz Bielicki, and Robert M. Malina. 2007. "Influence
       of height on attained level of education in males at 19 years of age " Journal of Biosocial
       Science 39(04):575-82.

Toma, Catalina L., and Jeffrey T. Hancock. 2010. "Looks and Lies: The Role of Physical
      Attractiveness in Online Dating Self-Presentation and Deception." Communication
      Research 37(3):335-51.

Toma, Catalina L., Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Nicole B. Ellison. 2008. "Separating Fact From
      Fiction: An Examination of Deceptive Self-Presentation in Online Dating Profiles."
      Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34(8):1023-36.

Torche, Florencia. 2010. "Educational assortative mating and economic inequality: A
       comparative analysis of three Latin American countries." Demography 47(2):481-502.




                                                                                                27
Figure 1: Percentage of Heads of Household Who Are Shorter or the Same Height as Their
Spouse
 8

 6                                                                       4.00
                                         4.13
 4

 2                                       3.14                            3.78

 0
                                         1986                            2009

                                                Shorter    Same height

Note: The percent of men who are shorter or the same height as their spouses
was not significantly different in 2009 than in 1986.




Figure 2: Frequency Distribution of Height Differences Between Heads and Spouses, in Inches
     Frequency in PSID sample




                                                                                1986
                                                                                2009




                                -9          0                 12                 24
                                     Difference between men's height and their
                                              spouse's height (inches)

Note: The mean difference between men and their wives in 1986 was 5.55”,
which is not significantly different from the mean difference of 5.63” in 2009.




                                                                                              28
Figure 3: Smoothed Kaplan-Meier Hazard Estimates of First-Marriage by Head’s Height
Relative to Other Heads




Note: N=77,361 person-years across 3,177 respondents




Figure 4: Smoothed Kaplan-Meier Hazard Estimates of First-Separation by Head’s Height
Relative to Other Heads




Note: N=41,130 married-years across 2,825 ever-married respondents




                                                                                        29
Figure 5: Smoothed Lowess Plots of Head’s Proportion of Combined Housework Hours, by
Head’s Individual Height and Height Relative to Spouse




Note: N=2,990.




Figure 6: Smoothed Lowess Plots of Head’s Proportion of Combined Annual Earnings, by
Head’s Individual Height and Height Relative to Spouse




Note: N=2,876.




                                                                                       30
   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for the Pooled Sample and by Survey Cohort
                                                         Pooled              1986           2009
                                                     Mean       SD      Mean      SD     Mean    SD
Main Predictors
 Men’s height
    Short                                              .10                .10              .09
    Average                                            .74                .78              .72
    Tall                                               .16                .12              .19
 Men’s relative height
    Shorter than spouse                                .04                .03              .92
    Same height as spouse                              .04                .04              .04
    Taller than spouse                                 .92                .93              .04
Supplementary predictors
 Men’s absolute height (inches)                      70.55     3.09     70.17     3.03   70.81    3.10
 Men’s height compared to spouse (inches)             5.63     3.80      5.55     3.77    5.67    3.82
Partner selection
 Spouse’s height                                     64.93     2.95     64.61     2.95   65.14    2.93
 Spouse’s education
    Less than H.S.                                     .16                .28              .08
    H.S.                                               .31                .44              .21
    College                                            .53                .28              .71
 Age heterogamy
    Spouse is within three years                       .55                .53              .56
    Spouse >3 years older                              .09                .07              .10
    Spouse >3 years younger                            .35                .40              .34
 Racial homogamy                                       .93                .95              .91
Marriage Entry
    Ever married                                       .92                .97              .90
    Years from birth to first marriage               24.85     4.70     22.93     4.07   26.13    4.66
Relationship Exit
    Ever separated                                     .25                .36              .17
    Years from first marriage to separation          16.45    12.70     26.09 13.41       9.56     .37
Relationship dynamics
    Head’s housework hours                            7.82     8.49      7.46     8.47    7.91     7.78
    Spouse’s housework hours                         19.21    14.49     22.60 15.11      17.05    13.63
    Head’s proportion of combined housework            .29      .20       .25      .20     .32      .20
      Head less                                        .76                .82              .71
      Head same                                        .16                .12              .19
      Head more                                        .08                .06              .10
    Ln (head’s earnings)                             10.33      .91      9.84      .77   10.66     .84
    Ln (spouse’s earnings)                            9.63     1.23      8.95     1.14   10.08    1.07
    Men’s proportion of combined earnings              .67      .27       .71      .25     .65     .27
      Head less                                        .13                .10              .15     .36
      Head same                                        .16                .13              .18     .38
      Head                                             .71                .77              .67     .47
Controls


                                                                                             31
Respondent’s age (23-45 years)        33.98   5.66   33.50   5.61   34.23   5.67
Respondent’s race
  White                                .71            .64            .74
  Black                                .24            .33            .19
  Native American                      .01            .01            .01
  Asian or Pacific Islander            .01           .003            .01
  Other                                .03            .02            .05
Head’s highest education
  Less than H.S.                       .16            .22            .12
  H.S.                                 .33            .43            .26
  College                              .51            .35            .62
Head’s mother’s highest education
  Less than H.S.                       .31            .22            .23
  H.S.                                 .40            .43            .40
  College                              .29            .35            .37
Spouse’s mother’s highest education
  Less than H.S.                       .33            .47            .24
  H.S.                                 .35            .36            .35
  College                              .32            .17            .41
Number of children in household       1.82    1.34   1.92    1.37   1.75    1.33




                                                                       32
Table 2: The Results of OLS, Multinomial, and Logistic Regressions Observing the Effects of Men’s Height
Relative to Other Men on Spousal Characteristics
                  Height and relative height               Education                Relative age         Relative race
                I                   II                         III                       IV                    V
             Inches Spouse same          Spouse         <H.S.      College     >3 years >3 years          Spouse is
                         height           taller                                younger      older        same race

Short         -1.58*       3.69***        15.50***           1.43*      0.88         1.03***       0.73              1.04
              (0.09)        (0.63)          (2.59)          (0.24)     (0.15)         (0.01)      (0.26)            (0.07)
Tall           0.42†        0.05*       1.21e-07***         0.71**      1.08           1.12      1.35***           1.30***
              (0.06)        (0.07)       (1.47e-07)         (0.08)     (0.05)         (0.12)      (0.02)            (0.06)
Constant     64.49**       0.04***        0.005***           2.39*    0.18***          0.48      0.02***          21.55***
              (0.47)        (0.02)        (0.0003)          (1.04)     (0.05)         (0.31)      (0.00)           (10.03)

        Note: In all models, N=3,033. Model I is estimated with OLS; models II-IV are estimated with multinomial logistic
        regression; and model V is estimated with logistic regression. The results of multinomial and logistic regressions are
        presented as (relative) odds-ratios. All models control for the survey cohort, and head’s age, education, race, and mother’s
        education. Coefficients for all controls are omitted from this table (available upon request).
        Robust standard errors, clustered by survey cohort, in parentheses
        *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                                                                  33
Table 3: Hazard Ratios from Discrete Time Hazard Models Observing the Effects of Men’s
Height on the Transition Into and Out of First-Marriage
                                                              First        First        First
                                                           marriage     marriage separation
  MI      Men’s height (ref: average)
            Short                                           0.82***     0.85***        0.68*
                                                             (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.11)
            Tall                                             0.91**      0.89**        1.22†
                                                             (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.14)
          Peron-years:
            30 years or greater                                         9.58***
                                                                          (0.65)
          Time and Height Interaction:
            Short * 30 years or greater                                    0.89
                                                                          (0.21)
            Tall * 30 years or greater                                   1.56**
                                                                          (0.22)
  MII Men’s height (ref: average)
            Short                                                                      0.69*
                                                                                       (0.12)
            Tall                                                                       1.22†
                                                                                       (0.14)
          Men’s height relative to spouse’s (ref: taller)
            Shorter                                                                     0.96
                                                                                       (0.21)
            Same height                                                                 0.97
                                                                                       (0.24)
 Note: In the marriage models, N=77,361 person-years across 3,177 heads of household. In the
 separation models, N=41,130 person-years across 2,825 heads of household who were married
 at least once. All models control for the survey cohort, and head’s race, education, and mother’s
 education. Separation models also include controls for the head’s age at first marriage, the
 couple’s number of children, spouses’ mother’s education, spouse’s relative age, spouse’s
 education, and a dummy for whether or not the spouse is the same race as the head. Coefficients
 for all controls have been omitted from this table (available upon request).
 Robust standard errors, clustered by person, in parentheses
 *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                               34
     Table 4: The Results of OLS and Multinomial Logistic Regressions Observing the Effects of
     Men’s Height Relative to Other Men and the Effects of Men’s Height Relative to Spouses’ on
     the Amount and Share of Housework Performed
                                                        Men’s          Women’s            Men’s share of
                                                      housework       housework          housework hours
                                                                                        relative to spouse’s
                                                         hours           hours           Same         More
  MI   Men’s height (ref: average)
         Short                                            0.70            1.97            0.90         1.29
                                                        (0.18)           (1.41)          (0.26)       (0.51)
         Tall                                            -0.23            0.99            1.12       0.77***
                                                        (0.33)           (0.32)          (0.21)       (0.04)
         Constant                                        8.99†          24.32**         0.27*** 0.07***
                                                        (1.07)           (0.05)          (0.03)       (0.02)

  MII    Men’s height (ref: average)
          Short                                               0.98              1.59            1.00           1.39
                                                             (0.31)            (1.14)          (0.28)         (0.59)
           Tall                                               -0.32             1.04            1.10         0.76***
                                                             (0.35)            (0.39)          (0.21)         (0.04)
         Men’s height relative to spouse’s (ref: taller)
          Shorter                                             -1.68            -0.03            0.86         0.68***
                                                             (0.77)           (0.80)           (0.28)         (0.05)
           Same height                                        -0.85             2.03           0.57*           0.79
                                                             (0.52)           (1.07)           (0.14)         (0.19)
           Constant                                          9.05†           24.34***         0.27***        0.07***
                                                             (1.05)           (0.01)           (0.03)         (0.02)

Note: In all models, N=2,990. Models in the first two columns are estimated with OLS; in the last column
with multinomial logistic regression. All models control for the survey cohort; head’s age, race, education,
and mother’s education; spouse’s education, mother’s education, relative age, and whether the spouse is the
same race as the head; and the couple’s number of children. Coefficients for all controls have been omitted
from this table (available upon request).
Robust standard errors, clustered by survey cohort, in parentheses
*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                                        35
     Table 5: The Results of Log-Linear and Multinomial Logistic Regressions Observing the Effects
     of Men’s Height Relative to Other Men and the Effects of Men’s Height Relative to Spouses’ on
     the Amount and Share of Weekly Earnings
                                                         Men’s     Women’s           Men’s share of
                                                        logged       logged        combined earnings
                                                       earnings     earnings       relative to spouse’s
                                                                                    Same          Less
 MI    Men’s height (ref: average)
         Short                                            -0.07        -0.26      0.52*** 0.75***
                                                         (0.05)       (0.09)        (0.03)       (0.03)
         Tall                                              0.04        -0.13      0.76***         0.98
                                                        (0.003)       (0.08)        (0.06)       (0.12)
         Constant                                         9.17*      8.37**       0.20***        0.13*
                                                         (0.34)       (0.07)        (0.03)       (0.13)
       Observations
 MII   Men’s height (ref: average)
         Short                                            -0.07        -0.25      0.52*** 0.74***
                                                         (0.07)       (0.08)        (0.01)       (0.05)
         Tall                                             0.04†        -0.13       0.75**         0.98
                                                         (0.00)       (0.09)        (0.07)       (0.10)
       Men’s height relative to spouse’s (ref: taller)
         Shorter                                         -0.001        -0.06      0.61***         1.04
                                                         (0.11)       (0.16)        (0.02)       (0.32)
         Same height                                      0.004       0.003          1.15         1.02
                                                         (0.04)      (0.003)        (0.26)       (0.09)
         Constant                                         9.17*      8.37**       0.20***        0.13*
                                                         (0.33)       (0.07)        (0.02)       (0.12)

Note: In the first column, N=2,884; in the second N=2,417; in the third N=2,876. Non-earning
individuals are excluded from the analysis of heads’ and spouses’ logged earnings. The models in
the first two columns are estimated with log-linear models. In the last column, models are
estimated with multinomial logistic regression. All models control for the survey cohort; head’s
age, race, education, and mother’s education; spouse’s education, mother’s education, relative age,
and whether the spouse is the same race as the head; and the couple’s number of children.
Coefficients for all controls have been omitted from this table (available upon request).
Robust standard errors, clustered by survey year, in parentheses
*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                                      36
           Appendix A: The Results of Main Models Observing the Linear Effects of Heads’ Individual Height and Relative Spousal Height
                                                   Partner Selection                                       Marriage Entry/Exit           Relationship Dynamics
               Height    Spouse same     Spouse        <H.S.       Coll.   >3 years   >3 years   Spouse is Marriage Separa-       Relative share of      Rel. share of
              (Inches)      height        taller                            older     younger    same race              tion         housework             earnings
                                                                                                                                   Same       More     Same        More
Height         0.17†        0.66***       0.49***       0.96     1.02***     1.04       1.00        1.00    0.96***    0.99*      1.03**     0.97*     1.01*       1.00
               (0.01)        (0.05)       (0.001)      (0.04)    (0.004)    (0.06)     (0.01)     (0.002)   (0.001)    (0.01)     (0.01)     (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.01)
Constant      52.31**    1.12e+11***   1.10e+19***     51.46†    0.06***     0.03     0.02***    20.36***                        0.05***      0.59    0.07***      0.13
               (0.54)     (4.75e+11)    (3.79e+18)    (120.56)    (0.03)    (0.10)     (0.01)     (12.97)                         (0.03)     (0.44)    (0.04)     (0.25)


Height dif.      --          --            --            --         --        --         --         --         --       0.99       1.01      1.02       1.00      0.98
                                                                                                                       (0.01)    (0.001)    (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.03)
Constant         --          --            --            --         --        --         --         --         --                0.26***   0.06***    0.20***    0.15†
                                                                                                                                  (0.02)    (0.03)     (0.06)    (0.17)

           Note: Models estimating the effects of respondents’ height (in inches) include the same controls as in the main analyses and are
           estimated without controlling for height-coupling behavior. Models estimating the effects of the continuous height difference between
           respondents and their spouses (in inches) include the same controls as in the main analyses and are estimated net of the effects of
           men’s height relative to other men (short, tall, average). All models are specified in the same way as the main analyses.
           Robust standard errors in parentheses
           *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                           37
        Appendix B: The Results of Main Models Run Separately by Survey Cohort
                                                  Partner Selection                                       Marriage Entry/Exit           Relationship Dynamics
              Height     Spouse same   Spouse       <H.S.     College   >3 years   >3 years   Spouse is   Marriage Separa-      Relative share of       Rel. share of
             (Inches)       height      taller                           older     younger    same race                tion        housework              earnings
1986                                                                                                                              Same      More      Same        More
Short        -1.69***      3.17**      20.45***     1.23       1.15      0.44†       1.03       0.87      0.82***     0.62*       1.21      2.12*     0.51†       0.84
               (0.27)      (1.12)        (7.77)    (0.27)     (0.31)     (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.37)      (0.05)     (0.13)     (0.35)    (0.73)     (0.18)     (0.29)
Tall            0.28        0.19†       6.86-07     0.79       1.14       1.47       0.93       1.20        0.94       0.99       0.64       0.94     0.59†       1.28
               (0.26)      (0.19)       (0.001)    (0.19)     (0.26)     (0.48)     (0.19)     (0.59)      (0.05)     (0.17)     (0.22)    (0.40)     (0.19)     (0.39)
Constant     65.03***      0.07**      0.004***     1.38     0.02***     3.33*     0.11***     8.73*                              0.32     0.04** 0.14** 0.02***
               (0.56)      (0.06)        (0.01)    (1.59)     (0.06)     (1.10)     (0.01)     (8.15)                            (0.24)    (0.04)     (0.11)     (0.02)
N              1,210        1,210        1,210     1,210      1,210      1,210      1,210      1,210       28,389     25,704     1,193      1,193     1,155      1,155

2009
Short         0.22***      4.44***     13.88***    1.72†       0.79       0.97       1.04        1.09     0.79***      0.79      0.69       0.91     0.56*          0.73
               (0.06)       (1.39)       (3.97)    (0.48)     (0.18)     (0.30)     (0.20)      (0.33)     (0.05)     (0.22)    (0.18)     (0.26)    (0.17)        (0.20)
Tall           1.57**     7.022e-08    1.07e-07     0.62       1.04       1.35       1.21        1.35     0.87***     1.47*      1.26       0.75      0.79          0.91
               (0.27)      (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.20)     (0.17)     (0.27)     (0.17)      (0.34)     (0.03)     (0.23)    (0.19)     (0.17)    (0.13)        (0.16)
Constant    8.9e+27***     0.03***      0.01***     0.80       0.95       0.46     0.02***    15.75***                           0.41      0.19*     0.22*          0.49
               (0.49)       (0.02)      (0.001)    (0.53)     (0.42)     (0.26)     (0.01)     (10.20)                          (0.23)     (0.13)    (0.14)        (0.30)
N              1,823         1,823       1,823     1,823      1,823      1,823      1,823       1,823      48,972     15,310    1,797      1,797     1,721         1,721

        Note: All models are specified in the same way as the main analyses. Because of a lack of variance within Asian and Pacific Islanders
        in 1986, the number of respondents in this supplementary analysis of separation is four smaller than in our main analysis (n=16
        person-years). Coefficients for all controls have been omitted from this table (available upon request).
        Robust standard errors in parentheses
        *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1




                                                                                                                                                              38
        Appendix C1: The Results of Main Models Run Separately Among White and Black Heads of Household
                                                   Partner Selection                                    Marriage Entry/Exit           Relationship Dynamics
             Height      Spouse        Spouse        <H.S.      College   >3 years   >3 years Spouse is Marriage Separa-       Relative share of     Rel. share of
            (Inches)   same height      taller                             older     younger same race               tion          housework           earnings
White                                                                                                                           Same       More     Same       More
Short        -1.49*     5.62***        22.94***      1.47         0.91      1.03      1.25†       0.74   0.76***    0.66*      0.70**      1.16    0.55***     0.73
             (0.06)      (0.79)          (0.52)     (0.43)      (0.27)     (0.41)     (0.14)    (0.28)    (0.04)    (0.14)     (0.10)     (0.88)    (0.02)    (0.20)
Tall          0.42        0.07       2.58e-07***    0.64*         1.05    1.32***      1.13       1.34   0.88***     1.20       1.30†    0.81*** 0.73***       0.99
             (0.25)      (0.11)       (3.17e-07)    (0.11)      (0.17)     (0.01)     (0.18)    (0.45)    (0.03)    (0.16)     (0.20)     (0.05)    (0.04)    (0.07)
Constant    64.11**     0.02***        0.001***    1.74***      0.10**    0.30***    0.02***    8.62**                        0.34*** 0.05*** 0.27***          0.08
             (0.58)      (0.01)         (0.001)     (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.02)     (0.01)    (6.78)                        (0.004)     (0.03)    (0.05)    (0.14)
N            2,140       2,140           2,140      2,140        2,140     2,140      2,140      2,140    53,215    28,697      2,118     2,118     2,047     2,047

Black
Short        -1.95*        2.05      9.72***       1.33***      0.85**      0.23     0.88***     1.33     0.83*     0.55†       1.47      1.30     0.37***      0.76†
             (0.05)       (1.64)      (6.57)        (0.02)      (0.05)     (0.21)     (0.03)    (0.83)    (0.07)    (0.18)     (0.36)    (0.45)    (0.001)     (0.11)
Tall          0.26     7.98-e08*** 1.47e-07***       0.90        1.16     1.53***      1.29    1.42***     0.99      1.31       0.74     0.72**    0.76***       1.16
             (0.53)     (8.08e-08)  (1.70e-07)      (0.12)      (0.19)     (0.05)     (0.24)    (0.02)    (0.07)    (0.30)     (0.21)    (0.09)     (0.03)     (0.59)
Constant    65.79**       0.13†      0.02***        6.38†        0.70       2.07     0.02***   6.20***                        0.27***    0.17*     0.13***     0.41**
             (0.28)       (0.11)      (0.02)        (6.65)      (0.57)     (4.55)    (0.005)    (2.57)                        (0.001)    (0.14)     (0.03)     (0.12)
N             742           742         742          742         742        742        742       742      20,372    10,436      722       722        690         690

        Note: The number of white observations and the number of black observations does not sum to the total number of observations in our
        main analysis because our main models also include observations of additional races. There is not a powerful enough number of
        observations among other races to conduct an independent analysis of height effects within them. All models are specified in the same
        way as the main analyses. Coefficients for all controls have been omitted from this table (available upon request).
        Robust standard errors in parentheses
        *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, † p<0.1

        Appendix C2: Smoothed Lowess Plots of Head’s Predicted Proportion of Housework Hours by Height and Race




                                                                                                                                                          39
