                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAN A SUMMER MAKE A DIFFERENCE? THE IMPACT OF THE AMERICAN
      ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION SUMMER PROGRAM ON MINORITY STUDENT
                              OUTCOMES

                                         Charles M. Becker
                                         Cecilia Elena Rouse
                                           Mingyu Chen

                                        Working Paper 20407
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20407


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




This paper grew out of a project with Gregory Price of Morehouse College and Sue Stockly of Eastern
New Mexico University. We owe them both a major intellectual debt. We also have benefited from
excellent research assistance from Ming Gu and are grateful to Edward Freeland and his colleagues
at Princeton’s Survey Research Center. Francisca Antman, Peter Arcidiacono, Will Dobbie, Don Fullerton,
Gregory Price and Juan Carlos Suarez have provided valuable, detailed comments for which we are
truly appreciative. We thank the Princeton University Industrial Relations Section for generously
funding the project. All errors in fact or interpretation are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20407.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Charles M. Becker, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Mingyu Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can a Summer Make a Difference? The Impact of the American Economic Association Summer
Program on Minority Student Outcomes
Charles M. Becker, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Mingyu Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 20407
August 2014
JEL No. I21,I24,J15

                                              ABSTRACT

In the 1970s, the American Economic Association (AEA) was one of several professional associations
to launch a summer program with the goal of increasing racial and ethnic diversity in its profession.
In this paper we estimate the effectiveness of the AEA’s program which, to the best of our knowledge,
is the first to rigorously study such a summer program. Using a comparison group consisting of those
who applied to, but did not attend, the program and controlling for an array of background characteristics,
we find that program participants were over 40 percentage points more likely to apply to and attend
a PhD program in economics, 26 percentage points more likely to complete a PhD, and about 15 percentage
points more likely to ever work in an economics-related academic job. Using our estimates, we calculate
that the program may directly account for 17-21 percent of the PhDs awarded to minorities in economics
over the past 20 years.


Charles M. Becker                                    Mingyu Chen
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
Duke University                                      Princeton University
213 Social Sciences Building                         NJ 08544
Box 90097                                            mingyuc@princeton.edu
Durham, NC 27708-0097
cbecker@duke.edu

Cecilia Elena Rouse
Woodrow Wilson School of Public
 and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
rouse@princeton.edu
                                                                                                        1


I.      Introduction

        Underrepresentation of minorities in higher education has been the focus of

sustained attention in the U.S. for decades.              Lack of preparation, information, and

resources as well as residual discrimination have been identified as potential reasons for

this underrepresentation, prompting policymakers and educators to adopt counteracting

strategies such as affirmative action in admissions, scholarships, and enrichment

programs. Perhaps the most controversial of these programs is affirmative action in

admissions. Studies examining the impact of affirmative action bans generally find that

these bans decrease the likelihood that minority students apply to and enroll in top-tier

institutions (e.g., Long, 2004; Dickson, 2006; Backes, 2012; Hinrichs, 2012). Similarly,

interventions in the spirit of affirmative action, such as quotas and preferential treatment

in laboratory designs, suggest that this approach is effective at increasing gender and

racial diversity (e.g., Balafoutas and Sutter, 2012; Niederle, Segal, and Vesterlund, 2013;
                                       1
Schotter and Weigelt, 1992).               However, given political and legal controversies

surrounding affirmative action, many have turned to other strategies for increasing the

representativeness of minority students in institutions of higher education.

        Providing enrichment for students so that they are better prepared for further

academic study is a well-established, though little-researched approach, to increasing

academic diversity. For example, for the past fifty years the federal government has

funded college preparatory programs, such as Upward Bound and Talent Search. While

the research base for these programs is relatively thin, the estimated impacts on student

educational outcomes (such as college attendance or the type of institution attended) have

1
 In addition, several theoretical studies have examined the implications of affirmative action for college
admission, future earnings, and wage inequality (see, e.g., Chan and Eyster, 2003; Moro and Norman,
2003; Arcidiacono, 2005).
                                                                                                             2


been surprisingly mixed (see, e.g., Haskins and Rouse 2013). There is even less evidence

on the effectiveness of enrichment programs to prepare students for graduate programs

with the aim of addressing underrepresentation in specific professions, although such

programs exist in several fields. For example, the American Economic Association

(AEA), American Political Science Association (APSA), and the Public Policy and

International Affairs Program (PPIA) have sponsored summer enrichment programs for

the past 30 or more years.2,3

         It is straightforward to understand why the AEA elected to focus on increasing

diversity in its profession: in the late-1970s only 3 to 5 percent of doctorates in

economics received by US citizens and permanent residents were awarded to minorities

traditionally underrepresented in the profession (African Americans, Hispanics, and

Native Americans), or about 23 new PhDs, each year (Collins 2000). This lack of

diversity was worrisome because economic analysis is likely to benefit from differing

perspectives and priorities among those in the profession; in addition, a lack of role

models in institutions of higher education may have been discouraging younger




2
  Other professions offer slightly different kinds of programs with the shared goal of increasing diversity.
For instance, the American Sociological Association runs the Minority Fellowship Program that provides
mentoring and financial support to minority applicants to graduate programs and current PhD students. As
another example, the Minority Legal Education Resources operates the Bar Process Management Program
to assist minorities in passing the Illinois Bar Exam and provide them professional advice.
3
  Around the time that efforts were starting to increase racial and ethnic diversity in many professions, there
were also efforts to increase representation of women. For example, the American Economic Association
started focusing efforts on increasing the proportion of women in economics in the 1970s. Since then, the
percentage of women receiving doctorates in economics has increased from 11 percent in 1975 to 35
percent in 2011, a trend that can be attributed to a variety of factors, including programs designed to
address the imbalance (American Economic Association, 1976; McElroy, 2013; Kahn, 1995; Ginther and
Kahn, 2004; Hale and Regev, 2013). Notably, Blau, et al. (2010) report findings from the first randomized
study of the AEA’s mentoring program for junior female economists. They find that the mentoring
program had a positive effect on a number of professional outcomes, such as the number of top-tier
publications, the total number of publications, and the number of successful federal grants earned by
individuals randomly assigned a mentor compared to those randomly assigned to the control group.
                                                                                                      3


generations of minority students from entering the profession (Collins 2000; Chung 2000)

and may have adversely affected minority students’ performance (Fairlie et al., 2014).

        Unfortunately, after some initial improvement, progress has stalled more recently.

As shown in Figure 1, the percentage of economics PhDs awarded to minorities has

fluctuated around 8 percent since the mid-1990s, which means on average about 30 new

PhDs each year.4 As a sobering contrast, the percentage of minorities receiving doctorates

has experienced a steady increase in other social sciences and in the science, technology,

engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.

        Given the lack of significant improvement in the racial and ethnic

representativeness of doctorates in economics, a key question is whether the AEA’s

Summer Program has been effective at improving the diversity of the economics

profession. To address this question and evaluate the success of the program, we use data

from over one-third of AEASP participants between its inception in 1974 and 2010, and a

comparison group of students who applied to the program but did not attend. While not a

randomized control group, the comparison group enables us to assess the program’s

impact on a variety of graduate school and professional outcomes. Although we control

for a variety of background characteristics, we note that there may be residual unobserved

differences between the AEASP participants and those in the comparison group that bias

the estimated impacts. That said, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first evaluation

that uses a comparison group to assess an (summer) enrichment program that focuses on

disadvantaged and minority groups.5


4
  Similarly, the percentage of bachelor’s degrees in economics awarded to minorities has remained around
10-12 percent since 1995 (Rouse 2013).
5
  In a related paper, Price (2005) examines the research productivity of Black American economists, and
alternately using propensity score matching (on observables) and Heckman corrections (to control for
                                                                                                        4


        Overall, we find that the AEA’s Summer Program participants were over 40

percentage points more likely to apply to and attend a PhD program in economics, 26

percentage points more likely to complete a PhD, and about 15 percentage points more

likely to ever work in an economics-related academic job. Using these estimates, we

calculate that the program may directly account for 17-21 percent of the minority PhDs in

economics over the past 20 years. As such, the results from this analysis suggest that

relatively intensive, but short, enrichment programs can be an effective tool for

improving diversity in at least economics, and likely other professions.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section we describe the

AEA Summer Program and its student population. In section III we present the data,

including our survey and its implementation and the estimation strategy. We present the

results in section IV. Section V concludes.



II.     Background on the American Economic Association Summer Program

        The Program

        With the stated objective of increasing the numbers of professional economists

from underrepresented minority groups who have been historically disadvantaged in the

American context, the AEA Summer Program began regular operation at the University

of California, Berkeley in 1974.6 Laudably, the program completed its 39th session in


unobserved selection), finds that conditional on being an economist, AEASP participants were somewhat
more likely to have published in major journals, received support from the National Science Foundation,
and to have NBER membership than those who did not attend.
6
  Initially, “underrepresented in the American context” largely meant African American and Native
American. Since about the mid-1970s this has broadened to include Hispanics, Filipino-Americans, Pacific
Islanders, and others. Scholarship support was generally, but not always, restricted to these groups,
although a small number of non-minority participants also have received financial aid. There have also
been a very small number of foreign, non-permanent resident participants; to our knowledge, these students
did not receive scholarship support unless they had refugee status. The presence of non-minority students
                                                                                                          5


2013.7 Table 1 shows the universities that have hosted the program since its inception,

the years of operation, and the annual average number of participants at each institution.8

Since the beginning, the AEASP has included just fewer than 1,000 participants, or about

25 per year; hosts have run the program for an average of 3.7 years.

        The program itself has varied over time. One reason for the variation is the

resources of the host institution and external funding support. As a result, while the

typical program has been 7-8 weeks long, it has ranged from as few as 5 weeks at the

University of New Mexico (UNM) to 9 weeks at Duke. Further, while on average about

25 students have participated each year (see Table 1), participant numbers have ranged

from fewer than 20 at University of Texas, Austin (Texas) to over 30 at Duke. Another

reason for the variation has been the director’s interpretation of the objective of the

program.      Some directors, especially those earlier on, have aimed to increase the

likelihood that students already interested in economics and from relatively competitive

undergraduate institutions could enroll in and successfully complete a graduate program

in an academically rigorous (think “Top 10”) department. Others have focused on “high

value added” students who were also interested in economics but who may have been

from a less competitive undergraduate institution, who may have not thought seriously of

pursuing a career in economics that requires training beyond the bachelor’s level, or who

may have had lower grades. Leeds (1992) articulated this issue slightly differently in

noting that students whose parents were professionals earned substantially higher grades

was driven by legal rulings and university policy, but at no institution were the numbers of non-minority
students large.
7
  See Alexis (1975) for a description of the history and first year of the AEASP, and see Collins (2000) for
an earlier discussion of the AEA’s efforts to increase the representation of minorities in the economics
profession.
8
  The program has operated nearly continuously since its inception. The only year the program did not
operate was in 2011 as it transitioned from the University of California at Santa Barbara to the University
of New Mexico.
                                                                                                        6


in their undergraduate programs. As a result, directors faced a trade-off between those

applicants with the greatest need (and who presumably were least likely to progress on

their own) and those applicants most likely to do well (and more likely to progress to

doctoral programs on their own). Although the outcomes of interest (e.g., success in a

doctoral program and a career in an economics-related profession) are similar, the focus

would have affected several decisions of the program directors, such as recruitment and

curriculum. While potentially important for the evaluation, as with other aspects of the

program that varied, because of small sample size we do not attempt to estimate

differential treatment effects by specific program characteristics.

        In terms of curriculum, at the outset the program offered what amounted to study

of advanced intermediate undergraduate material and an introduction to mathematical

economics using Alpha Chiang’s classic text (Alexis, 1975).                          Over the years,

econometrics and research components were added; since time constraints were binding,

something – usually macroeconomics – had to give. In more recent years, advanced

coursework at various hosts has included real analysis, probability and mathematical

statistics, time series econometrics, and research seminars that focused on micro data

analysis.9 At some hosts, the content has been delivered in formal course structures that

met university requirements and received academic credit; elsewhere, this was not the

case. At the University of Colorado, Denver (UC-Denver) and Duke, an average of

roughly 6 participants per year returned for a second summer.10 Elsewhere, students took



9
   Grove et al. (2007), Grove and Wu (2007), and Krueger and Wu (2000) find that better math and
economics preparation are related to success in graduate programs in economics, suggesting that these
elements of the Summer Program should result in improved outcomes for participants.
10
   We treat AEASP recipients as having been exposed to a single treatment regardless of whether they
attended for one or two summers. Descriptive statistics also do not count students who return for a second
summer. The impact of the second summer may well be important (as detailed in Becker and Price, 2008),
                                                                                                         7


a single program regardless of background level. Even excluding from consideration

those hosts that provided two levels, it is safe to say that the content has varied

substantially from one host to another.

        In terms of cost, it was recognized from the outset that most students needed to

earn money during the summer to cover living and tuition costs in the coming academic

year; moreover, given the caliber of the students attracted, many if not the majority had

competing paid internship opportunities. Thus, the Summer Program generally has paid

student living and travel costs, books and software costs, and also has provided a modest

stipend, which in recent years has been in the $2000 to $2500 range.11

        In addition to student costs and stipends, the program also recruited faculty and

teaching assistants. In most years, the program has had a faculty member who served as

the director, along with a staff assistant. Some of the faculty and teaching assistants

came from the host institution; those who did not were provided transportation and

housing. Most faculty and all teaching assistants, regardless of institution, were paid for

their work effort. These costs were covered by support from the AEA, public and private

foundation grants, university (generally in-kind) contributions, and sponsor in-kind



but the recency and number of second-year participants make it difficult to assess the impact on PhD
completion and career outcomes with any reliability.
11
   The stated intent of the AEASP has been to increase minority representation in the economics profession
and to our knowledge, all students prior to 1996 received scholarship support. However, starting with the
Texas program, the Hopwood v. Texas court ruling that forbade explicit consideration of race in admission
or other academic decisions caused the formal distinguishing of admission and financial aid decisions, and
also led to the admission of non-minority students. Since Texas offered credit for the summer program
courses, resident economics majors also were allowed to register for the courses and to participate in the
AEASP. Local students were awarded a tuition scholarship from Department of Economics funds and
included both minority and non-minority scholars. While the Hopwood ruling was later significantly
relaxed, the successor institutions no longer excluded non-minority students. Host institutions UCD and
Duke also offered course credit, and allowed regular students to take Summer Program courses. These
hosts also gave a small number of non-minority students need-based financial aid. Note that in our analysis
non-AEA Summer Program students from the host institution who were enrolled in the courses are not
regarded as AEASP students.
                                                                                                       8


contributions. 12 Institutional in-kind support included (at some, but not all, hosts)

classroom and other space, telephones, computer labs, and dormitories. Some hosts also

have opened the courses to other students and transferred tuition revenue to the program.

Examples of sponsor in-kind support include Coors Brewing Company’s hosting of the

2002 and 2003 graduation ceremonies, or the Federal Reserve Board of Governor’s

sponsoring of a Fed-based faculty member for the four years that the program was at

Duke.

        Program costs have varied through the years, in part because input costs changed

over time and location, in part because input quantities varied markedly and in part

because hosts or supporters provided varying amounts of unrecorded in-kind support.

Faculty salaries also varied, both because cost structures differ across institutions, and

because some schools treated instruction as regular teaching credit, while others paid

summer school rates or hired visitors. Above all, inputs varied. At UCD and Duke, costs

were higher because some participants returned for a second summer. Administrative

commitments also increased (generally to 0.5 of an academic year full-time equivalent

for the director) and at Duke, UC-Santa Barbara, and New Mexico there was extensive

use of recent alumni as teaching assistants and mentors. Overall, based on budget reports

submitted to the AEA to which we have access, costs ranged from $576,634

($22,178/participant) in 2003 to $776,676 ($25,889/participant) in 2006. In contrast, the

budget for the first AEASP program was well under $300,000 (and under

$12,500/participant; Alexis, 1975).13



12
   The program has received support from the National Science Foundation and private foundations, such as
the Ford, Mellon, and MacArthur Foundations.
13
   All costs are converted to 2013 dollars using CPI-U.
                                                                                                    9


        Applicants

        We do not have complete records on applicants, but based on what we have, it

appears that the size of the applicant pool has varied from about 50-75 at Texas to 150 at

the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Applicant pool size has varied with economic

climate, host institution effort and prestige, and the program’s geographic accessibility.14

Program directors had little reason to generate a large pool of highly-qualified applicants

only to reject most of them. As such, the incentive was to ensure there was a large and

diverse pool yielding 50-75 “quality” applicants, and not much of an impetus to go

beyond that (and, in any event, recruiting budgets were tight). In short, the program’s

applicant pool was not large but was highly competitive and in a typical year there would

have been at least two or more admissible applicants for each offer made. Further,

acceptance rates tended to be high. For example, at Duke and UCD, about 90 percent of

those admitted accepted the offer and attended. We have no reason to believe that the

percentages elsewhere were different. As a result, few alternates were extended offers.

Overall, program size was constrained by funding and host administrative capacity rather

than by the size of the applicant pool.



        Participants

        The composition of the minority student body also changed from one program to

another. Reflecting the two potential targets of the program discussed earlier, some

schools, such as Temple (Leeds, 1992) and UCD, targeted students from less elite schools


14
  The pool often declined during periods of high employment and economic growth. Evidence of this
during the years at Temple University is described in Leeds (1992). Data on applicant pools other than
Temple come from personal communication and information provided by program directors at Texas and
Wisconsin.
                                                                                         10


for practical as well as ideological reasons; Duke and Stanford did so to a lesser extent as

a matter of policy.

       Consistent gender and race/ethnicity data for all programs do not exist, but the

following points can be made from the (unpublished, but available from the authors) data

that do exist.    In the early years of the AEASP, the student composition was

overwhelmingly African-American. In more recent years, the student bodies have been

more evenly divided between African-American and Hispanic backgrounds, though there

has been substantial oscillation from one year and host to the next. There also have been

small contingents of students (just over 15 percent of our alumni survey respondents)

who were Native American or from other historically underrepresented Asian-American

groups (of Filipino, Pacific Islander, Hmong, or Vietnamese origin). Some students also

have self-identified as multiple racial/ethnic backgrounds.       Finally, throughout the

program’s history, women have comprised slightly less than half of the AEASP student

body, though in some years women were the majority. There is no apparent time trend in

the share of students who are women.



III.   The Survey and Empirical Strategy

       The Survey

       We started by putting together a sample frame of AEASP participants. We did so

with a list of participants from 1974-2007 that we believe to be complete. These data

included addresses and, for more recent years, virtually complete e-mail addresses.

While e-mail and physical addresses change, informal and some formal (e.g., Facebook
                                                                                                     11


pages) contacts remain strong, and ultimately it was possible to contact a very large

majority of participants.

        Fortunately, we also had relatively complete records on all applicants from

Stanford, UCD, and Duke with which to construct a comparison group. The advantage of

this comparison group is that it represents a group of students who were motivated to

apply for the AEA Summer Program and therefore are likely relatively comparable to the

participants. At the same time, most of them were not accepted to the program and we

only have such data from a limited number of program years.15

        We conducted a web-based survey from October 2010 to March 2011 to 1,464

individuals. We offered $25 as an incentive for participation. In total, 473 individuals

responded (for a response rate of 32 percent): 329 applied to and attended the program,

and 144 applied to but did not attend.16 Of all applicants, 19 percent reported that they

were not admitted and 6 percent reported having declined the offer or not attended for

reasons such as poor health. Figure 2 shows the number of respondents by treatment and

comparison status by the year in which they applied to the program. We had the highest

number of responses from the summer sessions of 1989-96 and 2000-07 though there

were a remarkable 14 respondents from the 1981 class.

        The survey asked for background information, such as parental educational

attainment, and about college experiences, any post-graduate studies, and labor market

15
   In an attempt to broaden the comparison group, we also asked survey participants to nominate someone
with whom the individual went to college but did not apply to the AEA Summer Program, a form of
“snowball sampling” (Goodman, 1961). While broadening the sample, this group of students is likely more
dissimilar to the participants (on both observable and unobservable characteristics) than those from the
unsuccessful applicant comparison group and, importantly, only increased the overall sample by 3
observations. As a result, we focus the analysis on only the applicant comparison group although results
are similar when we use all available data and are available on request. Unless otherwise mentioned, no
statistics in this paper involve the snowball sample.
16
   There were 8 respondents who did not respond to any outcome-related variables; 5 were AEASP alums
and 3 had not attended. We treat them as survey non-respondents.
                                                                                       12


experiences. Specifically, we asked about six educational outcomes including: whether

the respondent had graduated with an economics major, applied to an economics graduate

program, applied to an economics doctoral program, attended an economics graduate

program, attended an economics doctoral program, and completed a doctoral degree in

economics.       We also asked about seven employment-related outcomes: whether the

respondent currently has an economics-related job, has an economics-related job at an

educational or research institution, has an economics-related job in academia, ever has

had an economics-related job, ever has had an economics-related job at an educational or

research institution, ever has had an economics-related job in academia, and current gross

annual salary.



       Empirical Strategy

       We think of a potential AEA Summer Program participant as choosing future

outcomes as an optimization strategy, subject to constraints on time, financial resources,

ability, alternative options, and behavioral parameters, such as his or her discount rate.

Empirically, we model the impact of participating in the AEA Summer Program on a

variety of “economics-related” outcomes, Y, for individual i as follows:

                              Yi = α + βAEASPi + XiΘ + νi ,                (1)

where AEASPi is a treatment status indicator for individual i having participated in the

AEA Summer Program, Xi is a vector of baseline characteristics, νi is the error term, and

α, β, and Θ are parameters to be estimated; β represents the average effect on outcome Y

of having participated in the Summer Program. In the tables that follow, we estimate
                                                                                         13


equation (1) using a linear probability model for ease of interpretation; however, we have

also implemented probit models which yield similar results (see Appendix Table 1).

       We focus our analysis on three subsamples of our dataset. First, we use the full

sample, which consists of every individual who applied to the AEASP and all of the

available comparison group observations (which we highlight are only from Stanford,

UC-Denver, and Duke University). The second “balanced” sample only consists of data

from the years the program was at Stanford, UC-Denver, and Duke University; thus, the

treatment group also only consists of applicants to those programs. The final sample

further limits this “balanced” sample to individuals who applied to those programs

through 2002 (“pre-2003”) to allow for sufficient time to observe some of the longer-run

outcomes.

       The key challenge in this analysis is addressing potential unobserved

heterogeneity between AEASP participants and non-participants.          Table 2 compares

background characteristics between participants and non-participants in different

subsamples. Columns (1) and (2) present the mean of characteristics of the two available

comparison groups: those who applied in all available years to a program at Stanford,

UC-Denver, or Duke in column (1) and those who applied to one of these programs

before 2003 in column (2). Columns (3), (5), and (7) present the mean characteristics of

the treatment groups from our three samples, and columns (4), (6), and (8) show the p-

value of the t-test of the difference in means between treatment and comparison groups.

       In each subsample, treatment and comparison groups are fairly similar, although

there are some differences.     That said, we highlight that nearly all differences are

statistically indistinguishable across all of the available observable characteristics using
                                                                                                      14


the balanced and pre-2003 balanced samples. Specifically, the AEA Summer Program

participants were less likely to have graduated from a Historically Black College and

University (HBCU) in the full sample and the balanced sample.                      In addition, non-

participants are about 5 years younger than participants in the full sample, due to the

inclusion of older alumni in the treatment group. They are also 1.5 years older than

participants in the pre-2003 balanced sample. Despite these individual differences, an

omnibus F-test only suggests that overall the treatment and comparison groups are

different when using the full sample where the p-value was 0. The p-value on the

omnibus F-test was 0.57 for the balanced sample and 0.42 for the pre-2003 balanced

sample, suggesting that the treatment and comparison groups are statistically similar in

these two samples.         Nevertheless, we control for observable characteristics in the

subsequent analyses.

        Due to a low survey response rate (32 percent), we also attempt to explore

whether survey respondents were different from non-respondents. Ideally, we would

have liked to have regressed a survey response dummy on a series of baseline

characteristics, such as those reported in Table 2 using the survey sample. Unfortunately,

the only characteristic that we observe for the entire survey sample is whether the

individual was female. Across all three subsamples, the coefficient on female is nearly

zero and statistically insignificant, which suggests that it is not systematically associated

with the survey response decision.17 Even more importantly, the impact of whether the

individual was female on the decision to respond is not statistically different between the

treatment and comparison groups. Appendix Table 2 reports the regression results in


17
  As mentioned in footnote 16, we treat the 8 respondents who did not respond to any outcome variables as
survey non-respondents. Treating them as respondents does not change any of the results in this exercise.
                                                                                                       15


detail.18 While admittedly a limited exercise, the estimates suggest that the estimates of

the impact of the AEASP on subsequent outcomes are not affected by differential survey

response bias.



IV.     Results

        Table 3 presents the main results of the impact of the AEASP on “economics-

related” outcomes. In columns (1)-(3) we present results using the full sample, columns

(4)-(6) show results using the “balanced” sample using data from Stanford, the UC-

Denver, and Duke, and columns (7)-(9) show results using the subset of data from the

balanced sample through 2002 (“pre-2003”). Further, we show estimates of the “raw”

impact of the AEA Summer Program on these outcomes as well as estimates conditional

on a variety of background characteristics. Specifically, we control for a quadratic in the

individual’s age, sex, race, ethnicity, number of undergraduate institutions attended,

whether she or he received a bachelor’s degree from an HBCU, whether she or he

received a bachelor’s degree from an “elite” institution, and whether at least one parent

has a graduate degree. 19 Estimated coefficients from the full set of covariates are

presented in Appendix Table 3.



        Impacts on Education Outcomes

18
   We also obtained AEA membership status as of June 2014 for the entire survey sample and regressed a
survey response dummy on AEA membership. Different from gender, current AEA membership status is
not a baseline characteristic. Again, we found no statistically significant difference in the coefficent
between treatment and comparison groups. Because AEA membership changes over time and thus may be
correlated with other time-varying characteristics such as age, we do not report the results here although
they are available upon request.
19
   We control for the age of the respondent as a quadratic in the results shown here. In unreported
regressions we have included up to a quartic in age and also limited the sample to those born after 1965.
Both strategies generated results similar to those presented here and are available from the authors on
request.
                                                                                          16


       The first panel of Table 3 presents the impact of the AEA Summer Program on

education outcomes such as the likelihood that an individual majors in economics

(defined as economics, agricultural economics, and business/applied economics) or

applies to, enrolls in, or completes a graduate program. Starting with the impact on

interest in economics at the undergraduate level, we find across the samples that AEASP

participants were about 10 percentage points more likely to graduate with a major in

economics (broadly defined) although this impact is not statistically significant in the pre-

2003 balanced sample.

       Further, we observe that AEA Summer Program participants were significantly

more likely to apply to and attend graduate programs in economics. Specifically, AEA

Summer Program participants were nearly 30 percentage points more likely to have

applied to and attended a graduate program in economics and over 40 percentage points

more likely to have applied to and attended a doctoral program in economics relative to

the comparison group. Further, program participants appear to have been about 26

percentage points more likely to complete a PhD in economics relative to the comparison

group in the most restrictive sample – those who applied before 2002 and who have had

the greatest amount of time to complete one (see column (9)). Note that while the point

estimates vary, the estimated impact of an over 200 percent increase in the likelihood of

completing a doctorate in economics (relative to the comparison group mean) holds

across the samples, and with and without available covariates.



       Impacts on Labor Market Outcomes
                                                                                        17


       The bottom panel of Table 3 presents estimates of the AEA Summer Program on

longer-run “economics-related” career outcomes, such as currently having an economics-

related job or an economics-related academic job, or ever having held a job related to

economics. In general, 45 percent of those who applied to the AEA Summer Program

were holding an economics-related job at the time of the survey and nearly 60 percent

had ever held such a job. These percentages are quite high and reflect the fact that those

who applied to the program already had some interest in economics. We focus our

discussion on results from the pre-2003 balanced sample below.

       We estimate that the AEA Summer Program increased the likelihood that

participants were holding, or ever held, a job in an economics-related occupation at the

time of the survey by about 11 percentage points, although the estimates are not

statistically significant at conventional levels. In contrast, we find that the program

significantly improved diversity in the profession as reflected in other measures. For

example, we estimate that participants were over 15 percentage points more likely to

currently have, or ever had, an academic job related to economics; participants were 30

percentage points more likely ever to have held an economics-related job in an

educational or research institution. Given that only about 5 percent of the comparison

group had an academic job related to economics at the time of the survey, only 9 percent

had ever had such a job, and around one-fifth had ever held a job in an educational or

research institution, these impacts are economically quite large.

       While impressive, we caution that these estimates must likely be interpreted as

upper-bounds of the impact of the program as we do not have a randomly-assigned

control group. However, it is notable that the estimates are fairly stable across the three
                                                                                                    18


samples and with and without controlling for available background characteristics.

Further, as shown in Appendix Table 1, they are also robust to using a non-linear probit

and to employing propensity score matching. We also note that given the program

appears to have encouraged more students to apply to graduate programs, the marginal

students may have been weaker which would bias against finding positive impacts on

PhD completion and later outcomes.20



        The AEASP’s Cumulative Impact on the Number of Economics Doctorates

        Taking the estimates at face value, we ask what impact the AEASP has likely had

on increasing diversity in the economics profession. We limit this thought exercise to the

impact on the number of doctorates awarded to minority students as we have outside

estimates of the total number of such doctorates from which to form a “universe.” Based

on the estimates in Table 3, AEASP alumni were 26 percentage points more likely to

complete a doctorate in economics than were unsuccessful applicants. To estimate the

cumulative impact of the AEASP on the number of doctorates awarded in economics, we

use the following simplified calculation. Let P be the number of minority undergraduates

who were potential applicants for economics PhD programs in a typical year, r the

likelihood that these students would have eventually completed an economics PhD

without the AEASP intervention, k the AEASP program effect, A the number of students

who attended the AEASP in a particular year, and G the total number of minority

students from that year who eventually completed an economics PhD. We then have,


20
    As evidence of the program encouraging more marginal students to apply, the coefficient estimate on
AEASP participation in a linear probability model predicting PhD completion, is negative (although
statistically insignificant) conditional on having enrolled in a PhD program in the pre-2003 balanced
sample. These results are available on request.
                                                                                                     19


                                     −  +  +  = .

This simplifies to

                                            +  = .

        In any one year the contribution of the AEASP to the proportion of doctorates

awarded to minorities is (A×k)/G. The aggregate contribution is therefore the sum of A×k

divided by the sum of G over T years:

                                             ∑  x 
                                                      .
                                               ∑

Assuming the effect of the program on completing an economics PhD estimated in the

pre-2003 balanced sample is similar in other years, we use kt = 0.26 for all t.21 Between

1993 and 2012, a total of 628 or 777 economics doctorates were conferred to minorities,

depending on the data source.22 On average 25 students attended AEASP annually (i.e.,

500 students total in 20 years). Therefore, between 1993 and 2012, between 17 and 21

percent (500/628 × 0.26 and 500/777 × 0.26) of the doctorates in economics conferred to

minorities can be directly attributed to the AEASP.23 These estimates imply that the

program was responsible for an additional 130 PhDs earned in economics and related

fields by American minorities over the 20-year period. Given that AEASP operation

costs during this period were roughly $12 million ($600,000×20, in 2013 dollars), and


21
   We assume that the applicants to the AEASP were potential applicants for economics PhD programs in
the year following their college graduation and that the treatment effect of the program applies to all
minority students who might have applied to a doctoral program in economics.
22
   We obtain the number of degrees conferred to minorities from two sources, both through NSF's
WebCASPAR database. 777 is from the NSF Survey of Earned Doctorates/Doctorate Records File and 628
is from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System Completions Survey (IPEDS CS). Note that
IPEDS CS data are only available since 1995. We impute 1993 and 1994 values using the average of 1995-
1999 data. Both numbers include U.S. citizen and permanent residents only. Minority is defined as Native
American, Black and Hispanic, the same way as defined in Figure 1.
23
   In this simple calculation, we assume that minority students awarded an economics PhD between 1993
and 2012 are equal in numbers to future PhDs generated by potential PhD applicants during this same 20-
year period.
                                                                                                          20


ignoring individuals’ opportunity costs, the implied financial cost of “producing” a new

minority PhD is about $92,500.

        To get a sense of the magnitude of this figure, consider the cost of alternative

strategies to increase racial and ethnic diversity. One strategy might be to identify

talented students at institutions that rarely send students directly to doctoral programs

(call them “solid-but-non-elite”) and pay the cost differential to send them to institutions

that do send students directly to doctoral programs (call them “elite”), and, further, set up

the students to succeed. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that this strategy,

ignoring administrative and advising costs, would require at least $500,000 per PhD

produced – roughly five times that of the AEASP.24 Alternatively, one might support a

program to help minority students to get a master’s degree in preparation for doctoral

programs. There are an increasing number of these types of programs, and they vary in

cost and duration. To our knowledge, of those with a doctoral placement focus, only

Duke and Howard have large minority student populations in their economics graduate

programs. A back-of-the-envelope calculation, ignoring administrative costs, suggests

that this strategy would cost about $300,000 per PhD produced – that is, three times that

of the AEASP.25



24
   In this thought experiment, we assume that the selected participants would need to complete four years of
undergraduate study at the elite institution, since most students entering these institutions, and especially
those going on to doctoral programs, typically start with calculus and other AP credits. Based on tuition and
costs for the 2013-2014 academic year at Duke and North Carolina A&T State University, we assume that
the cost differential between “elite” and “solid-but-non-elite” institutions is roughly $17,500/semester, or
$140,000 for a four year course of study (Duke, 2014; NC A&T, 2014). Living cost differentials add
roughly another $16,000. The likelihood of a selected student entering a doctoral degree program in
Economics is surely no more than 0.5, while the likelihood of completion conditional upon entering a
doctoral program is about 0.6 (Stock et al., 2006; Stock and Siegfried, 2013). The cost of producing a PhD
this way is at least $520,000 = $156,000/(0.5*0.6).
25
   The cost of completing a master’s degree at Howard is approximately $94,000 ($25,000 tuition/year +
$22,000 expenses/year). The cost at Duke is approximately $128,000 ($44,000 tuition/year + $20,000
expenses/year). The unweighted average is $111,000; if we generously assume that half of those selected
                                                                                                     21


        We are confident there are other, potentially lower cost, ways to increase the

number of minority PhDs and our estimates should not be interpreted as dispositive.

However, these simple thought experiments imply that the AEASP is inexpensive relative

to obvious alternatives.



V.      Conclusion

        In this paper we estimate a sizeable impact of the AEA summer program (AEASP)

on racial and ethnic diversity in the economics profession. Specifically, we find that the

program may have increased the likelihood that students pursued graduate work in

economics, were more likely to complete a doctorate and were more likely to pursue

careers related to economics. These estimates do not, however, take into consideration

the impact of the Summer Program on the caliber of the PhD programs attended by

participants nor any indirect impacts generated by having more role models and peers in

the profession.

        Obviously these estimates did not derive from a controlled experiment. They are,

however, fairly robust across a variety of specifications and with the inclusion of

covariates. While it is conceivable that residual unobserved differences between the

AEASP participants and the comparison group are biasing the estimated impacts, we are

encouraged that the coefficient estimates are relatively insensitive to the inclusion of

additional covariates. Furthermore, while ultimately we suspect that any selection bias is

likely positive, it is also worth noting that many of those AEASP alumni who were the

most talented and with the best social skills may have found non-academic careers more


will enter doctoral programs and three fourth will complete the PhD conditional upon entering a doctoral
program, the cost of producing a PhD via a master’s degree program is nearly $300,000 per PhD.
                                                                                         22


financially rewarding and exciting. The program also appears to have encouraged more

marginal students to apply to graduate school which would work against finding a

positive impact on post-doctoral outcomes. Finally, selectivity is unlikely to be time

invariant, but rather would likely reflect opportunity costs (and the selection goals of the

different hosts). Clearly a more rigorous evaluation could (and should) be contemplated

to generate more reliable and nuanced estimates of the program, such as the value of a

second year.

       This final caveat in mind, it is useful to consider why the program has likely been

so successful.    Most obviously, it has provided mathematics, statistics, writing,

presentation, and economic modelling skills of direct use to graduate study. In addition,

the shock of being confronted with an overwhelming work load and learning how to deal

with it, and more generally improve time management skills, may also have helped to

better prepare the students for graduate work. Students have also received advising on

how to prepare for graduate study, on the institutions at which they might thrive, on

which courses to take in the upcoming academic year prior to applying, and ongoing

mentoring from AEASP faculty and administrators while in graduate school and links to

subsequent support systems. Finally, the program may have had psychological effects,

by boosting confidence, providing a peer support group and introductions to wider

networks, and exposure to role models. Better understanding of the mechanisms by

which the program may be improving student interest and success in economics would be

useful to designing and improving the program in the future.
                                                                                                                   23



                                  Figure 1: Percentage of PhDs Conferred to Minorities, 1995-2012
                         16

                         14

                         12

                         10
     Percentage




                          8

                          6

                          4

                          2

                          0
                           1995         1997       1999    2001       2003    2005      2007     2009       2011
                                      All Fields          Economics          Other Social Sciences          STEM
Note: Estimates are computed using data obtained from the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System Completions Survey through NSF's WebCASPAR database.
Degree counts include U.S. citizen and permanent residents only. Minorities include
American Indian, Alaska Native, Black, and Hispanic.



                                  Figure 2: Distribution of Survey Respondents in the Application
                                                       Sample of AEASP Data
                         45
                                     Non-Alumni
                         40          Alumni

                         35
 Number of Respondents




                         30
                         25
                         20
                         15
                         10
                          5
                          0
                              1974       1978      1982     1986      1990     1994      1998        2002   2006
                                                             Year Applied to AEASP
                                                                                         24


Table 1: AEA Summer Program Enrollment, 1974 - 2012

                                                      Total Number   Average Number of
               AEASP Hosts                  Years      of Students   New Students/Year

University of California, Berkeley          1974          22                22
Northwestern University                   1975-1979      117                23
Yale University                           1980-1982       88                29
University of Wisconsin, Madison          1983-1985       87                29
Temple University                         1986-1990      137                27
Stanford University                       1991-1995      123                25
University of Texas, Austin               1996-2000       96                19
University of Colorado, Denver            2001-2003       79                26
Duke University                           2004-2007      120                30
University of California, Santa Barbara   2008-2010       71                24
University of New Mexico                    2012          20                20
Total                                                    960                25



Note: Student enrollment data refer only to new students and not returning students for
Advanced level programs at UC-Denver and Duke. Total students are approximated
numbers reported by each program director. AEASP did not operate in 2011.
                                                                                                                                                   25

Table 2: Survey Respondent Characteristics

                                                  Comparison Group                               Treatment Group
                                                            Pre-2003
                                                Balanced    Balanced        All Alumni           Balanced Alumni         Pre-2003 Balanced Alumni
                                                                                   Difference             Difference                   Difference
                                                                                    with (1)                with (1)                    with (2)
                                                 Mean        Mean      Mean        (p-value)    Mean       (p-value)        Mean       (p-value)
                                                  (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)       (5)          (6)             (7)          (8)
Personal Chacteristics
   Age                                           35.88       40.31     40.45             0.00   35.01             0.25     38.94            0.09
       2
   Age (÷100)                                    13.34       16.47     17.22             0.00   12.61             0.20     15.43            0.11
   Female                                         0.44        0.46      0.44             0.98    0.44             0.95      0.44            0.84
   Hispanic                                       0.27        0.31      0.38             0.03    0.35             0.13      0.30            0.82
   Race
      African American                            0.69        0.68      0.67             0.61    0.69             0.94       0.75           0.33
      Other races                                 0.15        0.14      0.16             0.94    0.16             0.91       0.14           0.97
      White                                       0.15        0.18      0.17             0.56    0.15             0.98       0.11           0.23
Education
   Number of undergrad institutions attended      1.48        1.41      1.43             0.57    1.39             0.29       1.37           0.76
   Undergraduate degree institution type
      HBCU                                        0.24        0.25      0.16             0.05    0.16             0.05       0.15           0.12
      Elite research university                   0.27        0.30      0.32             0.26    0.30             0.48       0.31           0.87
   Parental Education
      At least one parent has graduate degree     0.40        0.38      0.43             0.64    0.44             0.51       0.46           0.29
      Both parents below graduate degree          0.60        0.63      0.58             0.63    0.56             0.54       0.55           0.33

Omnibus F-test (p-value)                                                         0.00                     0.57                       0.42
Number of observations (range)                  130-143       64-71            306-329                  163-179                     85-91


Note: The full sample consists of the all alumni treatment group and comparison group from years of Stanford, UC-Denver, and Duke
(S-U-D). The balanced sample consists of the S-U-D treatment and comparison groups. The pre-2003 balanced sample consists of the
pre-2003 S-U-D treatment and comparison groups, which is a subset of the balanced sample. Elite research university is defined as a
very competitive and very high research activity institution according to the 2010 Carnegie Classification. The p-value of F-statistic is
obtained from the regression of the treatment on the listed covariates.
                                                                                                                                                           26

Table 3: AEA Summer Program Treatment Effect by Outcomes

                                                     Full Sample                           Balanced Sample                   Pre-2003 Balanced Sample
                                                                   Treatment                               Treatment                              Treatment
                                         Mean for     Treatment    Effect with    Mean for    Treatment    Effect with    Mean for    Treatment   Effect with
Outcomes
                                        Comparison      Effect     covariates    Comparison     Effect     covariates    Comparison     Effect    covariates
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
Education Outcomes
Graduated with an econ major               0.62          0.12**       0.12**        0.62         0.11**       0.11*         0.68        0.10         0.10
                                                        (0.05)       (0.05)                     (0.05)       (0.06)                    (0.07)       (0.08)
Applied to an econ grad program            0.43          0.27***      0.30***       0.43         0.34***      0.33***       0.44        0.35***      0.31**
                                                        (0.07)       (0.07)                     (0.07)       (0.08)                    (0.10)       (0.12)
Applied to an econ PhD program             0.23          0.37***      0.43***       0.23         0.45***      0.46***       0.16        0.49***      0.46***
                                                        (0.06)       (0.07)                     (0.07)       (0.07)                    (0.09)       (0.11)
Attended an econ grad program              0.32          0.33***      0.35***       0.32         0.39***      0.38***       0.34        0.41***      0.35***
                                                        (0.06)       (0.07)                     (0.07)       (0.07)                    (0.10)       (0.11)
Attended an econ PhD program               0.14          0.37***      0.40***       0.14         0.43***      0.43***       0.11        0.50***      0.45***
                                                        (0.05)       (0.06)                     (0.06)       (0.06)                    (0.08)       (0.10)
Completed a PhD degree in econ             0.05          0.18***      0.17***       0.05         0.14***      0.16***       0.09        0.26***      0.26**
                                                        (0.04)       (0.04)                     (0.05)       (0.05)                    (0.08)       (0.10)
Labor Market Outcomes
Have an econ-related job                   0.44          0.10**       0.08          0.44         0.06         0.07          0.45        0.16*        0.11
                                                        (0.05)       (0.05)                     (0.06)       (0.06)                    (0.08)       (0.08)
Have an econ-related job at an             0.08          0.15***      0.14***       0.08         0.16***      0.14***       0.05        0.25***      0.21***
 educational or research institution                    (0.03)       (0.04)                     (0.04)       (0.04)                    (0.06)       (0.06)
Have an econ-related academic job          0.05          0.12***      0.10***       0.05         0.08**       0.08**        0.05        0.18***      0.16***
                                                        (0.03)       (0.03)                     (0.03)       (0.03)                    (0.05)       (0.06)
Ever had an econ-related job               0.57          0.16***      0.12**        0.57         0.15***      0.13**        0.59        0.15**       0.11
                                                        (0.05)       (0.05)                     (0.06)       (0.06)                    (0.08)       (0.08)
Ever had an econ-related job at an         0.21          0.24***      0.22***       0.21         0.28***      0.23***       0.18        0.30***      0.30***
 educational or research institution                    (0.05)       (0.05)                     (0.05)       (0.05)                    (0.07)       (0.07)
Ever had an econ-related academic job      0.07          0.15***      0.10***       0.07         0.12***      0.10**        0.09        0.18***      0.15**
                                                        (0.03)       (0.03)                     (0.04)       (0.04)                    (0.06)       (0.07)
Current gross annual salary (Ln)          10.93          0.41***      0.19*        10.93         0.18         0.11         11.25        0.13         0.11
                                                        (0.11)       (0.11)                     (0.13)       (0.12)                    (0.12)       (0.11)

Number of observations (range)                        254-468                                 170-318                                 88-160
                                                                                                                                      27

Note: “An academic job” is defined as a job at an educational institution with one of the following faculty ranks: professor,
associate/assistant professor, lecturer, and instructor (TA and RA are excluded). Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. Treatment
effects with covariates impute missing values in covariates. See Appendix Table 3 for the full specification of covariates and details of
the imputation. *, **, *** represent p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                           28


REFERENCES

Alexis, Marcus. 1975. "Summer Program in Economics for Minority Students." American
Economic Review 65 (2): 502-505.

American Economic Association. 1976. “Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in the
Economics Profession." American Economic Review 66(2): 509-520.

Arcidiacono, Peter. 2005. “Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How Do Admission and
Financial Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings.” Econometrica 73(5): 1477-1524.

Backes, Ben. 2012. “Do Affirmative Action Bans Lower Minority College Enrollment and
Attainment? Evidence from Statewide Bans.” Journal of Human Resources 47 (2): 435-455.

Balafoutas, Loukas, and Matthias Sutter. 2012. “Affirmative Action Policies Promote Women and
Do Not Harm Efficiency in the Laboratory.” Science 335 (6068): 579-582.

Becker, Charles, Pietro Peretto, Gail McKinnis, and Jerome Dugan, 2007. “2007 Report from the
AEASP to the Moody’s Foundation,” Durham, NC: Duke University Department of Economics,
unpublished mimeo.

Becker, Charles M. and Gregory N. Price, 2008. “Curriculum Intensity in Graduate Preparatory
Programs: Impact on Performance and Progression to Graduate Study among Minority Students in
Economics,” in Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Charlotte V. Kuh, Eds. Doctoral Education and the
Faculty of the Future. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Blau, Francine D., Janet M. Currie, Rachel T.A. Croson, and Donna K. Ginther. 2010. “Can
Mentoring Help Female Assistant Professors? Interim Results from a Randomized Trial.” American
Economic Review 100 (May): 348-352.

Chan , Jimmy, and Erik Eyster. 2003. “Does Banning Affirmative Action Lower College Student
Quality.” American Economic Review 93 (3): 858-872.

Chung, Kim-Sau. 2000. "Role Models and Arguments for Affirmative Action." American Economic
Review 90(3): 640-648.

Collins, Susan M. 2000. “Minority Groups in the Economics Profession.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14(2): 133-148.

Duke. 2014. “Undergraduate Tuition & Fees.” Accessed on July 28, 2014:
http://finance.duke.edu/bursar/TuitionFees/tuition.php

Dickson, Lisa M. 2006. “Does Ending Affirmative Action in College Admissions Lower the
Percent of Minority Students Applying to College?” Economics of Education Review 25(1): 109-
119.
                                                                                            29


McElroy, Marjorie B. 2013. "Report: Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics
Profession." American Economic Review, 103(3): 744-55.

Fairlie, Robert W., Florian Hoffman, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2014. “A community college
instructor like me: race and ethnicity interactions in the classroom.” American Economic Review
104(8): 2567-2591.

Ginther, Donna K., and Shulamit Kahn. 2004. “Women in Economics: Moving Up or Falling Off
the Academic Career Ladder?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(3): 193-214.

Goodman, Leo A. 1961. “Snowball Sampling.” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 32(1): 148-170.

Grove, Wayne, Donald Dutkowsky, and Andrew Grodner. 2007. “Survive Then Thrive:
Determinants of Success in the Economics Ph.D. Program,” Economic Inquiry 45(4): 864-871.

Grove, Wayne and Stephen Wu. 2007. “The Search for Economics Talent: Doctoral Completion
and Research Productivity.” American Economic Review 95(2): 506-111.

Hale, Galina, and Tali Regev. 2013. “Gender Ratios at Top PhD Programs in Economics.” Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-19.

Haskins, Ron and Cecilia Elena Rouse. 2013. “Time for Change: A New Federal Strategy to
Prepare Disadvantaged Students for College.” Future of Children Policy Brief (Spring).

Hinrichs, Peter. 2012. “The Effects of Affirmative Action Bans on College Enrollment,
Educational Attainment, and the Demographic Composition of Universities.” Review of Economics
and Statistics 94(3): 712-722.

Kahn, Shulamit. 1995. “Women in the Economics Profession.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
9(4): 193-205.

Krueger, Alan and Stephen Wu, 2010, “Forecasting Job Placements of Economics Graduate
Students,” Journal of Economics Education 31(1): 81-94.

Leeds, Michael A. 1992. "Who Benefits from Affirmative Action? The Case of the AEA Summer
Minority Program 1986-90." Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(2): 149-156.

Long, Mark C. 2004. “College Applications and the Effect of Affirmative Action.” Journal of
Econometrics 121(1-2): 319-342.

Moro, Andrea, and Peter Norman. 2003. “Affirmative Action in a Competitive Economy.” Journal
of Public Economics 87 (3-4): 567-594.

NC A&T. 2014. “North Carolina A and T State University Schedule of Costs for Tuition, Fees,
Room, and Meals (per Semester) Fall 2013 - Spring 2014.” Accessed on July 28, 2014:
                                                                                                   30


http://www.ncat.edu/divisions/business-and-finance/comptroller/treasurer/treas-assets/treas-off-
forms/2013-2014/1314-fee-sheet.pdf

Niederle, Muriel, Carmit Segal, and Lise Vesterlund. 2013. “How Costly is Diversity? Affirmative
Action in Light of Gender Differences in Competitiveness.” Management Science 59 (1): 1-16.

Price, Gregory N., 2005 (July), “The causal effects of participation in the American Economic
Association Summer Minority Program,” Southern Economic Journal 72(1): 78-97.

Rouse, Cecilia Elena. 2013. “Report: Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics
Profession.” American Economic Review 103(3): 756-766.

Schotter, Andrew, and Keith Weigelt. 1992. “Asymmetric Tournaments, Equal Opportunity Laws,
and Affirmative Action: Some Experimental Results.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2), 511-
539.

Stock, Wendy A., T. Aldrich Finegan, and John J. Siegfried. 2006. “Attrition in Economics Ph.D.
Programs,” American Economic Review 96(May): 458-466.

Stock, Wendy A., and John J. Siegfried. 2013. “15 Years of Research on Graduate Education in
Economics: What Have We Learned?” Bozeman, MT: Department of Economics, Montana State
University, unpublished manuscript.
                                                                                                                                                31

Appendix Table 1: Treatment Effects from Probit Estimation and Propensity Score Matching (PSM)
                                                    Full Sample                    Balanced Sample                 Pre-2003 Balanced Sample
                                         OLS          Probit      PSM          OLS      Probit     PSM            OLS       Probit      PSM
Outcomes
                                         (1)             (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)         (9)
Education Outcomes
Graduated with an econ major              0.12**       0.12**      0.13**      0.11*      0.11*      0.12**       0.10       0.08       0.10
                                         (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.08)     (0.07)     (0.08)
Applied to an econ grad program           0.30***      0.32***     0.32***     0.33***    0.33***    0.35***      0.31**     0.32***    0.36***
                                         (0.07)       (0.07)      (0.08)      (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.08)       (0.12)     (0.11)     (0.13)
Applied to an econ PhD program            0.43***      0.50***     0.45***     0.46***    0.53***    0.48***      0.46***    0.58***    0.51***
                                         (0.07)       (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.09)     (0.08)       (0.11)     (0.14)     (0.11)
Attended an econ grad program             0.35***      0.38***     0.35***     0.38***    0.41***    0.40***      0.35***    0.38***    0.40***
                                         (0.07)       (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.08)     (0.07)       (0.11)     (0.12)     (0.13)
Attended an econ PhD program              0.40***      0.49***     0.40***     0.43***    0.52***    0.45***      0.45***    0.58***    0.50***
                                         (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.06)      (0.06)     (0.08)     (0.06)       (0.10)     (0.14)     (0.10)
Completed a PhD degree in econ            0.17***      0.21***     0.19***     0.16***    0.15***    0.15***      0.26**     0.31***    0.25**
                                         (0.04)       (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.05)       (0.10)     (0.11)     (0.10)
Labor Market Outcomes
Have an econ-related job                  0.08         0.09        0.12*       0.07       0.08       0.08         0.11       0.12       0.17*
                                         (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.09)
Have an econ-related job at an            0.14***      0.16***     0.14***     0.14***    0.14***    0.14***      0.21***    0.24***    0.26***
 educational or research institution     (0.04)       (0.05)      (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
Have an econ-related academic job         0.10***      0.11***     0.11***     0.08**     0.07***    0.07**       0.16***    0.18***    0.18***
                                         (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)
Ever had an econ-related job              0.12**       0.12**      0.14**      0.13**     0.14**     0.14**       0.11       0.11       0.15*
                                         (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.06)      (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.09)
Ever had an econ-related job at an        0.22***      0.25***     0.23***     0.23***    0.25***    0.25***      0.30***    0.34***    0.36***
 educational or research institution     (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.05)     (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.07)     (0.09)     (0.08)
Ever had an econ-related academic job     0.10***      0.12***     0.13***     0.10**     0.09**     0.11***      0.15**     0.16**     0.18***
                                         (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.07)     (0.07)     (0.06)
Current gross annual salary (Ln)          0.19*                    0.15         0.11                 0.14          0.11                 0.10
                                         (0.11)                   (0.16)       (0.12)               (0.13)        (0.11)               (0.13)
                                        0.0969923 0.0408103       0.104971   0.0556082        301         136   0.0556082        301         136
                                                                                                                                32

Note: Treatment effects of propensity score matching are estimated using the kernel matching method. The propensity score satisfies
the balancing property in all samples. Marginal effects at means are reported for the probit estimation. All treatment effects are
estimated using the same specification as in Appendix Table 3A-3M. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                          33


Appendix Table 2: Survey Response Difference by Gender
                                                     Pre-2003
                                        Balanced     Balanced
                          Full Sample    Sample       Sample
                               (1)         (2)          (3)
Panel A
Female                        0.00        0.01            0.03
                             (0.02)      (0.03)          (0.04)
Observations                 1464         922             549
Panel B
Female                        0.02        0.02            0.03
                             (0.04)      (0.04)          (0.04)
Female*AEASP                  -0.04       -0.05           -0.05
                             (0.05)      (0.07)          (0.09)
Observations                 1464         922             549


Note: Panel A reports OLS regression results of survey response dummy on female. Panel B adds
AEASP and female*AEASP as covariates to the same regression. Coefficients on AEASP are
omitted from Panel B. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, *** represent p<0.01,
p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         34




Appendix Table 3A: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Graduating with an
Economics Major
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program             0.125**     0.119**      0.112**     0.107*        0.105        0.101
                               (0.049)     (0.052)      (0.055)     (0.057)      (0.072)     (0.077)
Age                                          0.009                   -0.012                    0.067
                                           (0.022)                  (0.041)                  (0.086)
    2
Age (÷100)                                  -0.008                    0.023                   -0.091
                                           (0.026)                  (0.056)                  (0.111)
Female                                       0.045                  0.094*                     0.010
                                           (0.045)                  (0.056)                  (0.074)
Hispanic                                     0.017                   -0.015                   -0.008
                                           (0.075)                  (0.092)                  (0.156)
Black                                        0.063                   -0.000                    0.126
                                           (0.090)                  (0.112)                  (0.186)
Other                                        0.054                    0.003                    0.034
                                           (0.086)                  (0.114)                  (0.168)
# of undergraduate                        -0.058**                 -0.083**                   -0.062
  institutions attended                    (0.029)                  (0.038)                  (0.055)
BA from an HBCU                             -0.035                   -0.081                    0.037
                                           (0.062)                  (0.078)                  (0.092)
BA from an elite institution                -0.046                   -0.049                   -0.046
                                           (0.052)                  (0.066)                  (0.094)
At least one parent has                     -0.064                   -0.058                   -0.075
 graduate degree                           (0.048)                  (0.060)                  (0.079)

Number of Observations           439         439          298         298          153         153
R-squared                       0.016       0.050        0.014       0.064        0.014       0.115
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         35




Appendix Table 3B: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Applying for an Economics
Graduate Program
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.273*** 0.301***         0.341*** 0.327***        0.348***     0.305**
                              (0.071)  (0.073)          (0.074)  (0.078)         (0.105)     (0.116)
Age                                      0.034                     0.034                       0.077
                                       (0.034)                   (0.051)                     (0.071)
    2
Age (÷100)                              -0.048                    -0.036                      -0.079
                                       (0.042)                   (0.068)                     (0.083)
Female                                  -0.039                     0.004                       0.024
                                       (0.061)                   (0.073)                     (0.104)
Hispanic                                -0.044                    -0.020                      -0.226
                                       (0.098)                   (0.113)                     (0.270)
Black                                    0.009                     0.064                      -0.163
                                       (0.113)                   (0.136)                     (0.298)
Other                                    0.028                     0.141                       0.080
                                       (0.119)                   (0.153)                     (0.243)
# of undergraduate                       0.030                    -0.009                      -0.032
  institutions attended                (0.036)                   (0.044)                     (0.072)
BA from an HBCU                        -0.142*                    -0.116                      -0.040
                                       (0.084)                   (0.097)                     (0.146)
BA from an elite institution           -0.130*                    -0.138                     -0.234*
                                       (0.070)                   (0.087)                     (0.121)
At least one parent has                  0.093                     0.067                       0.053
  graduate degree                      (0.062)                   (0.076)                     (0.111)

Number of Observations           261         261          176         176           88          88
R-squared                       0.059       0.142        0.117       0.181        0.125       0.256
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         36




Appendix Table 3C: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Applying for an Economics
Ph.D. Program
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.373*** 0.430***         0.450*** 0.458***        0.487*** 0.462***
                              (0.064)  (0.065)          (0.070)  (0.072)         (0.092)  (0.108)
Age                                      0.016                     0.038                   -0.053
                                       (0.035)                   (0.056)                  (0.082)
    2
Age (÷100)                              -0.030                    -0.053                    0.063
                                       (0.042)                   (0.074)                  (0.096)
Female                                  -0.030                    -0.038                    0.010
                                       (0.061)                   (0.072)                  (0.102)
Hispanic                                -0.087                    -0.106                   -0.328
                                       (0.092)                   (0.102)                  (0.282)
Black                                   -0.077                    -0.062                   -0.407
                                       (0.107)                   (0.120)                  (0.305)
Other                                   -0.021                     0.070                   -0.126
                                       (0.116)                   (0.138)                  (0.204)
# of undergraduate                      0.061*                     0.039                    0.016
  institutions attended                (0.037)                   (0.043)                  (0.086)
BA from an HBCU                         -0.106                    -0.061                   -0.062
                                       (0.091)                   (0.113)                  (0.178)
BA from an elite institution           -0.125*                    -0.123                 -0.217**
                                       (0.068)                   (0.079)                  (0.109)
At least one parent has               0.152**                   0.197**                   0.193*
  graduate degree                      (0.063)                   (0.077)                  (0.114)

Number of Observations           254         254          170         170           88          88
R-squared                       0.103       0.192        0.188       0.261        0.220       0.344
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         37




Appendix Table 3D: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Attending an Economics
Graduate Program
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.329*** 0.351***         0.387*** 0.381***        0.412*** 0.347***
                              (0.064)  (0.066)          (0.069)  (0.071)         (0.100)  (0.113)
Age                                     0.056*                     0.046                    0.091
                                       (0.031)                   (0.045)                  (0.072)
    2
Age (÷100)                             -0.072*                    -0.049                   -0.090
                                       (0.038)                   (0.059)                  (0.084)
Female                                  -0.063                    -0.039                   -0.052
                                       (0.059)                   (0.070)                  (0.104)
Hispanic                                -0.017                     0.009                   -0.033
                                       (0.093)                   (0.105)                  (0.239)
Black                                    0.060                     0.071                   -0.035
                                       (0.108)                   (0.130)                  (0.277)
Other                                    0.079                     0.129                   -0.037
                                       (0.115)                   (0.144)                  (0.217)
# of undergraduate                       0.031                     0.001                   -0.035
  institutions attended                (0.035)                   (0.043)                  (0.073)
BA from an HBCU                       -0.164**                    -0.135                   -0.043
                                       (0.079)                   (0.092)                  (0.153)
BA from an elite institution           -0.131*                    -0.099                   -0.158
                                       (0.069)                   (0.085)                  (0.121)
At least one parent has                 0.104*                     0.086                    0.150
  graduate degree                      (0.062)                   (0.075)                  (0.116)

Number of Observations           281         281          194         194           92          92
R-squared                       0.085       0.170        0.143       0.208        0.166       0.281
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         38




Appendix Table 3E: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Attending an Economics Ph.D.
Program
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.368*** 0.403***         0.433*** 0.433***        0.500*** 0.454***
                              (0.053)  (0.056)          (0.061)  (0.063)         (0.085)  (0.104)
Age                                      0.044                     0.045                   -0.037
                                       (0.028)                   (0.042)                  (0.080)
    2
Age (÷100)                             -0.060*                    -0.054                    0.050
                                       (0.034)                   (0.055)                  (0.093)
Female                                  -0.027                    -0.043                   -0.029
                                       (0.058)                   (0.067)                  (0.099)
Hispanic                                -0.083                    -0.060                   -0.147
                                       (0.088)                   (0.097)                  (0.228)
Black                                   -0.033                    -0.046                   -0.253
                                       (0.102)                   (0.115)                  (0.265)
Other                                    0.018                     0.021                   -0.181
                                       (0.106)                   (0.126)                  (0.180)
# of undergraduate                       0.050                     0.019                    0.021
  institutions attended                (0.036)                   (0.043)                  (0.083)
BA from an HBCU                        -0.145*                    -0.097                   -0.089
                                       (0.080)                   (0.097)                  (0.171)
BA from an elite institution          -0.146**                   -0.134*                  -0.182*
                                       (0.064)                   (0.075)                  (0.106)
At least one parent has                0.136**                  0.157**                  0.260**
  graduate degree                      (0.060)                   (0.072)                  (0.112)

Number of Observations           281         281          194         194           92          92
R-squared                       0.108       0.186        0.183       0.239        0.241       0.355
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         39




Appendix Table 3F: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Completing an Economics
Ph.D. Program
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.179*** 0.170***         0.140*** 0.156***        0.260***    0.255**
                              (0.040)   (0.041)         (0.045)  (0.046)         (0.081)     (0.096)
Age                                    0.065***                    0.043                       0.031
                                        (0.021)                  (0.032)                     (0.109)
    2
Age (÷100)                            -0.070***                   -0.038                      -0.029
                                        (0.026)                  (0.044)                     (0.141)
Female                                   -0.070                   -0.026                      -0.043
                                        (0.046)                  (0.051)                     (0.097)
Hispanic                                 -0.064                   -0.062                      -0.182
                                        (0.064)                  (0.071)                     (0.168)
Black                                    -0.095                   -0.071                      -0.245
                                        (0.083)                  (0.089)                     (0.219)
Other                                    -0.006                    0.006                      -0.089
                                        (0.093)                  (0.089)                     (0.158)
# of undergraduate                       -0.019                 -0.074**                      -0.064
  institutions attended                 (0.033)                  (0.031)                     (0.087)
BA from an HBCU                          -0.070                   -0.045                      -0.043
                                        (0.057)                  (0.065)                     (0.138)
BA from an elite institution              0.005                    0.010                      -0.014
                                        (0.054)                  (0.062)                     (0.106)
At least one parent has                0.154***                 0.172***                    0.300***
  graduate degree                       (0.050)                  (0.057)                     (0.109)

Number of Observations           278         278          191         191           90          90
R-squared                       0.041       0.145        0.038       0.182        0.087       0.243
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         40




Appendix Table 3G: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Having an Economics-Related
Job
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program             0.101**       0.084       0.064        0.075      0.155*        0.105
                               (0.050)     (0.053)      (0.056)     (0.058)      (0.079)     (0.082)
Age                                          0.025                    0.024                 -0.196**
                                           (0.024)                  (0.041)                  (0.079)
    2
Age (÷100)                                  -0.024                   -0.025                  0.236**
                                           (0.029)                  (0.054)                  (0.098)
Female                                    -0.105**                   -0.072                   -0.077
                                           (0.048)                  (0.058)                  (0.085)
Hispanic                                     0.067                  0.150*                     0.166
                                           (0.072)                  (0.084)                  (0.130)
Black                                       -0.084                    0.010                    0.105
                                           (0.088)                  (0.108)                  (0.172)
Other                                       -0.023                    0.029                    0.177
                                           (0.086)                  (0.113)                  (0.169)
# of undergraduate                           0.005                    0.025                    0.039
  institutions attended                    (0.030)                  (0.037)                  (0.051)
BA from an HBCU                              0.008                   -0.040                   -0.054
                                           (0.066)                  (0.079)                  (0.108)
BA from an elite institution                -0.011                    0.041                    0.140
                                           (0.055)                  (0.068)                  (0.095)
At least one parent has                      0.067                    0.063                    0.096
 graduate degree                           (0.050)                  (0.061)                  (0.088)

Number of Observations           468         468          318         318          160         160
R-squared                       0.009       0.059        0.004       0.071        0.024       0.168
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         41




Appendix Table 3H: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Having an Economics-Related
Job at an Educational/Research Institution
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.152*** 0.141***         0.156*** 0.135***        0.253*** 0.214***
                              (0.034)  (0.037)          (0.040)  (0.042)         (0.056)  (0.059)
Age                                     -0.006                     0.028                   -0.048
                                       (0.018)                   (0.025)                  (0.057)
    2
Age (÷100)                               0.009                    -0.037                    0.049
                                       (0.023)                   (0.033)                  (0.069)
Female                                 -0.063*                    -0.041                   -0.039
                                       (0.037)                   (0.043)                  (0.073)
Hispanic                                 0.031                     0.080                    0.067
                                       (0.062)                   (0.074)                  (0.146)
Black                                   -0.016                     0.060                    0.066
                                       (0.074)                   (0.087)                  (0.166)
Other                                   -0.015                     0.051                    0.046
                                       (0.069)                   (0.087)                  (0.140)
# of undergraduate                       0.008                    -0.011                   -0.031
  institutions attended                (0.025)                   (0.029)                  (0.041)
BA from an HBCU                         -0.008                    -0.034                   -0.068
                                       (0.051)                   (0.057)                  (0.086)
BA from an elite institution          -0.090**                    -0.077                   -0.024
                                       (0.042)                   (0.052)                  (0.080)
At least one parent has               0.132***                  0.158***                 0.155**
  graduate degree                      (0.041)                   (0.049)                  (0.071)

Number of Observations           447         447          308         308          153         153
R-squared                       0.032       0.073        0.042       0.093        0.103       0.160
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         42




Appendix Table 3I: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Having an Econ-Related
Academic Job
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.121*** 0.095***          0.081**     0.082**     0.183*** 0.160***
                              (0.029)  (0.030)          (0.032)     (0.034)      (0.054)  (0.060)
Age                                      0.013                      0.034*                 -0.008
                                       (0.016)                      (0.019)               (0.051)
    2
Age (÷100)                              -0.006                       -0.036                 0.012
                                       (0.020)                      (0.026)               (0.063)
Female                                  -0.032                       -0.007                -0.038
                                       (0.032)                      (0.034)               (0.071)
Hispanic                                -0.060                       -0.058                -0.006
                                       (0.051)                      (0.059)               (0.155)
Black                                   -0.085                       -0.026                 0.066
                                       (0.065)                      (0.073)               (0.167)
Other                                   -0.017                        0.023                 0.125
                                       (0.067)                      (0.072)               (0.142)
# of undergraduate                       0.005                       -0.025                -0.028
  institutions attended                (0.023)                      (0.021)               (0.040)
BA from an HBCU                         -0.023                       -0.044                -0.074
                                       (0.044)                      (0.042)               (0.075)
BA from an elite institution            -0.043                       -0.018                 0.010
                                       (0.037)                      (0.041)               (0.074)
At least one parent has               0.079**                       0.082**                 0.099
  graduate degree                      (0.037)                      (0.038)               (0.068)

Number of Observations           421         421          294         294          144         144
R-squared                       0.028       0.095        0.019       0.093        0.064       0.124
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         43




Appendix Table 3J: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Ever Had an Economics-
Related Job
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program             0.156***    0.125**     0.152***    0.131**       0.150**        0.108
                                (0.050)    (0.052)      (0.056)     (0.057)      (0.075)      (0.076)
Age                                          0.014                    0.037                 -0.193***
                                           (0.023)                  (0.040)                   (0.059)
    2
Age (÷100)                                  -0.013                   -0.043                  0.237***
                                           (0.028)                  (0.053)                   (0.070)
Female                                      -0.072                   -0.018                    -0.028
                                           (0.046)                  (0.058)                   (0.081)
Hispanic                                   0.166**                 0.249***                   0.195*
                                           (0.065)                  (0.075)                   (0.108)
Black                                        0.022                    0.031                    -0.003
                                           (0.077)                  (0.093)                   (0.136)
Other                                       -0.011                   -0.008                    -0.005
                                           (0.078)                  (0.104)                   (0.145)
# of undergraduate                          -0.009                    0.000                    -0.004
  institutions attended                    (0.028)                  (0.033)                   (0.048)
BA from an HBCU                             -0.055                   -0.071                     0.013
                                           (0.067)                  (0.083)                   (0.105)
BA from an elite institution                -0.026                   -0.002                     0.098
                                           (0.051)                  (0.064)                   (0.087)
At least one parent has                    0.108**                  0.099*                      0.077
 graduate degree                           (0.046)                  (0.058)                   (0.083)

Number of Observations           443         443          295         295          159         159
R-squared                       0.024       0.079        0.025       0.108        0.025       0.166
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         44




Appendix Table 3K: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Ever Had an Economics-
Related Job at an Educational/Research Institution
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.244*** 0.217***         0.277*** 0.228***        0.301*** 0.300***
                              (0.045)  (0.049)          (0.053)  (0.055)         (0.071)  (0.074)
Age                                     -0.009                    0.059*                    0.072
                                       (0.022)                   (0.031)                  (0.068)
    2
Age (÷100)                               0.012                   -0.077*                   -0.082
                                       (0.027)                   (0.041)                  (0.084)
Female                                  -0.059                     0.002                    0.022
                                       (0.047)                   (0.055)                  (0.083)
Hispanic                               0.136*                   0.209**                    -0.033
                                       (0.071)                   (0.081)                  (0.159)
Black                                   -0.007                     0.101                   -0.152
                                       (0.086)                   (0.101)                  (0.193)
Other                                    0.014                     0.083                   -0.114
                                       (0.088)                   (0.114)                  (0.169)
# of undergraduate                      -0.008                    -0.051                 -0.122***
  institutions attended                (0.030)                   (0.035)                  (0.047)
BA from an HBCU                          0.041                     0.007                    0.089
                                       (0.064)                   (0.074)                  (0.108)
BA from an elite institution            -0.035                    -0.036                    0.006
                                       (0.053)                   (0.064)                  (0.086)
At least one parent has               0.216***                  0.233***                  0.170**
  graduate degree                      (0.049)                   (0.058)                  (0.083)

Number of Observations           436         436          292         292          158         158
R-squared                       0.054       0.121        0.083       0.178        0.098       0.189
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         45




Appendix Table 3L: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Ever Had an Econ-Related
Academic Job
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program           0.146*** 0.102***         0.117***     0.101**     0.180***     0.147**
                              (0.033)  (0.035)          (0.038)     (0.039)      (0.058)     (0.065)
Age                                      0.022                      0.053**                    0.036
                                       (0.017)                      (0.022)                  (0.055)
    2
Age (÷100)                              -0.016                      -0.057*                   -0.037
                                       (0.021)                      (0.029)                  (0.068)
Female                                 -0.065*                       -0.028                   -0.101
                                       (0.036)                      (0.041)                  (0.075)
Hispanic                                -0.051                       -0.015                   -0.070
                                       (0.060)                      (0.070)                  (0.142)
Black                                   -0.067                        0.004                   -0.038
                                       (0.069)                      (0.081)                  (0.164)
Other                                    0.048                        0.063                   -0.012
                                       (0.070)                      (0.081)                  (0.137)
# of undergraduate                      -0.011                     -0.054**                   -0.054
  institutions attended                (0.023)                      (0.022)                  (0.041)
BA from an HBCU                         -0.035                       -0.063                   -0.122
                                       (0.049)                      (0.053)                  (0.082)
BA from an elite institution          -0.085**                       -0.067                   -0.093
                                       (0.040)                      (0.046)                  (0.077)
At least one parent has                0.100**                      0.099**                    0.079
  graduate degree                      (0.040)                      (0.044)                  (0.071)

Number of Observations           443         443          295         295          159         159
R-squared                       0.032       0.101        0.029       0.117        0.052       0.125
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
                                                                                                         46




Appendix Table 3M: Impact of AEA Summer Program on Current Gross Annual Income
                                   Full Sample           Balanced Sample         Pre-2003 Balanced
Variables                         (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)
AEA Summer Program             0.409***    0.191*        0.179        0.109       0.130        0.110
                                (0.111)    (0.111)      (0.126)     (0.121)      (0.125)     (0.115)
Age                                       0.121***                    0.006                    0.006
                                           (0.042)                  (0.082)                  (0.090)
    2
Age (÷100)                                -0.103**                    0.055                    0.041
                                           (0.048)                  (0.105)                  (0.106)
Female                                      -0.073                   -0.117                 -0.283**
                                           (0.080)                  (0.111)                  (0.131)
Hispanic                                    -0.069                   -0.085                   -0.142
                                           (0.129)                  (0.160)                  (0.247)
Black                                       -0.137                   -0.191                   -0.196
                                           (0.131)                  (0.178)                  (0.257)
Other                                       -0.163                   -0.210                  -0.394*
                                           (0.127)                  (0.183)                  (0.219)
# of undergraduate                        -0.145**                  -0.207*                   -0.126
  institutions attended                    (0.067)                  (0.106)                  (0.090)
BA from an HBCU                              0.088                    0.075                   -0.142
                                           (0.113)                  (0.158)                  (0.187)
BA from an elite institution              0.392***                 0.398***                 0.468***
                                           (0.087)                  (0.118)                  (0.122)
At least one parent has                    0.190**                   0.217*                   0.213*
 graduate degree                           (0.079)                  (0.110)                  (0.123)

Number of Observations           332         332          220         220          131         131
R-squared                       0.049       0.282        0.009       0.249        0.008       0.372
Note: Regressions with covariates impute missing values in covariates. For continuous covariates,
we impute the missing values by the treatment/comparison group mean and include imputation
dummies in regressions. For dummies, we impute the missing values by 0 and include imputation
dummies in regressions. The list of covariates listed in this table, plus imputation dummies and a
constant term, constitute the full specification for column (2), (4), and (6). It is also the
specification used for treatment effect with covariates in Table 3 and Appendix Table 1."Elite"
institutions are those identified as those that are "very competitive and very high research activity"
by the 2010 Carnegie Classification. Robust standard are errors in parentheses. *, **, *** represent
p<0.01, p<0.05, p<0.1, respectively.
