                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ON THE MEASURE OF DISTORTIONS

                                          Hugo A. Hopenhayn

                                         Working Paper 20404
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20404


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Hugo A. Hopenhayn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
On the Measure of Distortions
Hugo A. Hopenhayn
NBER Working Paper No. 20404
August 2014
JEL No. O11,O4,O47

                                            ABSTRACT

Abstract The paper considers formally the mapping from distortions in the allocations of resources
across firms to aggregate productivity. TFP gaps are characterized as the integral of a strictly concave
function with respect to an employment-weighted measure of distortions. Size related distortions are
shown to correspond to a mean preserving spread of this measure, explaining the stronger effects on
TFP found in the literature. In general, the effect of correlation between distortions and productivity
is shown to be ambiguous; conditions are given to determine its sign. An empirical lower bound on
distortions based on size distribution of firms is derived and analyzed, revealing that substantial rank
reversals in firm size are necessary for distortions to explain large TFP gaps. The effect of curvature
on the impact and measurement of distortions is also considered.


Hugo A. Hopenhayn
UCLA
Department of Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hopen@econ.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
Among the factors explaining the disparity of aggregate productivity across
countries, misallocation of resources across firms has been the focus of re-
cent macro development literature (Alfaro et al. [2007], Banerjee and Duflo
[2005], Guner et al. [2008], Hsieh and Klenow [2009b], Restuccia and Roger-
son [2008], Buera et al. [2011], Bartelsman et al. [2013].) The key finding
of these papers is that institutions and policies preventing the equalization
of the marginal value of inputs across firms can potentially generate large
losses in aggregate productivity. The benchmark models used in most pa-
pers (Hopenhayn [1992], Hopenhayn and Rogerson [1993], Jovanovic [1982],
Lucas Jr [1978], Melitz [2003]) share a similar structure. So far, the results
have been mainly quantitative and while motivated conjectures about the
mapping between distortions and aggregate TFP, there are no theoretical
results. The main objective of this paper is to fill this gap, providing a
precise characterization of the link between the structure of these inter-firm
distortions and aggregate productivity that is summarized in a measure of
distortions.
    The basic setting considered here has a set of firms producing a homoge-
nous product using labor as the only inputs. Firms produce output with a
homogenous production function that exhibits decreasing returns and with
an idiosyncratic productivity. The optimal allocation of labor across firms
was considered by Lucas Jr [1978]. It leads to an endogenous size distribu-
tion of firms after equating marginal product of labor and a simple expression
for the aggregate production function. Aggregate productivity in this undis-
torted economy is a geometric mean of firm level productivities.1
    A series of papers have considered explicit policies or constraints that
generate wedges in the allocation of resources across firms2 as a source of
misallocation. This was followed by very influential papers (see in particu-
lar Restuccia and Rogerson [2008], Guner et al. [2008], Hsieh and Klenow
[2009a], Bartelsman et al. [2009]) that abstract from policies and considers
   1
     As shown in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a] there is an equivalence between a model of
product differentiation Dixit and Stiglitz [1977], Melitz [2003] with curvature on the de-
mand side and this homogenous good model.
   2
     Barriers to the reallocation of labor resulting from firing costs were first considered
in Hopenhayn and Rogerson [1993]. Financial constraints as a source of misallocation in
Buera et al. [2011], Caselli and Gennaioli [2013], D’Erasmo and Moscoso Boedo [2012],
Jeong and Townsend [2007], Midrigan and Xu [2013], Moll [2012], Quintin [2008], among
others. Labor taxes and exemptions by Garicano et al. [2013], Gourio and Roys [2013],
among others. Variable markups by Epifani and Gancia [2011], Peters [2013]. Information
and learning are considered by Jovanovic [2014], David et al. [2014].


                                             1
the quantitative effect of hypothetical barriers preventing the reallocation of
labor represented by a joint distribution firm specific wedges and productiv-
ity. The main results suggested by this literature are: 1) Large distortions
can lead to large effects on productivity; 2) More concentrated distortions
have larger effects; 3) distortions that result in a reallocation of labor from
establishments with higher TFP to those with lower TFP are more detri-
mental to productivity than those that inefficiently reallocate labor within
size classes.
     The analysis in these papers is purely quantitative and there is no theo-
retical analysis establishing these results. To develop some intuition, consider
distortions that move employment from a set of firms to another set, starting
at the efficient allocation. First note that small changes have a second order
effect, regardless of the original size (proportional to TFP) of the firms in-
volved since at the efficient allocation marginal productivities are equalized.
Since first order effects are zero, the effects of the reallocation on aggregate
TFP must depend on infra-marginal considerations. The first observation
is that, fixing the number of workers reallocated if the reallocation involves
small firms it will affect a larger proportion of their employment, digging
deeper in the infra-marginal distortion. This is more damaging to aggregate
TFP than a reallocation involving the same number of workers and firms, but
the involved firms are larger (this would include reallocating those workers
from large to small firms.) Second, for a given amount of total employment
reallocated, the negative effect on productivity depends on the fraction of
original efficient employment being reallocated (depth) and not on the spe-
cific source and destination. For example taking 10% of employment from
one firm with 1000 employees is equivalent to taking 10% employment from
10 firms with 100 employees each.
     These two observations lead to the following measure of distortions. Let
ni be the employment of a firm under the efficient allocation and θi ni its
distorted employment. The measure of distortions N (θ) counts the total
fraction of aggregate original employment -regardless of source- that was
was distorted by θ. This measure is sufficient to derive the effects on ag-
gregate productivity. Moreover, the ratio of TFP in the     ´ distorted economy
to the undistorted level has a simple representation: θα dN (θ) , where α
is the degree of decreasing returns faced by firms. As 0 < α < 1, it follows
immediately that mean preserving spread of this measure leads to lower pro-
ductivity. The notion of a mean preserving spread can be interpreted as
putting more employment mass at "larger distortions" and "concentrating"
more the distortions. This also explains the quantitative results found in
Restuccia and Rogerson [2008].

                                       2
    While the concentration of distortions leads to lower TFP, the correlation
of wedges (the marginal product gap) and firm level productivity (or equally,
size in the optimal allocation) has ambiguous effects, contrary to conjectures
in the literature. The paper provides a necessary and sufficient condition so
that increases in the correlation between wedges and productivity lead to de-
creases in TFP. This condition and examples that follow, suggest that while
in highly distorted economies it is likely to hold, under plausible conditions
increases in correlation can result in higher aggregate TFP.
    As an application of our results, we provide an answer to the following
question: given two size distributions of firms F and G, where F corresponds
to an undistorted economy and G to a distorted one, what are the minimum
set of distortions (in terms of their effect on TFP) that rationalize G? The
characterization reduces the problem to one of assortative matching with the
simple solution of setting θ (n) so that F (n) = G (θ (n)) for all n.3 I then
apply this method to obtain lower bounds on distortions for India, China and
Mexico taking the US as a benchmark. The effects on productivity according
to this lower bound are meager: about 3.5% for India and Mexico and 0.5%
for China. I also show that the size distributions generated by the distortions
considered in Restuccia and Rogerson [2008] can be also rationalized with
distortions that imply much smaller TFP decrease (e.g. 7% instead of 49%.)
The difference is explained due to the presence of substantial degree of rank
reversals in their simulations as well as in the calculated wedges in Hsieh and
Klenow [2009a]. This result also suggests that without explicitly measuring
distortions or deriving them from observed policies, there is not much hope
of establishing large effects if they are only disciplined by consistency with
measured size distributions.
    Another important factor in determining the effect of distortions is the as-
sumed curvature in the firm level production function (or demand), for which
there is no general consensus. For instance, while Restuccia and Rogerson
[2008] and many of the papers that follow take a value α = 0.85, the analysis
in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a] use an implied value α = 1/2.Ie first establish
that for given measure of distortions, the effects on productivity are zero
at the extremes α = 0 and α = 1, so that the impact of α in the calcu-
lations is non-monotonic. I then consider the question of curvature in the
context of the calculations carried in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a]. There are
more subtleties to the analysis as given data on firms inputs and output,
the implied productivities and calculated distortions also depend on α. Thus
the measure of distortions also varies with α. Surprisingly, the effect of α is
  3
      This is in line with the method used in Alfaro et al. [2007]



                                              3
perfectly determined going monotonically from no productivity losses when
α = 0 to maximum losses for α = 1. The proof is remarkable as it reduces
the TFP ratio to a certainty equivalent and then uses standard analysis of
risk aversion.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the benchmark
model. Section 3 discusses the distorted economy. Section 4 develops the
measure of distortions, derives the mains Propositions and discusses its im-
plications. Section 5 derives the comparative statics results on correlation of
distortions. Section 6 derives the lower bound of distortions using the size
distribution of firms and provides calculations of those bounds for a set of
countries. Section 7 considers the role of curvature and Section 8 concludes.


2        Baseline model
This section describes a simple baseline model that will be used throughout
the paper. The model is a simplified version of Hopenhayn and Rogerson
[1993] that builds on Hopenhayn [1992] but without entry and exit. and
closely related to Lucas Jr [1978] and Jovanovic [1982]. The production side
of the economy is given by a collection of firms i = 1, ...M , with production
functions
                                  yi = zi nαi ,
where zi is an idiosyncratic productivity shock for firm/establishment i =
1, ...n.4 Production displays decreasing returns (α < 1) in the only input
labor and total endowment in the economy N is supplied inelastically. Firms
behave competitively taking prices as given. This economy has a unique
competitive equilibrium ({ni } , w), where ni is the profit maximizing input
choice for firm i and labor market clears. The competitive equilibrium is
also the solution to the planners problem:

                                                     X
                                              max          zi nαi
                                                ni
                                                       i
                                                X
                                  subject to:        ni ≤ N.

        The first order conditions for this problem imply that
                                                     1
                                  ln ni = a0 +          ln zi                         (2.1)
                                                    1−α
    4
        We won’t make any distinctions here. The data used later is based on establishments.


                                                4
where a0 is a constant that depends on α, N and the vector of firm level
productivities. Substituting in the production function,
                                                       
                                                1
                    ln yi = ln zi + α a0 +        ln zi            (2.2)
                                              1−α
                                      1
                          = αa0 +         ln zi                    (2.3)
                                    1−α
                          = ln ni − a0 (1 − α)                     (2.4)
is also proportional to zi , implying that at the efficient allocation yi /ni =
y/n = aα−1
         0   ≡ a for all i.5 Finally, using the aggregate resource constraint
to substitute for a, it follows that
                                           !1−α
                                  X 1
                             y=      zi1−α      N α.
                                        i

This is an aggregate production function of the same class as the underlying
                                                                     1
                                                                        1−α
                                                                             .6 This
                                                               P 1−α
firm-level production function, with TFP parameter given by      i zi
technology exhibits decreasing returns in the aggregate, as firms here are
treated as a fixed factor. This can be more clearly seen, dividing the first
term by M 1−α
                                 1
                                     1−α
                        y = Ezi  1−α
                                          M 1−α N α .                 (2.5)

This aggregate production function has constant returns to scale in firms and
other inputs (in our example, labor), where aggregate TFP is a geometric
mean of firm level productivity. Throughout the paper I refer to the term in
brackets as TFP.7


3       The distorted economy
This section analyzes the consequences of deviations from the optimal al-
location of resources across productive units. Figure 3.1 provides a useful
picture of the type of distortions that might occur:
    The solid line shows an optimal allocation, where ln ni is a linear function
of ln zi . The dots represent actual employment.
    5
     This would obviously not hold when with a fixed cost in terms of overhead labor, as
used in Bartelsman et al. [2013].
   6
     Similar aggregation is given in Melitz [2003]
   7
     In doing so, I treat firms as a form of capital. For most of the analysis the number of
firms is constant, so this distinction is irrelevant.


                                             5
                   Figure 3.1: Wedges in marginal product

  1. ni not equal for all firms with the same zi , termed uncorrelated distor-
     tions;
                                1
  2. average ln ni (z) 6= a + 1−α  z, termed correlated distortions, in the case
     of Figure 3.1 it is a distortion that results in reallocation of labor from
     more to less productive firms.
Both of these distortions result in losses of productivity as marginal prod-
uct (or the marginal value of labor) is not equated across productive units.
As an accounting device and following the literature, it is useful to model
these distortions as firm-specific implicit taxes/subsidies that create a wedge
between its revenues and output:

                       ri = (1 − τi ) yi = (1 − τi ) zi nαi
                                                  1
                          = α (zi (1 − τi )) 1−α ,

where α is a constant that depends only on the equilibrium wage. Equilib-
rium in this economy will be identical in terms of allocations to the equilib-
rium of an undistorted economy where the distribution of firm productivities
is changed to zi (1 − τi ) . Total revenues are given by
                                                    α
                                                       1−α
                    r = N α M 1−α E [zi (1 − τi )] 1−α                  (3.1)

and total output            ˆ             ˆ
                       y=       yi di =       ri (1 − τi )−1 di


                                          6
                  ´                                                        1
            y         ri (1 − τi )−1 di   E (1 − τi )−1 (zi (1 − τi )) 1−α
              =            ´            =                        1         .   (3.2)
            r                ri                E (zi (1 − τi )) 1−α
Using equations (3.1) and (3.2), it follows that
                                                                    1
                           α    1−α E   (1 − τi )−1 (zi (1 − τi )) 1−α
                  y=N M                                     1
                                                                α     .       (3.3)
                                           E (zi (1 − τi )) 1−α

3.1    Distortions and aggregate productivity: some examples
There is a general consensus in the literature (see for example Restuccia and
Rogerson [2008], Guner et al. [2008], Hsieh and Klenow [2009a], Bartelsman
et al. [2013]) that correlated distortions that implicitly tax high productivity
firms and subsidize low productivity ones are more damaging to aggregate
productivity than those that are uncorrelated to size. This section shows
that under a homogenous production function, such presumption is not nec-
essarily true.
    I will first consider three examples that illustrate some of the key insights.
Example. There are two types of firms with productivities z1 = 1 and
z2 = 2. Suppose there are 16 firms of each type, a total labor endowment
N = 2000 and α = 12 . It is easily verified that the optimal allocation requires
n1 = 25 and n2 = 100 and total output y = 400.
    Uncorrelated distortions for low productivity firms. Now suppose that 12
type 1 firms are excluded from production while 4 of them get 100 work-
ers. This gives a feasible set of distortions as it is easily verified that total
employment doesn’t change and total output y = 360.
    Uncorrelated distortions for high productivity firms. Assume instead that
3 type 2 firms are excluded from production while one of them gets 400
workers. This does not change aggregate employment and also gives total
output y = 360.
    Correlated distortions. Now assume 12 firms of type 1 are excluded from
production while 1 firm of type 2 gets 400 workers. Agains, this does not
change aggregate employment and also total output y = 360.
    What do all these examples have in common? In all cases employment
in some firms is dropped to zero while for other firms it is multiplied by
4, relative to the efficient allocation. Moreover, in all cases the original
amount of employment that is affected by each of these distortions is exactly
the same. In the first case, the employment dropped to zero is that of 12
type 1 firms giving a total of 12 × 25 = 300. In turn, 4 of these firms had

                                             7
employment quadrupled so the total employment affected by this distortion
is 4 × 25 = 100. In the second case, the three firms of type 2 excluded from
production represent an original total employment of 300 while the one firm
whose employment quadrupled had 100 workers. It is easily verified that the
same is true for the last case.
    The examples suggest that what matters for total productivity is not
what type of firms are hit by each distortion but the total original em-
ployment affected by them. In the next section we prove this conjecture,
providing a general characterization of distortions.


4    The Measure of Distortions and Aggregate Pro-
     ductivity
                                                                      1
For the undistorted economy, employment of each firm n (z) = az 1−α , where
a is a constant that depends on the total labor endowment N and the dis-
tribution of productivities. I will define a distortion as a ratio θ from actual
employment to the undistorted one: n = θn (z) , where θ ≥ 0. (It is easy
to see that this is proportional to a wedge (1 − τ ) = θ1−α .) Distortions re-
allocate resources across firms, so they generate the same level of aggregate
employment. This motivates the following definition:
Definition 1. A feasible distortion is a conditional probability distribution
P (θ|z) such that             ˆ
                    N/M = θn (e) dP (θ|e) dG(e),

where N is employment allocated to production and M is the number of
firms, so N/M is the average size of a firm. Since there is a one to one
mapping between z and n (z) , it is more convenient to summarize these
distortions, after the corresponding change of variables with a joint measure
µ (θ, n) with mass M and such that:
                            ˆ             ˆ
                      N = ndµ (θ, n) = θndµ (θ, n)

where n is undistorted employment corresponding to n (z) for some z.
   For every θ let
                               ˆ
                           N θ̂ =        ndµ.
                                           θ≤θ̂
It is easy to see that this defines a measure on θ with the property that
      ´                               ´                   
N = dN (θ) and by feasibility N = θdN ((θ)) . Here N θ̂ corresponds

                                       8
to the total original (undistorted) employment affected by a distortion θ ≤ θ̂.
Notice that it is silent about the productivity of the firms underlying these
distortions.8

         Consider now total output in the distorted economy:
                                   ˆ
                        yd = M y (θ, z) dP (θ|z) dG (z) .

Using
                        y (θ, z) = z (θn (z))α = θα y (z) = θα an (z)
where a is average labor productivity in the undistorted economy, it follows
that:
                                 ˆ
                       yd = a θα n (z) dµ (θ, z)
                                 ˆ
                            = a θα dN (θ)

Since a is average labor productivity in the undistorted economy, it follows
that yu = aN so the ratio of TFP in the distorted economy to the undistorted
one is:                               ´ α
                             T F Pd     θ dN (θ)
                                    =                                  (4.1)
                            T F Pu        N
which simply corresponds to integrating θα with the the normalized measure
of distortions, i.e by the corresponding employment weights.9 As a corollary
to this result, consider two subsets of firms with identical total employment.
Assigning the feasible distortions θ < 1 to one group of firms and 2 − θ to
the other one gives the same decrease in TFP regardless of the assignment.
10

     8
         Note that in the the three examples above this measure is given by:


                                 N (θ)   =   300 for 0 ≤ θ < 1
                                         =   1900 for 1 ≤ θ < 4
                                         =   2000 for 4 ≤ θ.

     9
     A similar result can be obtained considering the the employment weighted distribution
                                                        1
of wedges, given the proportionality of θ to (1 − τ ) 1−α .
  10
     This implies that in the analysis of Restuccia and Rogerson [2008] detailed in Section 5,
the effect of correlation would be null if the firm quantiles for the calculation of correlated
distortions were picked weighted by employment.


                                                9
Connection to TFPR
There is a close connection between θ and TFPR. In our benchmark model,
TFPR equal labor productivity, yi /ni . Let a = yio /noi = y o /n denote average
labor productivity in the optimal allocation, where it is equated across firms.
Then T F P Ri = yi /ni = θα−1 (y o /n), so θ = (yi /ni )1/(α−1) . An alternative
formula that is closer to the one used in the literature (Hsieh and Klenow
[2009a], Bartelsman et al. [2013]) can be derived exploiting this connection
between θ and TFPR. Substituting in (4.1) it is easy to show that:
                                                          1 !1−α
                         TFPe            X ni  yi /ni  1−α
                              =                                                               (4.2)
                         TFP               n     y/n
                                          i

The corresponding formula for the monopolistic competition case is:
                                                            1−α
                                                        α !
                       TFPe          X Ri  T F P Ri  1−α α
                            =                                                                 (4.3)
                       TFP             R T F¯P R
                                                                              
where Ri is the revenue of firm i, TFPRi = Ri /                  kiα̂ li1−α̂       and letting R be
total revenue, T F¯P R = R/ K α̂ N 1−α̂ .11
                                       


4.1     Ordering distortions
Not all measure of distortions correspond to feasible distortions, for they
need to be consistent with total employment.

Definition 2. A feasible measure of distortions is a measure N (θ) that
integrates to N and such that

                                     ˆ
                                          θdN (θ) = N.

It follows immediately that a mean preserving spread of a feasible measure of
distortions is also a feasible measure of distortions. Together with equation
(4.1) this suggests a very natural order on measures of distortions given by
second order stochastic dominance. Indeed, as the function under integration
is concave, a mean preserving spread of a measure of distortions gives another
  11
     In the case of monopolistic competition, Ri is proportional to the input aggregator,
e.g. kiα̂ n1−
           i
             α̂
                , so if there is only labor Ri is proportional and can be replaced by ni in the
last formula.


                                              10
measure of distortions with lower associated TFP. The intuition behind this
result is that the infra-marginal effect of distortions is stronger the more deep
and concentrated they are. The following corollary is a direct consequence
of this observation.

Corollary 1. The effect of uncorrelated distortions on TFP increases with
the total employment of the group involved. In particular, holding fixed the
number of firms affected, uncorrelated distortions to large firms are more
detrimental to TFP than uncorrelated distortions to small firms.

4.2   Generalization to more inputs
The above analysis generalizes easily to more inputs with a Cobb-Douglass
specification. For exposition, we consider here the case of two inputs, n and
k and production function yi = zi nαi kiβ . Letting n (z) and k (z) denote the
optimal allocation and θL and θk the corresponding distortions, total output
is:
                      ˆ
                          α β
               y = M θL    θk zn (z)α k (z)β dP (θL , θk |z) dG (z)
              ´                                         ´
where K/M = θk k (z) dP (θL , θk ) dG (z) and N/M = θL d (θL , θk ) dG (z) .
   Using linearity between k (z) and n (z) it follows that total output
                               ˆ
                                              α+β
                                   α β
                    y = aM θL       θk z × z 1−β−α dP dG
                             ˆ
                                 α β
                       = a0 θ L   θk dN (θL , θK )

for some constants a and a0 that are independent of the θ0 s, and consequently
                                    ˆ
                      TFP         1     α β
                               =       θL θk dN (θL , θK ) .
                     T F Pef f   N

This is again an employment weighted measure integrating θL   α θ β , that is in
                                                                 K
turn homogeneous aggregator of distortions. In the particular case where
θL = θK = θ this aggregator is θα+β that setting α = α + β is the same as
the one obtained before. A caveat to this extension is that we are treating
total capital as given. This in general is not the case, but as we will see is
justified in the analysis of the next section.




                                       11
4.3         Markups and distortions: an application
In a recent paper, Peters [2013] considers the impact of competition on aggre-
gate TFP. He finds that the TFP gap depends on the marginal distribution
of markups only and not the correlation between markups and firm pro-
ductivity. This can be explained easily using the measure of distortions, as
shown in this section.
    The model is one of monopolistic competition. The´set of products (and
firms) is indexed by [0, 1] . Preferences are given by ln yi di. Production
displays constant returns, yi = zi ni , where zi is the productivity of firm i.
Let mi denote the markup of firm i, so pi = (w/z) mi . Rearranging, this
implies that
                            pi yi = pi zi ni = wmi ni                     (4.4)
and because of log preferences, this is equated across all products. In absence
of distortions, mi = m0 for all i and thus employment is equated across firms
to the aggregate (and average) ´labor endowment,      that I normalize to one.
                                      −1
                                              
Using (4.4), it follows that θi =   mi di/mi and N (dθ) is equal to measure
of firms12 with θi ≤ θ is fully determined by the distribution of markups.


5         Concentration and Correlation
In their seminal paper, Restuccia and Rogerson [2008] examine the poten-
tial effects of distortions in an economy similar to the one described here.
The specification is similar to the one above with the addition of capital
with production function yi = zi nα̃i 1 kiα̃2 where α̃1 + α̃1 = α < 1. Restuccia
and Rogerson [2008] consider taxes on output, so profits are of the form
(1 − τi ) yi − wli − rki ,where τi denotes a sales tax. In their numerical exer-
cises, τi takes two values τ1 > 0 > τ2 applied to two subsets of firms. The
subsidy τ2 is chosen so that total capital remains constant.13
    The following table is taken from the simulations reported by Restuc-
cia and Rogerson. The first two columns consider the case of uncorrelated
distortions, where a fraction of establishments is taxed and the counterpart
subsidized at a rate so that total capital stock is unchanged. The second pair
of columns consider the case where the x% most productive establishments
are taxed while the counterpart is subsidized, again at a rate that maintains
the total capital stock unchanged.
    12
         Recall that all firms’ employment is the same, normalized to one, in the optimum.
    13
         The government budget constraint is satisfied with the addition of lump-sum taxes.




                                               12
                Table 1: Uncorrelated and Correlated Distortions

                   % Estab. taxed        Uncorrelated       Correlated
                                             τt                 τt
                                         0.2     0.4        0.2    0.4

                          90%            0.84      0.74     0.66    0.51
                          50%            0.96      0.92     0.80    0.69
                          10%            0.99      0.99     0.92    0.86


   There are two distinguishing features of these distorted economies: 1)
the larger the share of establishments taxed, the larger the negative effect
on TFP and 2) Correlated distortions seem to have a larger effect than
uncorrelated ones.14
   To examine the first feature, take an uncorrelated distortion that sets
a tax τt > 0 to a fraction α of establishments while subsidizing the rest
with τs < 0. Consider the corresponding distortions θt < 1 and θs > 1. To
preserve total employment (and use of capital) it must be that
                                            α
                                θs − 1 =       (1 − θt ) .                             (5.1)
                                           1−α
The corresponding measure of distortions is: {(αN, θt ) , ((1 − α) N, θs )}.15
An increase in α can be interpreted as a mean preserving spread of the origi-
nal measure. To see this, take α0 > α and new measure {(α0 N, θt ) , ((1 − α0 ) N, θs0 )}.
It follows immediately that θs0 > θs and that

                            (1 − α0 ) θs0 + (α0 − α) θt
                                                        = θs .
                                       1−α
So the new measure can be constructed by taking (α0 − α) N from the orig-
inal mass at θs and assigning it to θt and mass (1 − α0 ) N and assigning it
to θs0 , which as shown is mean preserving.
    Consider now the second feature. Correlated distortions do in fact have
larger effects in this setting, but not for the reasons claimed above. Indeed,
our examples in Section 3.1 suggest that this need not be true. Even though
  14
     "A key difference is that in this case the distortion is not to the size distribution of
establishments of a given productivity, but rather to the distribution of resources across
establishments of varying productivity." (Restuccia and Rogerson [2008])
  15
     More precisely, it is the product of this measure since the same distortions apply to
labor and capital.


                                             13
correlated distortions move resources from establishments with higher TFP
to those with lower ones, at the efficient allocation marginal productivities
are equated and so the nature of marginal distortions does not matter. The
reason why correlated distortions are more detrimental to productivity in
the Restuccia and Rogerson simulations is that they hit a larger fraction of
the population and result in a more dispersed measure of distortions. The
analysis follows very similar lines to comparative statics with respect to α
considered above. To preserve equality of total employment, the following
must hold:
                                       Nt
                           (θs − 1) =     (1 − θt ) ,
                                       Ns
where Nt corresponds to the total employment (at the efficient allocation) of
establishments taxed and Ns of those subsidized. With correlated distortions
where larger establishments are taxed and holding constant α, Nt /Ns will
be higher. Following the same logic as above, the corresponding measure of
distortions is a mean preserving spread of the distribution of uncorrelated
distortions with the same α where Nt /Ns would be lower.

More general analysis
To stay closer to the literature, define a system of distortions by a joint
probability distribution Q (τ, z) where the first marginal Qτ is the uncon-
ditional distribution of (output) wedges and the second marginal Qz is
the distribution of firm productivity. For expositional purposes, suppose
both supports are finite so Q is a matrix with typical element qij and
let the elements of the respective supports be ordered, so τi+1 > τi and
zj+1 > zj . Following the literature on stochastic orderings (see Epstein
and Tanny [1980], Meyer and Strulovici [2013], Tchen [1980]) define an in-
crease in correlation as follows. Take i = {i1 , i2 } and j = {j1 , j2 } where
i1 < i2 and j1 < j2 . Suppose that qij > 0 for all four pairs i, j in this
set. Define a new matrix Q̃ that is identical to Q with the exception that
q̃i1 j1 = qi1 j1 + ε, q̃i2 j2 = qi2 j2 + ε and q̃i1 j2 = qi1 j2 − ε, q̃i2 j1 = qi2 j1 − ε. This
correlation increasing transformation is represented in Figure 5.1 for points
{a = (z1 , τ1 ) , b = (z2 , τ1 ) , c = (z1 , τ2 ) , d = (z2 , τ2 )} . The arrows indicate a
shift of ε probability from b to a and c to d, a local increase in association
between τ and z. For joint distributions with finite support this defines a
bivariate correlation (more precisely concordance) ordering, where Q̃  Q
if and only if the former can be obtained by a finite number of correlation




                                              14
increasing transformations of the latter.16




                         Figure 5.1: Increase in correlation

     To evaluate the effect of increased correlation on TFP, it is useful to ex-
amine its effect on the measure of distortions. With the aid of Figure 5.1,
it is useful to decompose this effect in two steps. Let θ1 and θ2 be the dis-
tortions corresponding to τ1 and τ2 respectively, where it easily follows that
θ2 /θ1 = ((1 − τ2 ) / (1 − τ1 ))1/1−α < 1. Let n2 > n1 be the efficient employ-
ment levels associated to z1 and z2 , respectively. As a first step, the shift of
ε probability from b to a and from c to d imply a decrease of δ = (n2 − n1 ) ε
in the employment measure of θ1 and a corresponding increase in employ-
ment associated to θ2 . But given that θ2 < θ1 , this shift implies a reduction
in total employment. As wages decrease to reestablish the equilibrium, all
θ0 s increase proportionately. The effect of positively correlated distortions
(again, adhering to the standard definition this means larger wedges for
higher levels of productivity) is to move employment from higher to lower
levels of θ while increasing proportionately employment elsewhere. Consider
the case of a finite set of distortions θ1 > θ2 > ... > θN −1 > θN with cor-
responding employment measures n1 , ..., nN . An increase in correlation can
be represented by a new vector n0 = n1 , n2 , ..., nk − δ, ..., nm + δ, ..., nN . As
indicated above at the original θ0 s total employment would be short of the
endowment, so a rescaling is necessary. More specifically, the new vector
  16
     For this definition, see Epstein and Tanny [1980] and Tchen [1980]. The order is
easily extended to all integrable functions by taking limits. It coincides with the ordering
induced by using supermodular functions as a basis for comparison and the bivariate
ordering of the corresponding cdf’s FQ (τ, z) ≤ FQ̃ (τ, z) for all (τ, z) . It is also implied
that the correlation between τ and z is greater for Q̃.



                                             15
θj0 = θj /       θi n0i = θj / ( θi ni + (θm − θk ) δ) and the tfp ratio given by:
             P                  P

                            X                             α
                                            θj
                                  P                             n0j
                                    θi ni + (θm − θk ) δ
                             j
                                                                               P
Taking the derivative with respect to δ evaluated at δ = 0 and using               θ i ni =
1 gives:                                                 X
                                 α
             ∂T F P ratio/∂δ = θm   − θkα − (θm − θk ) α    θiα ni                   (5.2)
                                                                      i
This proves the following:

Proposition 1. Take an initial joint distribution Q (τ, z) of wedges with
finite support. Let Q̃ (τ, z) be derived from Q with a correlation increasing
transformation on (τ1 , z1 ) × (τ2 , z2 ) where τ1 < τ2 and z1 < z2 . The TFP
ratio of Q̃ is lower than the T F P ratio of Q if and only if
                                                   X
                     − (θ1α − θ2α ) + (θ1 − θ2 ) α   θiα ni ≤ 0           (5.3)
                                                      i

where θi = (1 − τi )1/1−α .

    Inequality 5.3 highlights two countervailing forces. On the one hand,
there is the shift of employment away from higher to lower θ with a marginal
negative effect on TFP of the order θ1α − θ2α , represented by the first term.
On the other hand, this shift of employment to lower θ frees up employment
that is reallocated uniformly across distortions in proportionPto their current
employment. The second term can be written as (θ1 − θ2 ) i αθiα−1 (θi ni ) .
The first term in brackets represent employment resources freed up. The
second term is the marginal effect on distortions (weighted by employment)
and is proportional to the marginal product of labor being reallocated.17

Corollary 2. Under the assumptions of Proposition 1, a sufficient condition
for the increase in correlation to lower TFP is that θ1 ≤ 1.

Proof. Since θ1 > θ2P   , by concavity it follows that θ1α − θ2α ≥ αθ1α−1 (θ1 − θ2 ).
Given θ1 ≤P1 and              α                           α      α
                           i θi ni < 1, it follows that θ1 − θ2 ≥ α (θ1 − θ2 ) >
(θ1 − θ2 ) α i θiα ni . Applying Proposition 1, the Corollary is proved.
  17
    While this Proposition considers a local change between two pair of distortions, an
arbitrary directional derivative can be obtained aggregating local changes. An interesting
case occurs when (θ, n) is joint-log normally distributed, where the two effects described
above cancel out exactly. This is the reason why the degree of correlation of distortions
has no impact in that case, as Hsieh and Klenow [2009a] find.


                                            16
    While Corollary 2 gives sufficient conditions for an increase in the corre-
lation of distortions to lower TFP, it is of limited use since it requires that
θ1 ≤ 1 so it is restricted to shifts in correlation between two distortions with
above average
            P wedges.      Indeed, starting from a minimally distorted econ-
omy (e.g.       θ α n close to one), applying a similar argument it is easy to
               i i i
show that if θ2 > 1 (i.e. taking points with wedges below average) an in-
crease in correlation will actually raise TFP. The following examples show
the plausibility of both cases.
Example 1. α = 0.5, N = 2, θ1 = 2, n1 = 0.5, θ2 = 0, n2 = 0.5. This could
be the result of a baseline uncorrelated distortion where a share of firms
comprising 50% of employment face a positive wedge that essentially shuts
them down. All employment is absorbed by the remaining firms, doubling
their employment relative to the undistorted case. These distortions lower
TFP by 29.3%. Substituting in equation (5.2), ∂T F P ratio/∂δ = −0.707.
More generally, whenever θ2 = 0 this will be negative since ∂T F P ratio/∂δ =
−θ1α +αθ1 (θ1α n1 ) = θ1α (α − 1) where the equality follows from θ1 n1 = 1. It is
clear in this case that making wedges more positively correlated (i.e. increas-
ing n1 ) lowers TFP while making them negatively correlated (increasing n2 )
increases TFP.
   The previous example is in line with the prevailing view that correlated
wedges are more damaging to TFP. The next example shows the opposite
can also occur.
Example 2. α = 0.5, N = 2, θ1 = 3, n1 = 0.2, θ2 = 0.5, n2 = 0.8. This
could be the result of a baseline uncorrelated distortion where a share of
firms that comprise 80% of employment is subject to a positive wedge in
marginal products that decreases their employment by 50% while the re-
maining firms face no wedge yet the fall in wages increases their employment
by 200%. These distortions lower TFP by 8.8%. Substituting in equation
(5.2), ∂T F P ratio/∂δ = 0.115. Hence starting from this baseline and making
wedges positively (negatively) correlated with productivity would increase
(decrease) TFP. For instance, decreasing n2 to 0.7 and increasing n1 to 0.3
-as would result more negatively correlated wage- lowers the TFP gap to
9.25%, an extra 0.425% relative to the baseline. Likewise, increasing the
employment share of firms with a positive wedge to 0.9 -a more positively
correlated wedge- results in a TFP gap of only 6.5%, an improvement of
2.3% relative to the baseline.18
  18
    As the shares of employment are modified, the θ0 s are rescaled as explained above so
the employment resource constraint is satisfied. In the first case, θ2 = 0.4 and θ2 = 2.4
while in the second case θ2 = 2/3 and θ1 = 4.


                                           17
    While the effect of correlation is in general indeterminate, inequality (5.3)
suggests
     P that starting from a high level of initial distortions, i.e. a low TFP
ratio i θiα ni , an increase in correlation will decrease TFP.


6         Distortions and the size distribution of firms
One feature of underdeveloped economies is a different size distribution, in
particular a large fraction of employment in small firms. How much do these
differences in the size distribution of firms explain the TFP gap? What is
the role played by distortions?
    There are obvious identification problems with this approach. Even if the
economies compared had the same distribution of firm level productivities,
the mapping between distortions and size distribution is not invertible. As
an example, the same size distribution for an undistorted economy can be
obtained by another one where only the least productive firms produce with
a distribution of wedges that generates this size distribution. However, as
shown below it is very straightforward to find a lower bound on distortions
under some identifying assumptions.19
    Let Q (θ, n) be a joint measure on (θ, n) . The interpretation is as follows:
if the economy were undistorted, the size distribution of firms would be the
marginal on n:                       ˆ
                                     F (n) =            dQ (θ, z)          (6.1)
                                                  z≤n

while the actual size distribution
                                              ˆ
                                    G (n) =             dQ (θ, z) .        (6.2)
                                               θz≤n


   ´This joint distribution has an associated measure of distortions N (θ) =
M nQ (θ, dn). The lower bound on distortions is obtained as the solution
to the following program:
                                 ˆ
                            max     θα nQ (dθ, dn)                      (6.3)
                                     Q(θ,n)

subject to (6.1) and (6.2), where F is a given distribution of efficient estab-
lishment size and G the actual size distribution.
     The following Proposition characterizes the solution to this problem, but
it is very intuitive. For continuous size distributions the solution is for each
    19
         A related procedure is used in Alfaro et al. [2007]


                                                  18
n a point mass at θ (n) so that F (n) = G (θ (n) n) . Letting h (n) = θ (n) n
this function provides an assortative match between efficient and actual firm
size by matching the percentiles of the corresponding distributions.
Proposition 2. Suppose F and G are continuous distributions. The solution
to (6.3) is given the the joint measure Q (θ, n) that puts all mass on the graph
of θ (n) where F (n) = G (θ (n) n) and dQ (θ (n) , n) = dF (n) .
Proof. We show the solution to the above problem can be cast as an optimal
matching problem. Any pair (θ, n) can be also represented by (m, n) where
m = θn. Hence for any joint measure Q (dθ, dn) there exists a corresponding
measure P (dm, dn) with first marginal G and second marginal F. Rewrite
(6.3) as:                       ˆ  
                                   m α
                         max           nP (dm, dn)
                      P (dm,dn)    n
subject to:
                           G (dm) = P (dm, N )
                            F (dn) = P (M, dn)
where N and M are the support of F and G, respectively. This is an as-
signment problem with match-return function u (m, n) = mα n1−α . Since
this function is supermodular, the solution is perfectly assortative match-
ing, so that m (n) satisfies F (n) = G (m (n)) = G (θ (n) n) where θ (n) =
m (n) /n.

    The above procedure would require to know, in addition to the actual
size distribution of firms, the hypothetical size distribution for that economy
in absence of distortions. This can be done (with somewhat strong assump-
tions) by benchmarking that economy with an undistorted one under the
following identifying assumptions:
Assumption 1. (a) The benchmark economy is undistorted. (b) The un-
derlying distribution of productivities for both economies is the same.
    The algorithm to derive the bound on distortions can be easily explained
as follows. Let F denote the cdf for size distribution in the reference economy
and G the one in the presumably distorted one and for now assume that
average size n̄ is the same in both. For x [0, 1] define the corresponding
quartiles n (x) and m (x) by F (n (x)) = x and G (m (x)) = x. By Proposition
2 we can write:                    ˆ
                      TFPd      1
                             =        m (x)α n (x)1−α dx.
                      TFPu      n̄

                                      19
Scaling
There are large differences in the average size of firms (or number of firms
per capita) across countries and this needs to be taken into account in the
calculations. Take for instance the size distributions of India and US as the
benchmark economy as shown in the left side of Figure 6.1.20 The average
size of a US firm is approximately 270 while in India it is only 50 and that
is apparent from the strong stochastic dominance observed in this figure.
To isolate the effect of the number of firms from distortions, we focus on
the question: how far is the distorted economy from its own frontier? This
requires scaling down the size distributions of firms in the reference economy.
    More precisely, letting n̄d denote average firm size in the distorted econ-
omy and n̄u in the undistorted one, a firm that is of size n in the undistorted
economy (e.g. US) would have been of size γn in the distorted one (e.g.
India) in the absence of distortions, where γ = n̄d /n̄u . This adjustment is
done in the right panel of Figure 6.1. Once this adjustment is made, it shows
that India’s size distribution is compressed relative to that of the US.

0.14	                                                                                    0.14	  

0.12	                                                                                    0.12	  

  0.1	                                                                                     0.1	  

0.08	                                                                                    0.08	  
                                                                  India	                                                                                India	  
0.06	                                                            US	                    0.06	                                                         USadj	  

0.04	                                                                                    0.04	  

0.02	                                                                                    0.02	  

     0	                                                                                       0	  
             1	     10	        100	     1000	     10000	                   0.1	                  1	     10	     100	     1000	     10000	  




                              Figure 6.1: Size distribution of Firms: India and US

   Let F denote the size distribution of the benchmark economy and G
the that of the distorted one. Define the hypothetical size distribution of
the distorted economy in absence of distortions F̃ by F̃ (n) = F (γn) . Our
upper bound is constructed setting G (m (n)) = F̃ (n) and computing:
                                  ˆ
                  T F Pd       1
                          =         m (x)α (γn (x))1−α dx.
                  T F Pu      n̄d
   The identifying assumptions are strong, but I believe they can be weak-
ened. In particular, I conjecture that (b) can be weakened to assuming that
  20
     This data has been graciously provided to me by Hsieh and Klenow and corresponds
to the one used in their paper. In the case of India, only formal firms are included.


                                                                           20
the distribution of productivities of the distorted economy is dominated by
that of the distorted one. Differences in productivities would arise from
both, difference in underlying productivities together with distortions. A
firm could be small in the distorted economy either because its employment
is less than optimal or because its productivity is lower. For a given level
of employment, the firm’s output would be higher in the latter case. This
suggests that to explain a lower size distribution in the distorted economy, it
is less damaging to the TFP of that economy if this comes from distortions
rather than lower distribution of firm productivities. This would imply that
assuming both countries have the same distribution of firm productivities
provides an upper bound for T F Pd /T F Pu .

6.1    Example: Pareto distributions
Consider two economies a benchmark economy b and a distorted economy d
that have Pareto size distributions with parameters (xb , b) , (xd , d) , respec-
                                      bxb           dxd
tively, and mean employments n̄b = b−1    and n̄d = d−1 satisfying the above
                             −b                    −d
                                                                          bxb d−1
assumptions, so 1−F (n) = xnb       and 1−G (n) = xnd        and γ = dx     d b−1
                                                                                  .
Define m̃ (n) by F (n) = G (m̃ (n)) :
                                         b/d
                                          n
                            m̃ (n) = xd          .
                                          xb
After some calculations, the bound on relative TFP is :
                                          α
                                     b d−1
                       T F Pd        d b−1    (1 − b)
                                =
                       T F Pde      1 + db α − b − α
which is independent of the scaling parameters xb and xd . The following
table gives the TFP ratios for some values of b and d.

                     Table 2: TFP ratios for Pareto case

                              b     d     TFP ratio
                             1.1   1.2      0.96
                                   1.5      0.82
                                    2       0.72
                             1.5    2       0.98
                                    3       0.94



                                         21
6.2    Application: Bounds for some countries
This section computes the TFP bound for three economies: India, China
and Mexico.21 The benchmark size distribution is the one corresponding to
the US. Figure 6.2 provides on the left panel the size distribution of firms
for the four countries. The right panel gives the distributions adjusted to
the average firm size of the US (the average sizes are as follows: Mexico=15,
India=50, US=272, China=558.) It is worth noting that the normalized
distribution for China is close to the one for the US, while those of Mexico
and India are similar to each other but more compressed than the US.
                                     0.16	  

                                     0.14	  

                                     0.12	  

                                       0.1	                                                                                                                       India	  

                                     0.08	                                                                                                                        US	  

                                                                                                                                                                   China	  
                                     0.06	  
                                                                                                                                                                   Mexico	  
                                     0.04	  

                                     0.02	  

                                          0	  
                  0.1	                           1	              10	               100	                1000	            10000	         100000	  

                0.16	  

                0.14	  

                0.12	  

                  0.1	                                                                                                                                   India	  adj	  

                0.08	                                                                                                                                    US	  

                                                                                                                                                          China	  ajd	  
                0.06	  
                                                                                                                                                          Mexico	  adj	  
                0.04	  

                0.02	  

                     0	  
                             1	                          10	              100	               1000	                10000	            100000	  




        Figure 6.2: Size Distributions: India, China, Mexico and US

    Figure 6.3 plots the corresponding measures of distortion. Recall that an
undistorted economy corresponds to a point mass measure at one. China’s
measure is very close to undistorted, while India and Mexico’s measures, be-
ing very similar to each other, are a clear mean preserving spread of China’s.
The corresponding TFP ratios are as given in Table 3, giving the above
calculation for different values of α. As was apparent from before, China
appears as almost undistorted while the TFP losses for India and Mexico
are relatively small, especially when taking α = 0.85 which is one of the
standard value used in the literature. The value of α = 0.5 is consistent with
the markup values used by Hsieh and Klenow [2009a].
    These bounds on distortion losses are very small when compared to what
  21
    As mentioned earlier, data for India corresponds to formal firms only. When the
calculation is done to include informal firms, result change very little.



                                                                                                22
                                                            Table 3: TFP ratios

                                                               α = 1/2              α = 2/3      α = 0.85
                                        China                   0.991                0.992        0.995
                                        India                   0.928                0.937        0.964
                                       Mexico                   0.931                0.939        0.966
                                        R&R                     0.851                0.873        0.929
                                      USA mean                  0.655                0.693        0.817

    1	  


 0.8	  


 0.6	                                                                              India	  

                                                                                    China	  
 0.4	  
                                                                                    Mexico	  

 0.2	  


    0	  
            0	     0.5	     1	      1.5	        2	      2.5	     3	  



                                                 Figure 6.3: Measures of distortion


has been suggested in the literature.22 To put these results in perspective,
I consider the most extreme hypothetical case considered in Restuccia and
Rogerson [2008], where the top 90% firms are taxed away 40% of their out-
put giving a TFP ratio of 0.51. Using α = 0.85 as done in their paper, the
implied measure of distortions is {(0.033, 90%) , (470, 10%)} as depicted in
the left panel of Figure 6.4.23 These distortions give rise to a substantial
spread in the size distribution and a distance to the US undistorted distri-
bution that is much larger than that of India, as shown in Figure 6.5. Using
this size distribution, we can now calculate our lower bound of distortion.
The corresponding measure is shown in the right panel of Figure 6.4. It is
considerably more dispersed than the one obtained for India but orders of
   22
      It is worth noticing that Alfaro et al. [2007], using a similar procedure find significant
effects. There is a key difference with our calculations in that while in our analysis we
exclude the impact of the number of firms from the TFP term (see equation 3.3), they
include that term. I believe that to a large extent this explains the difference.
   23
      The first term of this measure is obtained setting θ = (1 − 0.4)1/(1−0.85) and the
second term is obtained to keep total employment constant, as done in Restuccia and
Rogerson [2008].


                                                                               23
magnitude less dispersed than the actual measure of distortions as shown
in the left panel of the figure. As a consequence, this lower bound on the
measure of distortions is considerably less damaging to TFP. The fourth row
in Table 3 gives the corresponding TFP ratios. Compare, for example, the
bound for α = 0.85 that gives a 7% decrease in TFP to the one obtained in
Restuccia and Rogerson [2008] which is almost 50%.


                               Figure 6.4: Measure of Distortions in Restuccia/Rogerson
   1	                                                                                                               1	  


0.8	                                                                                                             0.8	  


0.6	                                                                                                             0.6	  
                                                                                                                                                                                 India	  
                                                                                            RR	  real	  
0.4	                                                                                                             0.4	                                                          RR	  bound	  


0.2	                                                                                                             0.2	  


   0	                                                                                                               0	  
           0	       100	       200	                300	     400	             500	                                      0	      1	        2	         3	     4	  




                   Figure 6.5: Size Distribution with Distortions in Restuccia/Rogerson
                               0.14	  

                               0.12	  

                                 0.1	  

                               0.08	                                                                                                                                                              India	  adj	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                   US	  
                               0.06	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                   US_RR	  
                               0.04	  

                               0.02	  

                                    0	  
                                            0.1	                         1	                            10	                          100	             1000	              10000	  




    Our bounds on distortions are also very small when compared to Hsieh
and Klenow [2009a], derived from establishment level data for China and
India, that find a TFP ratios in the order of 45%. Table 4 provides some
statistics of the dispersion in θ0 s found in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a] and in
our calculation.24 All measures of dispersion are orders of magnitude higher
in their data.25
     The dispersion of lnθ0 s is equivalent to dispersion in ln T1−α
       24                                                         FPR
                                                                      reported in Hsieh and
Klenow [2009a]
  25
     Incidentally, these measures of dispersion are taken across establishments without
considering employment weights, which as seen in Section 4 are relevant for the derivation
of TFP ratios. Indeed the same establishment level dispersion of ln θ0 s can give rise to
very different TFP ratios depending on the employment weights, ranging from zero (all
employment on θ = 1) to all employment at the two extremes. In our case, the latter



                                                                                                                                     24
                           Table 4: Dispersion of ln θ0 s
                                   India (94)      China (98)
                    Percentiles
                                 H-K Bound H-K Bound
                       SD        4.47     0.53   4.93     0.31
                      75-25       5.4     0.73   6.27     0.36
                      90-10      10.7     1.14   12.4     0.75


     Our method disciplines the calculations of policy distortions with the
size distribution of different countries. But at the same time, ours is a lower
bound which is only attained when distortions do not lead to rank reversals
in firm size. These rank reversals inevitably occur both for the correlated and
uncorrelated distortions considered in Restuccia and Rogerson [2008] and in
the calculated distortions in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a].26 It follows that
for distortions to really matter quantitatively, they must lead to substantial
degree of large rank reversals. In particular, policies that do not lead to
rank reversals will not do the job. Examples of such kinds of policies are
widespread, such as tax exemptions as the ones in France discussed in Gourio
and Roys [2013] and Garicano et al. [2013]; direct subsidies to small firms;
and restrictions to the operation of large retail stores. Indeed these papers
find that while these policies have notable impact on the size distribution of
firms, they have almost no effect on aggregate TFP. 27


7     On the impact of curvature
This section considers the impact of curvature -the degree of decreasing re-
turns at the firm level- on the analysis of distortions. Recall the representa-
tion of TFP derived in Section 4
gives approximately 0.86 for India and 0.92 for China. These numbers come down to 0.76
and 0.86 when using α = 0.5 as in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a] instead of α = 0.85.
   26
      To illustrate this point, consider the extreme case of correlated distortions analyzed
in Section 5: a firm with 2 employees in the undistorted economy will have approximately
1,000 in the distorted one and a firm with an original employment of 9,000 employees ends
up with less than 300!
   27
      There is a related finding in Guner et al. [2008], that simulate the effect of correlated
distortions for OECD countries. They consider labor and capital taxes with exemptions
for firms below a size threshold, disciplined to match average OECD firm sizes. While they
find considerable impact on capital accumulation, the effects of misallocation on aggregate
TFP are minimal. Again, the distortion considered preserves rank.




                                              25
                                       ´ α
                             T F Pd      θ dN (θ)
                                     =            .
                             T F Pe         N
By Jensen’s inequality, for any 0 < α < 1 this is strictly less than one. For
α = 1 it equals one for it must integrate to employment. But also when
α = 0 this ratio is equal to one. Hence, the relationship between the TFP
gap and curvature is not monotonic, for a fixed measure of distortion.
    The caveat to this analysis is that we consider fixed the measure of dis-
tortions, while this might also be affected by α. This follows from the fact
that the optimal distribution of employment across firms is a function of α :
as α increases, employment becomes more concentrated in large firms and
whether this results in a smaller or larger TFP gap depends on the distri-
bution of distortions. If distortions are obtained as the result of firm level
output wedges (1 − τi ) as in Restuccia and Rogerson [2008], using equation
(3.3) it is straightforward to see that the TFP gap disappears as α → 0.
On the other extreme, the results are ambiguous and might depend on the
nature of distortions: with uncorrelated distortions, output will still be con-
centrated in one firm with highest productivity but if they are positively
correlated, it will not.
    When distortions are uncovered from the data as in Hsieh and Klenow
[2009a] there is an additional reasons why curvature will matter in the calcu-
lations: both, the distribution of TFP and implicit distortions (i.e. wedges)
depend on α. Interestingly enough, a sharp result emerges in this case as
detailed below.
    A stylized version of the procedure followed by Hsieh and Klenow [2009a]
is as follows. The data consists of establishment levels of inputs and outputs:
                              (n1 , y1 , n2 , y2 , ..., nM , yM )
where M is the number os establishments. Using this data and a production
function of the form yi = zi nαi , we can solve for the vector of productivities
(z1 , z2 , ..., zM ) and compute the counterfactual efficient level of output.
     As shown in Section 2, aggregate T F P in the undistorted economy is:
                                                !1−α
                                       X 1
                            T F Pe =      zi1−α
                                                     N α.
                                            i

Substituting zi =   yi /nαi   gives:
                                                     1 !1−α
                                           X  yi  1−α
                        T F Pe =
                                                     nαi

                                                26
and dividing by actual T F P in this economy y/nα gives:
                                    1−α
                            yi ! 1
                   
                                                             1−α
          T F Pe X nαi 1−α 
                                            X            1
                                                ni       1−α
                =           y             =        LP Ri                 (7.1)
          TFP              nα                   n

where LP Ri = yy/n
                i /ni
                      stands for labor productivity ratio. From equation (7.1)
it follows immediately that:
                               1                   1
                         T F Pe 1−α X ni
                                      =       LP Ri1−α .                 (7.2)
                         TFP                n
Equation
        (7.2) expresses the TFP  ratio as the certainty  equivalent of the
lottery LP R1 , nn1 , LP R2 , nn2 , ..., LP RM , nnM
                                                    
                                                       under utility function
           1
u (x) = x 1−α . Note precisely because these preferences are risk loving they
imply a TFP coefficient ratio greater than one. An increase in α implies
more risk loving and hence higher T F Pe /T F P , so the TFP gap increases
with α. At the extreme, when α = 0 utility is linear and there is no TFP
gap. In the other extreme, when α = P      1 and assuming firm M has the
highest productivity the T F Pe /T F P = ( (zi /zM ) (ni /n))−1 . This proves
the following Proposition:
Proposition 3. When firm level tfp and wedges are obtained from the data
as in Hsieh and Klenow [2009a], the ratio T F P/T F Pe decreases with α and
it is equal to one (i.e. no gap) at α = 0.
    As an example, suppose the economy consists of two firms and n1 /n =
n2 /n = 1/2. The following table gives the TFP ratios for different levels
of curvature and degree of distortions, as measured by the relative average
output of the two firms.

                  Table 5: TFP, Distortions and Curvature
                               α 0 0.2      0.5   0.8   0.95
               relative yi /ni

               0.2                 1   1.09   1.28   1.57   1.74
               0.4                 1   1.05   1.17   1.39   1.55
               0.6                 1   1.02   1.08   1.22   1.35
               0.8                 1   1.01   1.02   1.07   1.16
               1                   1   1      1      1      1

    It can be seen that TFP is very sensitive to the degree of curvature and
as stated in the Proposition increases with α.

                                       27
8    Final remarks
Distortions that prevent the equalization of marginal products of inputs
across firms can be costly. This paper developed a precise characterization of
how distortions map into aggregate productivity. More precisely, aggregate
TFP is the integral of a strictly concave function of distortions with respect
to an input weighted measure of distortions. This establishes a precise or-
dering of distortions associated to mean preserving spreads. Thus, more
concentrated distortions will have more detrimental effects on productivity.
In contrast, higher correlation of distortions with firm level productivity is
not necessarily more damaging to aggregate productivity, though it is likely
to be so for highly distorted economies.
    As an application, a lower bound of distortions that is consistent with
observed size distribution of firms across countries was developed. This re-
quires a rank-preserving (or monotone) transformation of firm sizes. Any
other measure of distortions that generates the same size distribution is a
mean preserving spread of this lower bound and thus leads to a larger TFP
gap. Applying our bounds to the size distributions of China, India and Mex-
ico (as compared to the United States) delivers very small TFP gaps, orders
of magnitude smaller than those reported by Hsieh and Klenow [2009a].
Policies or distortions that lead to large rank reversals are needed for mis-
allocation to have large impact. This observation can provide guidance in
future studies in seeking for specific policies or constraints that lead to mis-
allocation. In particular, policies that preserve rankings of firm size such as
tax exemptions for firms under some size threshold, subsidies to small firms
or restrictions on the size of manufacturing plants or retail stores will not
have large effects on TFP, as consistently found in some reported studies.
    An important caveat to our analysis, is that it concerns a particular
structure, on homogeneous production/revenue functions with the same re-
turns to scale across economies. While restrictive, this has been the class
of models used in the growing and influential literature on macro develop-
ment. A deeper understanding of the determinants of returns to scale and
its measurement is clearly an important direction for future research in this
area. Relatedly, extending results in this paper to economies with varying
returns to scale or non-homogeneous production/revenue functions is also an
important direction for future research.




                                      28
References
L. Alfaro, A. Charlton, and F. Kanczuk. Firm-size distribution and cross-
  country income differences. manuscript, Harvard Business School, 2007.
A.V. Banerjee and E. Duflo. Growth theory through the lens of development
  economics. Handbook of economic growth, 1:473–552, 2005.
E.J. Bartelsman, J.C. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta. Cross-country dif-
  ferences in productivity: the role of allocation and selection. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2009.
Eric Bartelsman, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta. Cross-country
  differences in productivity: The role of allocation and selection. American
  Economic Review, 103(1):305–34, 2013.
Francisco J. Buera, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin. Finance
  and development: A tale of two sectors. American Economic Re-
  view, 101(5):1964–2002, 2011.  doi: 10.1257/aer.101.5.1964. URL
  http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.101.5.1964.
Francesco Caselli and Nicola Gennaioli. Dynastic management. Economic
  inquiry, 51(1):971–996, 2013.
Joel M David, Hugo A Hopenhayn, Venky Venkateswaran, and NYU Stern.
  Information, misallocation and aggregate productivity. NBER Working
  paper, 2014.
Pablo N D’Erasmo and Hernan J Moscoso Boedo. Financial structure, infor-
  mality and development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(3):286–302,
  2012.
A.K. Dixit and J.E. Stiglitz. Monopolistic competition and optimum product
  diversity. The American Economic Review, pages 297–308, 1977.
Paolo Epifani and Gino Gancia. Trade, markup heterogeneity and misallo-
  cations. Journal of International Economics, 83(1):1–13, 2011.
Larry G Epstein and Stephen M Tanny. Increasing generalized correlation:
  a definition and some economic consequences. Canadian Journal of Eco-
  nomics, pages 16–34, 1980.
Luis Garicano, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. Firm size distortions
  and the productivity distribution: Evidence from france. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, 2013.

                                     29
Francois Gourio and N. Roys. Size-dependent regulations, firm size distribu-
  tion, and reallocation. In 2013 Meeting Papers, number 199. Society for
  Economic Dynamics, 2013.

N. Guner, G. Ventura, and Y. Xu. Macroeconomic implications of size-
  dependent policies. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):721–744, 2008.

H. Hopenhayn and R. Rogerson. Job turnover and policy evaluation: A
  general equilibrium analysis. The Journal of Political Economy, 101(5):
  915–938, 1993.

H.A. Hopenhayn. Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium.
  Econometrica, 60(5):1127–1150, 1992.

C.T. Hsieh and P.J. Klenow. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
  and India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448, 2009a.

C.T. Hsieh and P.J. Klenow. Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china
  and india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448, 2009b.

H. Jeong and R.M. Townsend. Sources of TFP growth: occupational choice
  and financial deepening. Economic Theory, 32(1):179–221, 2007.

B. Jovanovic. Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica: Jour-
  nal of the Econometric Society, pages 649–670, 1982.

Boyan Jovanovic. Misallocation and growth. The American Economic Re-
  view, 104(4):1149–1171, 2014.

R.E. Lucas Jr. On the size distribution of business firms. The Bell Journal
  of Economics, 9(2):508–523, 1978.

M.J. Melitz. The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggre-
 gate industry productivity. Econometrica, 71(6):1695–1725, 2003.

Margaret Meyer and Bruno Strulovici. The supermodular stochastic order-
 ing. Technical report, Discussion Paper, Center for Mathematical Studies
 in Economics and Management Science, 2013.

Virgiliu Midrigan and Daniel Xu. Finance and misallocation: Evidence from
  plant-level data. Working paper (forthcoming in the American Economic
  Review), 2013.

Benjamin Moll. Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-
  financing undo capital misallocation? Working paper, 2012.

                                    30
Michael Peters. Heterogeneous mark-ups, growth and endogenous misallo-
 cation. Manuscript, Londong School of Economics, 2013.

Erwan Quintin. Limited enforcement and the organization of production.
  Journal of Macroeconomics, 30(3):1222–1245, 2008.

D. Restuccia and R. Rogerson. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity
  with heterogeneous establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):
  707–720, 2008.

André H Tchen. Inequalities for distributions with given marginals. The
 Annals of Probability, pages 814–827, 1980.




                                    31
