                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             MAKING PROGRESS ON FOREIGN AID

                                               Nancy Qian

                                         Working Paper 20412
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20412


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




Forthcoming in the Annual Review of Economics Doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115553.
I thank Nathan Nunn for comments and Jaya Wen for excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Nancy Qian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Making Progress on Foreign Aid
Nancy Qian
NBER Working Paper No. 20412
August 2014
JEL No. O1

                                             ABSTRACT

Foreign aid is one of the most important policy tools that rich countries use for helping poor countries
to improve population well-being and facilitate economic and institutional development. The empirical
evidence on its benefits is mixed and has generated much controversy. This paper presents descriptive
statistics which show that foreign aid to very poor countries accounts for very little of total global
aid; reviews the evidence that foreign aid is often determined by the objectives of donor countries
rather than the needs of recipient countries; argues that the evidence on the impact of aggregate foreign
aid is hindered by problems of measurement and identification, which are partly due to the heterogenous
nature of aid; and discusses recent studies using natural and randomized experiments to examine narrowed
definitions of aid on more disaggregated outcomes.


Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu
Contents

1 Introduction                           2


2 How Foreign Aid Can Matter             7


3 Descriptive Facts                      9


4 The Determinants of Foreign Aid       17


5 The Consequences of Foreign Aid       21


6 The Delivery of Foreign Aid           27


7 Conclusion                            28




                                    1
1       Introduction

Since the second World War, foreign aid has been one of the most prominent policy tools that

high income countries use for assisting low income countries to increase economic growth,

improve population well-being and facilitate institutional development. In a 1970 resolution,

the United Nations General Assembly speciﬁed that rich countries should aim to give 0.7%

of their GNP to poor countries in the form of oﬃcial development aid (ODA).


           “In recognition of the special importance of the role that can be fulﬁlled only

        by oﬃcial development assistance, a major part of ﬁnancial resource transfers to

        the developing countries should be provided in the form of oﬃcial development

        assistance. Each economically advanced country will progressively increase its

        oﬃcial development assistance to the developing countries and will exert its best

        eﬀorts to reach a minimum net amount of 0.7 percent of its gross national product

        at market prices by the middle of the decade.” (UN 1970, paragraph 43)


During 1960 to 2013, at least 3.5 trillion dollars (2009 USD) were given as foreign aid from

rich to poor countries.1 However, Figure 1 shows that as a fraction of GNI, only seven

countries have reached 0.7%. As a result, this commitment was re-stated in the Millennium

Development Goals, when a deadline was set for 2015. As of 2005, sixteen of the OECD

Development Assistance Committee (DAC) member countries have agreed to this.2

Although aid has not met the ambitious aims set by the United Nations, it can nevertheless

amount to a large proportion of revenues for many recipient countries. For some, it can exceed

half of GDP. An example is Liberia, where, since 2010, annual foreign aid has accounted for

approximately 64% of GDP on average.3
    1
     This figure includes all ODA given by OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) members.
Source: OECD DAC1 flows. Aid given by non-OECD DAC members (e.g., Russia, the United Arab Emirates,
China) are excluded.
   2
     In 2005, the DAC had 22 members. They all meet the technical standard of being “high-income”—which
has a GDP per capita threshold of around US$10,000 per capita in 2005. Australia, Canada, Japan, Switzer-
land and the United States have not set a timetable. See www.oecd.org for more information.
   3
     Aid data comes from DAC2 flows by recipient and year (QWIDS) and GDP data comes from WDI.




                                                   2
Given the enormous amount of resources put into foreign aid and the call from international

policymakers to increase it further, it is unsurprising that aid has always been and remains a

subject of controversy for academics and policymakers. On the one hand, proponents argue

that aid can help poor countries break out of the vicious cycle of poverty by funding “the core

inputs to development – teachers, health centers, roads, wells, medicine, to name a few...”

(United Nations 2004). In a discussion of U.S. aid to Africa, author of The End of Poverty:

Economic Possibilities of Our Time, Jeﬀrey Sachs said that “[cutting aid] amounts to a death

sentence for more than 6 million Africans a year who die of preventable and treatable causes,

including undernourishment, a lack of safe drinking water, malaria, tuberculosis and AIDS”

and that “increased ﬁnancing could help end school fees, pay for more classrooms and teachers,

buy school meals that contain locally produced foods and invest in water and power so women

and children do not continue to spend their lives fetching water and wood for fuel. Inaction

by the United States will claim millions of lives and add to global instability” (Sachs 2005).4

On the other hand, many have expressed skepticism about the eﬀectiveness of foreign aid. For

example, author of White Man’s Burden and the Elusive Quest for Growth, William Easterly,

points out that “[in the past forty years] $568 billion spent on aid to Africa, and yet the typical

African country is no richer today than 40 years ago” (Easterly 2006). In his recent book, The

Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality, Angus Deaton observes that “one

central dilemma for foreign aid” is that “When the ‘conditions for development’ are present,

aid is not required. When local conditions are hostile to development, aid is not useful, and

it will do harm if it perpetuates those conditions” (Deaton 2013). Even humanitarian aid is

controversial. In fact, it has been since the beginning of the Red Cross. Somewhat ironically,

Florence Nightingale, who is often referred to as the “godmother” of humanitarianism, argued

against the establishment of the Red Cross as she believed that the reduction of human

suﬀering inadvertently eases the political burden of war on governments, and, by reducing

the political cost of warfare, will actually increase the probability of conﬂict (Polman 2010).
    4
      In his book, Sachs also argue that poverty can be entirely eliminated if rich countries commit $195 billion
in foreign aid per year during 2005-2015 (Sachs 2006).




                                                       3
The policy debate has prompted a large body of research evaluating the impact of foreign

aid. However, the mixed empirical evidence, which I will discuss later in the paper, has

only exacerbated the controversy. For example, a World Bank meta study of evaluations

acknowledges that “despite the billions of dollars spent on development assistance each year,

there is still very little known about the actual impact of projects on the poor.” 5 In Making

Aid Work, Abhijit Banerjee argues that “aid has much to contribute, but the lack of analysis

about which programs really work causes considerable waste and ineﬃciency, which in turn

fuels unwarranted pessimism about the role of aid in fostering economic development” (Bates

et al 2007). The need for better evaluations of the numerous past interventions for assisting

the poor is also called for by Banerjee and Duﬂo (2011) in their book, Poor Economics: A

Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty.

The goal of this review article is to summarize the empirical evidence on the determinants and

impact of foreign aid, and to discuss the causes of our meager understanding and possible ways

forward. The goal of this article is not to provide a comprehensive review of the literature, and

it is beyond its scope to give credit to all those who have contributed to our understanding

of this important question.

Section 2 brieﬂy discusses how foreign aid can aﬀect outcomes that have featured in the

empirical literature such as growth, conﬂict and political accountability.

In Section 3, I provide a brief overview of the structure of foreign aid. I describe the diﬀerent

forms that aid can take, as well as the changes in aid ﬂows over time and space. The data show

that aid ﬂows have remained relatively constant during the period of 1960-2013. The countries

that comprise the top donors also remain mostly unchanged. In contrast, the composition of

the top foreign aid recipients changes signiﬁcantly over time. Consistent with the evidence

discussed in the next section of the paper, much of the change in recipient composition seems

aligned with foreign policy concerns of donor countries rather than changes in poverty levels in

the recipient countries. Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, the data show that annual aid to the

poorest twenty percent of countries of the world comprise only 1.69% to 5.25% of total global
  5
    See “Evaluating the Impact of Development Projects on Poverty: A Handbook for Practitioners” by Judy
L. Baker (2000), Washington D.C.: LCSPR/PRMPO, The World Bank.


                                                   4
aid ﬂows. To the extent that data are available, this section will also provide a breakdown of

the types of foreign aid that are given and how that composition has changed since 1960. For

example, from 1970 to 2013, annual total global multilateral aid is only two to ten percent

of annual ODA, and humanitarian aid never exceeds eight percent of annual ODA. I also

document that a signiﬁcant portion of aid is spent in donor countries. While this may be a

legitimate use of funds, it complicates the valuation of aid and needs to be taken into account

in the research design.

Section 4 discusses the evidence on the determinants of foreign aid, which political scientists

have long argued are primarily the political and economic concerns of donor countries rather

than the economic need of recipients. Studies in economics have provided a wealth of cor-

relational evidence and evidence from natural experiments in support of this view. While

each study may be imperfect, the ﬁnding that strategic concerns of the donor countries are

important driving forces persists across studies of diﬀerent contexts, data and methods such

that there is a reasonable consensus that foreign aid is often unrelated to the needs of the

recipient country.

Section 5 discusses the more controversial literature on the impact of aid. The evidence come

from within as well as from across countries, and the results are very mixed. Depending on

the measures used, the empirical strategy that is employed, and the context of the study, the

results can vary widely from ﬁnding that aid can be quite beneﬁcial to being harmful.

There are many possible causes for the lack of consensus, and there exist potential problems

with each study. I focus my discussion on the need for future research to shift away from

examining aggregate aid towards more narrowed deﬁnitions because aggregation exacerbates

several fundamental diﬃculties of empirical research. First, aggregate ODA is diﬃcult to

interpret as it is comprised of many diﬀerent types of aid (e.g., debt relief, cash transfers,

food, etc.). Each type of aid faces diﬀerent measurement issues and, more importantly, each

aﬀects a diﬀerent set of outcomes. For papers that examine aggregate outcomes such as

growth, this conﬂation is particularly problematic since some consequences of aid may aﬀect

growth (e.g., infrastructure) while some are unlikely to, at least in the short or medium run


                                              5
(e.g., expenditure on refugees in donor countries). The tendency for past studies of foreign aid

to study the relationship between aggregate ODA on growth therefore confounds the inﬂuences

of multiple factors. It is not surprising, then, that the results are sensitive to small changes

in data, measurement and speciﬁcation. The conﬂuence of factors also makes it diﬃcult to

map empirical results to theory with any rigor.

Second, the aggregation of data increases the signiﬁcant challenge of establishing causality

that is faced by any impact evaluation. To ﬁnd plausibly exogenous variation in foreign aid

so that its casual impact can be evaluated, researchers typically need to either ﬁnd variation

from natural experiments (e.g., policy shocks) that are unrelated to the outcome of interest

except through foreign aid or conduct randomized experiments to create such variation. For

both methods, it is much easier to focus on a particular type of aid. Narrowing the type of

foreign aid that is examined will also allow researchers to identify a narrowed set of outcomes

ex ante that are most likely to be aﬀected to the aid of interest, which has the beneﬁts of

easier interpretation and avoiding problems of data mining.

For rigorous analysis using natural experiments to be feasible, researchers will need to have

access to high quality data on potentially important outcomes as well as a thorough under-

standing of aid policy. However, this is often not possible. For example, good measures of

health, an outcome which is very likely to be inﬂuenced by aid, are not systematically avail-

able on a country and year basis. The available measures (e.g., WDI indicators) are typically

interpolated across space and over time from very few data points. These data are hard to

interpret and the interpolation means that they cannot be used with more rigorous empirical

strategies that require both temporal and spatial variation.

Similarly, to understand the determinants of aid, researchers must overcome the lack of

transparency from policymakers. The motivations behind aid policy are typically not well-

documented and even detailed data on the types of aid and the valuation of aid ﬂows are

often unavailable.

Section 5 also discusses some recent studies that use currently available data and create em-

pirical strategies from natural or randomized variation for a particular type of foreign aid to


                                               6
identify its causal eﬀect on disaggregated outcomes. For example, Werker et al (2009) show

that large transfers from OPEC countries to poorer Muslim countries increases consumption

and unaccounted transfers of funds out of the recipient country. Several studies show that

conﬂict increases in response to U.S. military aid (in Colombia) (Dube & Naidu 2011), U.S.

food aid (across low-income countries) (Nunn & Qian 2014b) and community driven develop-

ment aid (in the Philippines) (Crost et al 2014). Two other studies ﬁnd that foreign aid can

reduce political accountability, but that this problem can be mitigated by providing recipi-

ents with more information about aid allocation (Manacorda et al 2011, Guiteras & Mobarak

2014).

The ultimate goal for researchers and policy makers interested in development is to design

eﬀective aid policies. Therefore, Section 6 considers several recent studies that have used ﬁeld

experiments to understand the eﬀectiveness of diﬀerent ways of delivering aid. For example,

(Casey et al 2012) ﬁnds that increased citizen participation in community driven aid in Sierra

Leone results in positive short-run eﬀects on local public goods and economic outcomes, but

no eﬀects on the quality of institutions. At the same time, (Olken et al 2012) shows that

linking ﬁnancial incentives to block grants for improving maternal and child health improved

aid performance in rural Indonesia.

Finally, Section 7 oﬀers concluding remarks. The review of the literature shows that research

has attempted to address two closely related, but nevertheless very diﬀerent, sets of questions.

The ﬁrst asks whether existing foreign aid has been eﬀective. The second asks whether or

how foreign aid can ever be eﬀective. While the answers to these two questions are highly

complementary, it is important to not directly apply answers for the ﬁrst question to address

the second one. This is particularly important when interpreting results for policy.



2    How Foreign Aid Can Matter

There is no uniﬁed framework for understanding the impact of foreign aid. The eﬀect of aid

on the recipient country and the mechanisms driving it depend on the type of aid and the



                                               7
outcomes of interest. This section provides a brief discussion on the mechanisms, aid forms

and outcomes that appear most frequently in the empirical literature discussed in Section 5.

First, consider aggregate outcomes such as growth. In principle, foreign aid can lead to

positive or negative economic outcomes. On the one hand, aid can relieve credit constraints

faced by the government and allow it to invest in the development of public infrastructure

and human capital, which can in turn increase growth. On the other hand, large inﬂows of

foreign aid can have unintended consequences such as triggering the Dutch Disease, where

the increase in aid increases the exchange rate, which increases the price of exports and thus

reduces the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector (Rajan & Subramanian 2011).6

Second, consider conﬂict, which has received signiﬁcant attention from recent empirical stud-

ies. The theoretical literature yields mixed predictions for the eﬀect of foreign aid, which

is essentially an exogenous increase in government revenues, on conﬂict. On the one hand,

standard contest models of conﬂict predict that increased revenues can increase conﬂict in

equilibrium because they increase the returns to controlling the government (Garﬁnkel 1990).

The recent study by Besley & Persson (2011) emphasizes the importance of commitment

and makes the point that an exogenous increase in government revenues will only increase

conﬂict in the presence of weak institutions or a non-representative government, where the

government and opposing factions cannot commit to make transfers to other factions. Other

studies, such as Collier and Hoeﬄer (2002), argue that aid ﬂows can reduce conﬂict because

increasing aid revenues can relax government budget constraints, which can increase military

spending and deter opposing groups from engaging in conﬂict.

The eﬀect of aid on conﬂict also depends on the mode in which it is given. For example,

a program which subsidizes wages may reduce conﬂict by increasing the opportunity cost

of ﬁghting (Dube & Vargas 2013, Miguel et al 2004). In contrast, aid which reduces wages

could, by the same mechanism, increase conﬂict. An example is food aid, which could reduce

farm-gate prices faced by domestic farmers (Kirwan & McMillan 2007, Pedersen 1996).

Finally, aid can aﬀect political accountability. On the one hand, foreign aid may be a tool for
   6
    See Easterly (2003) for a discussion of the different mechanisms through which aid can promote or hinder
growth.


                                                     8
donor countries to support politicians and policies that will bring about positive institutional

development. On the other hand, donor countries may not have the best interests of recipient

countries at heart. Moreover, even with the best intentions, foreign aid may reduce political

accountability because large inﬂows of aids could relax the need of the government to appease

its tax base. The mechanism operates similar to that of a natural resource curse or for any

large positive shock to government revenues. Recently, these concerns have been raised in

several prominent books about development and aid (e.g., Deaton 2013, Easterly 2003).



3       Descriptive Facts

This section lays out a few basic facts about foreign aid. Oﬃcial Development Assistance

(ODA), the most common measure of foreign aid in the academic literature and policy dis-

cussions, is reported by the OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC). Most aid is

given by DAC member countries. Currently, there are 29 members: Australia,‌ ‌ Austria,‌ ‌ ‌Bel-

gium,‌ ‌Canada,‌ Czech Republic, Denmark, the European Union, Finland, France, Germany,

Greece, Iceland, Ireland‌, Italy, Japan‌‌, Korea, ‌Luxembourg‌, ‌the Netherlands, New Zealand,

Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, ‌Sweden, ‌Switzerland, the United

Kingdom and the United States (OECD 2014). Data for ODA are reported annually starting

in 1960. Figure 2 shows that total ODA disbursements increased dramatically from approx-

imately 4.65 billion USD in 1960 to 180 billion USD in 2013. All values in this paper are

reported in constant 2009 USD. In total, ODA from OECD DAC members sum to approxi-

mately 3.5 trillion USD for the 64 year period.

Figure 2 plots disbursements for the top ten donor countries. Throughout this section, ranks

for donors and recipients are deﬁned according to 2013 aid ﬂows.7 It shows that the United

States gives the most on average. Until the mid 1990s, the trend in total ODA was driven by

Japan and European countries such as Germany and France. Since then, the trend has been

driven by the United States. Amongst the top donors, only Saudi Arabia is not a member of
    7
    Since the number of donor countries increased over time, using 2013 aid flows to define the ranks avoids
excluding countries that became donors later. For consistency, I also use 2013 flows to define the top recipients.



                                                        9
the DAC.

In Figure 3, I plot aid given by the top non-DAC member donors. It shows that total aid

from non-DAC members was high during the 1980s, peaking at approximately twenty billion

USD. This was mainly due to aid from Arab countries such as Saudi Arabia, the United Arab

Emirates and Kuwait. Non-DAC aid declined signiﬁcantly to approximately one billion USD

in the late 1990s, and rose moderately since 2000 to approximately ﬁve billion USD. The

latter rise is driven by Saudi Arabia.

We also note that foreign aid from China has increased dramatically in recent years. AidData

estimates that annual Chinese ODA has risen almost sixfold from approximately three hundred

million USD in 2000 to approximately two billion USD. This balance makes China comparable

to Saudi Arabia in terms of the level of foreign aid given in the same years. Compared to

DAC donors, China would rank similarly to Belgium and Spain in 2012 as the approximately

35th or 36th largest donor. Most of this aid is given to countries in Southeast Asia and Africa.

AidData notes that the data for China are incomplete. As the OECD does not report aid

from China, it will not be included in the subsequent ﬁgures and tables.

Figure 4 plots the ODA disbursement for the ten countries that have received the highest

annual ODA during 2013. It shows that the increase in global ODA and U.S. ODA after

2000 in Figure 2 is mainly driven by aid to Afghanistan, which coincides with the War in

Afghanistan (2001 - ).

To assess the importance of aid for a low-income country, it is useful to examine aid as a

percentage of GDP. Figure 5 plots this variable for the top ten recipients, excluding small

island nations. It shows that the importance of aid for a national economy can change

dramatically over time. For example, for Mozambique, aid increased from approximately

10% of GDP in the mid 1980s to almost 80% of GDP by the mid-1990s. For Afghanistan, aid

increased from approximately 20% in 2000 to approximately 50% by 2010.

In considering the determinants of aid ﬂows, it is interesting to examine whether the com-

position of top donors and recipients change over time. Table 1 lists the ten donor countries

with the highest annual disbursement for each decade. With the exception of the decline of

                                              10
aid from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait over time, it shows that composition of the major donors

is reasonably stable. In considering the inﬂuences of donor countries that may arise through

foreign aid, note the large diﬀerences in ODA between the top donor and the next highest

donor. With the exception of the 1990s, the top donor is always the United States, and it

gives 1.6 to 4.1 times as much as the next largest donor. Relative to the tenth highest donor,

the largest donor gives between approximately 6.2 to 39 times as much.

Table 2 lists the ten countries that receive the highest annual ODA for each decade. The

patterns for the composition of top recipients over time are very diﬀerent from those of the

top donors in that there is signiﬁcant change over time. A casual glance suggests that the top

recipients are countries that are politically important to the top donor countries. For example,

Vietnam features in the top ten in the 1970s during the peak of America’s war with Vietnam.

China features in the 1980s and 1990s, during the early reform-era. Iraq and Afghanistan

make it to the list after 2000, during the War in Afghanistan (2001- ) and the Iraq War (2003

- 2011). I will discuss the empirical evidence on the strategic interests of donors more in the

next section of the paper.

Aid is more equally distributed across recipient countries than across donor countries. The

highest recipient receives one to 2.5 times more aid than the second highest recipient and 2.2

to 9.3 times more aid than the tenth highest recipient.

Table 3 is an analogous list except that it deﬁnes ODA as a percentage of GDP. As before,

small island nations are excluded. This list is more stable in that it mainly features Sub-

Saharan African countries. The distribution of aid is also relatively equitable. The top

recipient receives approximately 1.2 to 1.7 more than the second highest recipient and two to

4.5 more than the tenth highest recipient.

Another way of examining aid from the recipients’ perspective is to measure aid in per capita

terms. Table 4 lists the top ten aid recipients in terms of average annual per capita ODA ﬂows

for each decade. The list comprises mostly of countries from the Middle East, Sub-Saharan

Africa and Latin America. As with the other lists, the composition changes over time.

Since a large part of the debate about the eﬀectiveness of foreign aid centers around raising

                                              11
the poorest countries out of poverty, I examine the amount of aid received by countries of

diﬀerent income levels. I divide all ODA recipients into ﬁve equally sized quintiles depending

on a country’s GDP rank each year. Figure 6 plots average ODA per capita received by

countries of each income quintile over time. It shows that in per capita terms, the poorest

countries, which are highlighted in the thick red line, receive the largest amount of aid. With

the exception of a peak in the mid 1990s, aid to these countries have been relatively stable

at approximately 400 USD per year. This amount is approximately four times or more than

what is received by other countries.

Figure 7 plots the analogous relationship, except that does not normalize ODA levels with

population. A very diﬀerent pattern emerges. The poorest countries, again highlighted by

the thick red line, receive very little aid in comparison with richer countries. In fact, income

is inversely correlated with the amount of aid received. The thick gray line shows that aid to

the poorest 20% countries comprise only 1.69% to 5.25% of total global aid.

In Table 5, I investigate the contribution of several factors (log population, log GDP during

the past year, growth during the past year, whether there was any conﬂict during the past

year, whether there is a small or large natural disaster in the current year) to ODA from

OECD DAC donors. Small natural disasters are deﬁned as those that kill more than 100

people. Large disasters are deﬁned as those that kill more than 1,000. Across the columns,

I gradually introduce year ﬁxed eﬀects to control for time trends, country ﬁxed eﬀects to

control for time-invariant diﬀerences across countries and then both sets of ﬁxed eﬀects. The

table reports standardized coeﬃcients and p-values. The standard errors are clustered at the

recipient country level.

The overall pattern is similar regardless of which controls are used. The coeﬃcients for lag

growth, lag conﬂict incidence and the dummy variables for whether there is a small or large

natural disaster are very close to zero and mostly statistically insigniﬁcant. The one exception

is the coeﬃcient for small natural disasters in column (4), which is 0.0255 and signiﬁcant at

the 10% level. However, the magnitude is still very small – a one standard deviation change in

whether there is a small natural disaster is associated with a 0.026 standard deviation change


                                              12
in log ODA. In contrast, the most important contributors are population and lag GDP. These

coeﬃcients are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5% or higher level in all speciﬁcations. The

association with population is negative, meaning that more populous countries receive less

aid. The association with lag GDP is positive, meaning that richer countries receive more aid.

Together, these two estimates also imply that countries with lower per capita GDP receive less

aid. The inﬂuence of GDP is large. A one standard deviation increase in GDP is associated

with a 1.37 to 1.87 standard deviation increase in log ODA.

The estimates in Table 5 show that countries that are richer in total and in per capita terms

receive much more aid, while factors such as poor economic growth or the occurrence of

natural disasters has very little inﬂuence.

The eﬀect of aid will depend on who gives the aid (why the aid is given) and the type of

aid that is given. Here, I consider the crudest categorizations for each dimension. Donors

can be divided into two groups. The ﬁrst is bilateral aid which is given from one country

to another. The second is multilateral aid which is given by a group of countries or an

international organization representing a group of countries to a recipient. Past studies such

as Easterly (2003) have argued that multilateral aid is more eﬀective than bilateral aid.

Figure 8 plots ODA that is bilateral and multilateral over time. It shows that multilateral

aid has increased rapidly over time from being less than three percent of total ODA during

the 1970s to approximately 10% since 2010. However, in terms of total aid, multilateral aid

still constitutes a small proportion.

At the crudest level, aid can be categorized into diﬀerent types. The most crude categoriza-

tion is to divide aid into humanitarian and non-humanitarian aid. According to the OECD,

“humanitarian aid is assistance designed to save lives, alleviate suﬀering and maintain and

protect human dignity during and in the aftermath of emergencies. To be classiﬁed as human-

itarian, aid should be consistent with the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality,

neutrality and independence. Humanitarian aid includes: disaster prevention and prepared-

ness; the provision of shelter, food, water and sanitation, health services and other items of

assistance for the beneﬁt of aﬀected people and to facilitate the return to normal lives and


                                              13
livelihoods; measures to promote and protect the safety, welfare and dignity of civilians and

those no longer taking part in hostilities and rehabilitation, reconstruction and transition

assistance while the emergency situation persists. Activities to protect the security of per-

sons or property through the use or display of force are excluded. Includes aid to refugees in

developing countries, but not to those in donor countries. Relief food aid comprises supplies

of food, and associated costs, provided for humanitarian relief purposes” (OECD 2000).

Non-humanitarian aid includes development aid, which seeks to address the underlying socioe-

conomic factors which may have led to a crisis or emergency. This category includes a large

range of aid types, including debt relief, administrative costs and scholarships for students

from low-income countries to study abroad.

Figure 9 shows that humanitarian aid is a very small proportion of total ODA. In the period

for which data are available, 1995 to 2013, it ranges between a little over four percent to

nine percent of total ODA. This is interesting since humanitarian aid, especially relief aid for

natural disasters and conﬂict, is arguably the form of foreign aid that is most salient in the

minds of the public and receives much more press attention than other types of aid.

To understand how aid is spent, it is useful to note that it comprises of many diﬀerent types of

aid, even for one recipient country. “For example, Sierra Leone received US$408 million in aid

in 2011, according to DAC statistics. But what it got was a bundle: US$181 million in cash

grants, US$48 million in loans, US$82 million in cash and in-kind transfers to support speciﬁc

projects, US$35 million in food and other commodities, US$48 million in people and expertise

and US$10 million invested on its behalf in GPGs, development education and NGOs; US$3

million was spent within donor countries on administrative costs, student costs and similar

items”.

Aid can also vary in where it is spent. “For example, Denmark and Italy each reported giving

just over US$2 billion in bilateral ODA in 2011. More than two-thirds of Denmark’s aid was

transferred to developing countries as cash grants, cash loans, project support or technical

assistance. By contrast, more than two-thirds of Italy’s aid, mainly debt relief or housing

refugees in Italy, did not transfer any new resources to developing countries”. The degree


                                              14
to which aid is transferred varies not just across donor countries, but also across recipient

countries. “Headline ﬁgures show Afghanistan, Solomon islands and Togo as equally aid

dependent, but unbundling shows that the Solomon islands are dependent only on expertise

and that Togo’s reported aid never left the donor country” (Development Initiatives 2013).

Table 6 lists the average annual aid spent within the donor countries during 2006-2012 for all

donor countries for which data are available.8 It shows that Korea spends the least amount of

its foreign aid disbursements at home (5.53%) and Austria spends the most at home (68.61%).

Amongst the top ten donors, in boldface, non-transferred aid ranges from 9.99% for the United

States to 40.08% for France. For most donors that spend a high percentage of foreign aid

at home, the major categories of non-transferred aid are debt relief and administrative costs,

and, to a lesser extent, expenditure on refugees in donor countries. Sweden and Canada diﬀer

slightly in that expenditure on refugees constitutes a higher proportion of their non-transferred

aid.

Figure 10 plots the percentage of foreign aid that is not transferred to the recipient country

over time for the top ten donors and for all of the DAC countries combined. It shows that

non-transferred aid for the United States and Germany have declined over time. For other

countries, it has remained relatively constant over the seven year period. Figure 11 plots

non-transferred aid by type for all donor countries over time. It shows that the decline in

non-transferred aid is due to the decline in debt relief. Other forms of non-transferred aid

have remained constant over time.

While expenditures within the donor countries can be legitimate means for assisting poor

countries, they do not necessarily lead to the same outcomes as aid that reaches poor recipient

countries. For example, it is unclear how expenditure on refugees within donor countries would

result in measurable amounts of growth.

The fact that a signiﬁcant portion of aid is spent within donor countries also raises a problem

of valuation. For example, administrative costs could vary widely depending on labor costs

and other factors across donor countries. This means that higher amounts of aid in the form
  8
    The OECD data for non-transferred ODA are only available for 2006-2012, and only for the long-term
high income members of the OECD.


                                                 15
of administrative costs does not necessarily mean higher values of eﬀective assistance to a

poor country.

The valuation problem also exists for aid that is transferred to the recipient country. Consider

the case of in-kind transfers, 26% of which is food aid. The food is valued at the price of the

donor country, which can be much higher than the price of food in the recipient country. For

example, a recent study ﬁnds that sorghum in U.S. ODA in 2010 was valued at 215% higher

than the average local market price in Chad, 95% higher than that in Somalia, and 63%

higher than that in Sudan (Development Initiative 2013). If this is not taken into account,

then an evaluation of U.S. food aid may likely ﬁnd that a dollar of food aid yields smaller-

than-expected beneﬁts to the recipient country. Moreover, the relative price diﬀerences mean

that the same amount of U.S. food aid will have diﬀerent values for diﬀerent recipients.

Empirical studies on the eﬀect of food aid which do not take this into account could introduce

non-classical measurement error to their explanatory variable.

Food aid provides an example of another type of valuation problem. By law, 50% of U.S. food

aid must be transported on U.S.-ﬂagged cargo ships. This threshold is recently lowered from

the previous 75% requirement (Development Initiative 2013). The data for the cost breakdown

and the determinants of pricing are not publicly available. This raises two potential issues.

First, if the pricing for shipping is not competitive, we again face the diﬃculty of comparing

the value of food aid over time and across countries. For example, if U.S. food aid values are

higher than Australia’s because the U.S. faces higher shipping costs, it would be hard to argue

that U.S. food aid is worth more to the recipient country that Australian food aid. Second,

if we are interested in the eﬀect of food aid on the recipient country, one could argue that the

money paid to U.S. cargo ships should not be counted towards aid.

All of the diﬃculties discussed here are compounded by the fact that the composition of aid

and the way that it is valued vary across countries and over time. Not carefully accounting

for it could lead to very misleading results. Yet, it is very diﬃcult to obtain systematic

information on the detailed breakdown of the cost structure of aid and valuation methods.

Later in Section 5 and the Conclusion, I will discuss how making detailed data available on


                                              16
the types of aid, the cost structure, and the methods used to price aid are critical for making

progress on understanding the eﬀects of aid.



4    The Determinants of Foreign Aid

Political scientists have long argued that strategic concerns drive aid ﬂows. For example,

studies have found that humanitarian criteria did not signiﬁcantly aﬀect U.S., U.K. or French

aid ﬂows to non-communist countries during the Cold War. Instead, they were likely driven

by foreign policy concerns and the promotion of trade for the donor countries (McKinlay &

Little 1977, McKinlay & Little 1978, McKinlay & Little 1978b). Similarly, Meernik et al (1998)

argued that foreign aid during the Cold War was mainly driven by security concerns, whereas

after the Cold War, it was driven by ideological motivations. Schraeder et al (1998) provide

case-study and statistical evidence that some of the largest donor countries allocate aid to

Sub-Saharan African countries during 1980-89 for reasons other than the economic needs of the

recipients. They argue that the United States directs aid depending on countries’ ideological

stances; that Japan directs foreign aid to countries of economic importance, particular those

with raw materials or major markets for export; that Sweden focused its aid on countries

that were not supported by the United States or the Soviet Union and those with socialist

regimes; and that France gave much more aid to Francophone and militarized countries, which

the authors interpret as the French government being motivated by cultural propagation.

In economics, a large number of studies furthered the evidence for the hypothesis that strategic

concerns of donor countries underpin foreign aid ﬂows. In a cross-country study, Alesina &

Dollar (2000) collect data on bilateral aid ﬂows for OECD countries for 1970-1994 and ﬁnd

that the amount of aid is positively associated with former colonial ties and increases with

the duration of colonization. They also ﬁnd that aid is positively associated with the number

of votes that the recipient country votes in agreement with the donor country in the United

Nations General Assembly. They interpret this evidence as donors giving aid for strategic

purposes. For income, they ﬁnd that most countries give more to poorer countries, but there



                                               17
is signiﬁcant variation in the degree to which the amount of aid varies with income. They

ﬁnd that Nordic countries have the highest elasticity with respect to poverty levels.

In a study that focuses on food aid to Sub-Saharan Africa, Nunn & Qian (2014) provide

consistent evidence. They examine the supply-side and demand-side determinants of global

bilateral food aid shipments between 1971 and 2008, where food aid is measured in metric

tons of food. This strategy avoids the valuation problems discussed in the previous section.

They ﬁnd that domestic food production in developing countries is negatively correlated with

subsequent food aid receipts, suggesting that food aid receipt is partly driven by local food

shortages. Interestingly, food aid from some of the largest donors is the least responsive to

production shocks in recipient countries. Second, they show that U.S. food aid is mostly driven

by domestic production surpluses, whereas former colonial ties are an important determinant

for European countries. Aid ﬂows to countries with former colonial ties are less responsive to

recipient production.

The main caveat for interpreting the results from Alesina & Dollar (2000) and from Nunn &

Qian (2014) is omitted variable bias. For contemporaneous explanatory variables, one may be

concerned about reverse causality. For example, more aid could cause a recipient country to

vote more favorably with the donor country in the United Nations. Similarly, more aid could

increase income. For historical variables such as colonial ties, one may be concerned that

such ties could inﬂuence aid ﬂows through channels other than the strategic considerations

of donor countries. For example, donor countries may have more information about former

colonies which can, in principle, reduce monitoring costs. Similarly, infrastructure may be

better so as to reduce the cost of transferring aid to former colonies.

Several recent studies have addressed such problems of identiﬁcation strategies using natural

experiments. In the case of the relationship between strategic alliance in the United Nations

and foreign aid, Kuziemko & Werker (2006) exploit plausibly exogenous variation from UN

Security Council rotating memberships and the importance of the Council to the United States

in a given year. They proxy for the importance of the Council with the number of articles

containing “Security Council” in the New York Times in a given year. The logic of their


                                              18
natural experiment is that Council members are strategically more valuable to the United

States than General Assembly members because they are more likely to vote on important

policies. The strategic value (to the United States) increases further in years when there are

issues which are important to the United States. Their strategy assumes that the interaction

of the rotating membership, which is potentially endogenous, and the strategic importance of

the Council to the United States in a given year is plausibly exogenous. They then show that

the interaction eﬀect on the amount of aid received from the United States is signiﬁcantly

positive. Thus, the amount of U.S. foreign aid received by a rotating member on the Security

Council is increasing in the strategic value of the Council member to the United States.

Nunn and Qian (2014b) document that U.S. food aid, measured in metric tons, is mostly

driven by U.S. price support policies to domestic farmers. The U.S. government provides

a price ﬂoor to U.S. wheat farmers such that when weather conditions are good in wheat

producing regions in the United States and more wheat is produced, the U.S. government

increases its purchases of wheat to subsidize U.S. farmers. The purchased wheat is then

given as food aid to poor countries. Therefore, although U.S. food aid is broadly correlated

with the level of a country’s economic development (i.e., rich countries do not receive U.S.

food aid), the amount of aid does not correspond to a recipient country’s need on a year-

to-year basis. They predict lagged U.S. production with lagged weather conditions in wheat

producing areas of the United States and control for weather in recipient countries to address

the possibility that they are correlated with U.S. weather conditions. Since weather conditions

in wheat producing regions are unrelated to the needs of poor countries beyond these and

other controls, the relationship they document can be interpreted as causal.9 Given that the

United States is the world’s largest donor of food aid and that most U.S. food aid is wheat,

this means that a signiﬁcant amount of global food aid is determined by changes in weather

in wheat producing regions of the United States, which is uncorrelated with changing food

needs in recipient countries.

In a related study about U.S. relief aid, Eisensee & Stromberg (2007) show that aid is partly
  9
      The results where U.S. production is predicted by weather are shown in a in earlier working paper version.



                                                       19
determined by the occurrence of other newsworthy events. They document 5,000 natural

disasters during 1968 to 2002, twenty percent of which received assistance from the United

States Agency for International Development (USAID). They ﬁnd that the amount of aid

given is negatively associated with the occurrence of other newsworthy events such as major

sporting events or the O.J. Simpson trial. Since the occurrence of these other events are

unrelated to that of natural disasters, the authors conclude that media coverage has a causal

impact on aid. Their results are similar when controlling for the size of the calamity (e.g.,

the number killed by the disaster). Thus, it is not the case that other events only drive out

smaller disasters, which would receive less aid in any case. A plausible mechanism for their

ﬁndings is political accountability of the U.S. government. More media coverage leads to more

attention from voters. Assuming that U.S. voters value relief aid, the government will provide

more assistance to disasters that voters pay attention to because of re-election concerns. The

results of this study imply that one of the reasons for the varying degrees of responsiveness of

foreign aid to need may be domestic political pressure/interest within donor countries (rather

than the degree of need in recipient countries).

In another related study, Faye & Niehaus (2012) uses a diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences strategy to

ﬁnd that recipient country administrations that are politically closely aligned with a donor

receive more aid from OECD countries during election years, while those that are less aligned

receive less during election years. An administration that is two standard deviations more

politically aligned with the donor receives $20 million more ODA on average during an election

year as opposed to a non-election year. This is 35 percent of mean annual ODA level in

their sample. They ﬁnd that political aid cycles are driven by donor-speciﬁc alignment and

not alignment with all donors in general. They also ﬁnd that their result only applies to

competitive elections, which is consistent with the hypothesis that donor governments are

trying to use foreign aid to inﬂuence electoral outcomes. These results could be consistent

with donor countries attempting to use aid to improve institutions, but are also consistent

with donor countries prioritizing political goals when deciding aid.

There are fewer within-country studies. For example, using a cross-section of household in


                                              20
1996, Jayne et al (2002) ﬁnd that food aid in Ethiopia is not concentrated in the poorest

regions. In fact, it is spatially continuous. The authors argue that this is likely to be due to

the ﬁxed cost in aid delivery.

The evidence for the determinants of aid consistently shows that factors unrelated to the need

of recipient countries are important determinants of aid. This holds across contexts, diﬀerent

ways of measuring aid and a variety of empirical strategies.

One limitation in this branch of the aid literature is the lack of evidence for how much

of total ODA can be attributed to strategic goals versus economic needs of the recipient

country. A careful accounting exercise using the evidence from correlational studies and

natural experiments could be very helpful for assessing the magnitude of aid that is donor-

driven versus driven by recipient needs.



5    The Consequences of Foreign Aid

The empirical literature on the impact of foreign aid is perhaps one of the most controversial

ones in development and growth economics. On the one hand, a number of studies have found

that foreign aid can be beneﬁcial. Dollar & Burnside (2000) provide case study and cross-

country evidence from 56 countries during 1970-1993 that multilateral aid can promote growth

if given to countries with good economic policies, which they measure as a function of the

budget surplus, inﬂation and trade openness. The authors use OLS and also instrument for

policy using variables such as the linguistic composition of the recipient country, the distance

from the equator, log population. Collier and Dehn (2001) introduce export shocks into the

growth-aid regression to ﬁnd that controlling for GDP levels, foreign aid can help mitigate

the averse eﬀects of negative export shocks for a panel of 113 developing countries during

1957-1997.

On the other hand, a large number of studies have emerged to dispute the positive eﬀects of

foreign aid. For example, Easterly et al (2003) and Easterly (2003) show that the Dollar &

Burnside (2000) results are sensitive to the inclusion of additional years of data and question


                                              21
the validity of the exclusion restrictions for their instrumental variables strategy. Roodman

(2007) examines the sensitivity of seven important papers on the positive impact of aid on

growth to slight changes in the set of controls, diﬀerent deﬁnitions of aid (e.g., ODA or

Oﬃcial Development Assistance, EDA or Eﬀective Development Assistance), diﬀerent GDP

measures for normalization (e.g., real GDP from the Penn World Tables, GDP in dollars at

market exchange rates), diﬀerent deﬁnitions of good institutions/policies, examining diﬀerent

time periods, removing outliers, and expanding the sample to 2001.10 He ﬁnds that all of the

results are fragile.

Recently, Galiani et al (2014) improved on the identiﬁcation of older papers with a strategy

similar to a regression discontinuity. They focused on 35 poor countries, some of which crossed

an arbitrary per capita income threshold that made these countries ineligible for aid from the

World Bank’s International Development Association (IDA). Under the interpretation that

countries above the threshold are identical to those below the threshold except that those

above receive less aid, the authors used whether a country is above or below the threshold to

instrument for aid. They ﬁnd that aid increases growth.

A number of studies also ﬁnd that aid can result in negative outcomes for recipient coun-

tries. For example, Djankov et al (2008) study ODA from OECD countries using a panel of

108 countries during 1960-1999 and institutional quality data from the Polity IV database.

The authors instrument for foreign aid with variables such as the initial level of income and

population and ﬁnd that aid reduces democracy for the top quartile of recipients. In another

example, Rajan & Subramanian (2011) provide evidence for the Dutch Disease. The authors

exploit cross-country and cross-industry variation for a panel of 32 countries during the 1980s

and 1990s that receive foreign aid greater than one percent of the recipient’s GDP. This study

ﬁnds that aid inﬂows reduce the relative growth rate of export industries and provides some

evidence that the main mechanism is real exchange rate appreciation caused by aid inﬂows.

Svensson (2000) ﬁnds that foreign aid, like trade windfalls, increase corruption in a panel of
  10
    Roodman (2007) focuses on Dollar & Burnside (2000), Collier & Dehn (2001), Collier & Dollar (2002),
Collier & Hoeffler (2004), Hansen & Tarp (2001), Dalgaard et al (2004), Guillaumont & Chauvet (2001).
Easterly (2003) also reviews these papers.



                                                  22
66 countries during 1980-1994.

The results across the diﬀerent studies can vary for a large number of reasons. One key

diﬃculty comes from the fact that much of the existing literature examines aggregate ODA,

which is a bundle of many diﬀerent types of aid. As was shown in Section 3, aid can diﬀer in

whether the donor is a country or a multilateral agency, designated as humanitarian or non-

humanitarian, transferred as cash or in-kind, or spent in the donor or the recipient country.

Each aspect can inﬂuence how aid aﬀects the recipient country. Thus, examining the impact

of aggregate aid confounds a bundle of diﬀerent and potentially oﬀsetting mechanisms. This

problem is particularly prominent when one examines aggregate outcomes such as growth. For

example, aid used to construct infrastructure may improve growth in the short and medium

run. However, large cash transfers may reduce the competitiveness of the manufacturing

sector and have negative consequences on growth.

The aggregation of aid also increases the diﬃculty in developing credible identiﬁcation strate-

gies. Variation used in existing studies from factors such as geography, population and income

naturally leave open many concerns about the exclusion restriction, since these factors can

each aﬀect growth through channels other than aid. To ﬁnd a plausibly exogenous source of

variation in aid, researchers need to understand the details of aid implementation and ﬁnd nat-

ural variation that aﬀects the outcome of interest only through aid or conduct a randomized

experiment, both of which increase in diﬃculty with the aggregation of aid.

A third problem is valuing aid. As discussed in Section 3, data on the amount of aid disburse-

ment includes signiﬁcant amounts of expenditures that never reach the recipient country (e.g.,

administrative costs, debt relief, shipping costs for food aid). If overhead costs are higher in

Norway than in the United States, it is unclear that more aid spent on administrative costs

on Norway implies more aid to the recipient country. Similarly, if shipping costs for U.S.

food aid are not priced at market prices (i.e., the industry for shipping U.S. food aid is not

competitive) such that U.S. cargo ships charge higher prices than ships that carry food from

the European Union, then it becomes unclear how to value aid dollars spent on U.S. food

aid for shipping. For in-kind foreign aid such as food aid, another diﬃculty comes from the


                                              23
valuation of food. If U.S. food is priced much higher than food in the recipient countries or

food from other donor countries, how do we compare a dollar of U.S. food aid versus a dollar

of EU food aid? The fact that the composition of aid varies across countries and over time

means that if this is not carefully accounted for, the results could be very misleading. These

issues need to be carefully addressed with detailed data on the cost structure of aid and a

thorough understanding of how prices are set.

Several recent studies have improved on the measurement and/or identiﬁcation issues facing

earlier studies by exploiting more detailed variation in aid caused by a narrow set of aid

policies. Narrowing the set of aid policies also allows researchers to avoid compositional

diﬃculties and to examine outcomes that are more disaggregated than growth and/or can be

more directly linked to the foreign aid of interest.

Werker et al (2009) focused on the eﬀect of ODA ﬂows from wealthy OPEC countries to poorer

Muslim countries. The authors ﬁrst document that increases in world oil prices increase the

amount of aid ﬂows between these two sets of countries. Then, they instrument for aid with

the interaction of whether the recipient country is Muslim and world oil prices in a given

year. The results show that aid has no eﬀect on prices or growth or the exchange rate, but

increases household consumption, shifts imports away from capital goods towards noncapital

goods, crowds out domestic savings and partly leaves the country in the form of unaccounted

transactions.

Dube & Naidu (2011) study the eﬀect of U.S. military aid on attacks by paramilitary groups

and guerrillas in Colombia during 1988-2005, when total U.S. military aid amounted to ap-

proximately ﬁve billion USD. The authors exploit two sources of variation. First, there is

spatial variation in aid allocation within Colombia caused by the fact that aid was only al-

located to areas with military bases. Second, there is time variation in the amount of U.S.

military aid. To address the potential endogeneity of aid to Colombia, they proxy for U.S.

military aid to Colombia with U.S. military aid to the world excluding to Latin America.

Using detailed data on political violence, they ﬁnd that U.S. military aid increases attacks

by paramilitaries, which collude with the Colombian military. During election years, aid also


                                               24
increases homicides committed by the paramilitary and reduces voter turnout. In contrast,

U.S. military aid has no eﬀect on guerrillas, which do not collude with the military.

Two recent studies ﬁnd that humanitarian and development aid can also increase conﬂict.

Nunn & Qian (2014b) focus on U.S. food aid. As was discussed earlier, they show that U.S.

food aid ﬂows are determined by weather-driven production shocks in the United States.

They then use lagged U.S. wheat production to instrument for U.S. food aid and ﬁnd that

increased food aid increases conﬂict in recipient countries. They show that their estimates are

robust to a large number of controls and alternative measurements. They also show that U.S.

food aid does not crowd out other types of food aid or total foreign aid. Thus, the results

imply that more aid causes more conﬂict. Their results are consistent with anecdotal and case

study evidence from aid workers that food aid and humanitarian aid are more generally often

appropriated by armed factions (which can be from the government or opposition groups)

during transportation.

A similarly negative ﬁnding on conﬂict emerges from a within-country study by Crost et al

(2014). They use a regression discontinuity design to study the impact of the $180 million

KALAHI-CIDSS program, a community driven development program meant to enhance local

infrastructure, governance, participation and social cohesion, on domestic armed conﬂict in the

Philippines during 2002-2009. Eligibility for the aid is determined by an arbitrary threshold –

only the poorest quartile in the forty poorest provinces were eligible. On average, the grant is

15% of a municipality’s annual budget. The authors then estimate the intent-to-treat eﬀect by

comparing conﬂict in regions right above the eligibility threshold to those that are right below.

They ﬁnd that those right above the cutoﬀ experience more conﬂict. Under the assumption

that the only change at the arbitrary cutoﬀ is eligibility to the program, their results imply

that aid causes more conﬂict. The authors argue that this is most likely because insurgents

wish to undermine the program with the fear that the latter will reduce political support for

the insurgency.

In observing the (relatively) large number of natural experiments about the eﬀects of aid on

conﬂict, it is important to note that this focus is partly driven by the recent availability of


                                               25
high quality conﬂict data.11 In other words, that we lack rigorous analysis on other outcomes

is partly due to data limitations. For example, one naturally expects food aid to improve

health outcomes such as malnutrition or infant mortality. These data are reported for a large

number of countries over time by international organizations such as the World Development

Indicators (WDI). However, a closer examination of the data and the source material reveals

that most of these measures are interpolated over time and space from very few real obser-

vations. As an illustration, Figure 12 plots infant mortality rates for Sub-Saharan African

countries as reported by the WDI. The levels are normalized by dividing infant mortality

rates for each country for each year by that country’s rates in 1990. The poor quality of the

data can be seen by the fact that these measures are very smooth over time. This creates a

serious problem for researchers. The measurement error in the dependent variable can bias

estimated eﬀects of aid if it is not classical. More importantly, the data simply contains little

information.

In the literature on foreign aid, one also observes a large number of studies about U.S. aid.

This may partly be due to the fact that the United States garners much interest as the largest

giver of aid. At the same time, it may also be due to the fact that USAID makes the most

detailed data on aid disbursements easily available to researchers.

Another outcome linked to foreign aid by the recent literature is political accountability. For

example, Eubank (2012) uses detailed case study evidence from Somaliland to argue that

the ineligibility for foreign assistance increases government dependency on local tax revenues.

This then increases inclusiveness in political participation and accountability.

An alternative reason for aid to aﬀect performance of the politician is that the constituents

may inaccurately attribute successful aid programs to the politician, which could remove the

need for the politician to enact other policies to appease voters. For example, Manacorda

et al (2011) study a large anti-poverty cash transfer program in Uruguay. The authors use

a regression discontinuity design to show that eligible households were more likely to favor

the government and political support eﬀects persist after the program ends. These results
  11
    The Correlates of War and UCDP/PRIO datasets report detailed data on battles for the post-World War
II period.


                                                  26
are consistent with poorly informed voters using policy to infer politicians’ redistributive

preferences or competence.

However, a recent randomized ﬁeld experiment in Bangladesh by Guiteras & Mobarak (2014)

shows that simply informing voters about the source of aid can remove such confusion. House-

holds and villages are randomly assigned by the researchers to treatment groups where aid

was allocated to households, to a second identical treatment group where participants were

also told that the politician played no role in aid allocation, and to a control group. The

authors ﬁnd that local politicians participated in events surrounding aid allocation, which is

consistent to their intending to take credit for the aid; that residents of villages that received

the treatment without information attributed credit to the politician; but that villagers in the

treatment with information did not attribute credit to the politician. The authors conclude

that providing more information to recipients is a straightforward way to reduce how much

aid undermines political accountability.



6    The Delivery of Foreign Aid

The evidence in Section 4 questions the intentions of the donors. At the same time, it is

important to note that aid policymakers worry that even with the best of intentions on the

part of the donors, it may be diﬃcult to ensure that aid is not misappropriated by recipient

governments. For example, in a study of U.S. aid to eight countries (Egypt, India, Israel,

Jordan, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand and Turkey) during 1972-1987, Khilji & Zampelli

(1994) ﬁnd that aid is highly fungible and that recipients can easily circumvent donor-imposed

restrictions and spend aid on non-targeted programs. They ﬁnd that much of U.S. aid is

channeled into the private sector and used for current consumption rather than investment,

and that the diﬀerent countries behave in similar ways. Similarly, in the context of the

Dominican Republic (1968-1986), Pack & Pack (1990) ﬁnd that there is substantial diversion

of aid from its intended purposes. An additional dollar of foreign aid stimulates no net

development expenditures, and it is instead used for debt repayment and deﬁcit reduction.



                                               27
That aid is fungible is unavoidable. However, several recent studies have examined how dif-

ferent methods of delivery and monitoring may improve aid eﬀectiveness despite this inherent

diﬃculty. For example, Casey et al (2012) study the eﬀectiveness of Community Driven De-

velopment (CDD) programs, which is a common way for implementing foreign aid at the

local level. They evaluate the GoBifo project in Sierra Leone, which attempts to make lo-

cal institutions more democratic and egalitarian by imposing participation requirements for

marginalized groups. Villages were randomly assigned to the GoBifo program or a control

group. They ﬁnd positive short-run eﬀects on local public goods and economic outcomes, but

no eﬀects on the quality of institutions.

In a study of rural Indonesia, Olken et al (2012) show that linking ﬁnancial incentives to

block grants for improving maternal and child health improved performance. Villages were

randomly assigned to either receive a block grant where the size of the subsequent year’s block

grant depended on performance relative to other villages in the subdistrict; or to receive a

identical block grant where subsequent funding was unconditional on performance. They ﬁnd

that the incentivizes led to more eﬃcient spending of block grants, and an increase in labor

from health providers.



7    Conclusion

Foreign aid is one of the most important policy tools for transferring resources from rich

countries to poor countries. Several trillions of dollars have been given in the past 64 years, but

the empirical evidence on its beneﬁts have been very mixed, resulting in a heated academic and

policy debate. This review paper highlights several descriptive facts, summarizes the existing

evidence and discusses some of the fundamental problems that have prevented researchers

from reaching more conclusive and comprehensive ﬁndings.

The literature shows that the primary purpose of aid is often not to alleviate poverty and that

out of all of the foreign aid ﬂows, only 1.69% to 5.25% are given to the poorest twenty percent

of countries in any given year. While recent empirical evidence have shown that some types of



                                                28
aid (even those given with the intention of improving economic conditions of poor recipients)

can cause adverse outcomes, rigorous analysis has been applied to too few types of aid and

examined too few outcomes to form a comprehensive assessment of the net eﬀect of aid. As

such, the polarized arguments of the necessity of aid versus the detrimental eﬀects of aid are

premature, and the discussion of total foreign aid and the lack of economic improvement for

the poorest countries in the world is somewhat misleading.

The discussion of past studies show that there are two closely related research questions that

need be carefully distinguished. The ﬁrst question is about the eﬀectiveness of aid that has

been given out. What is the impact of existing aid? How have diﬀerent modes of delivery

or diﬀerent characteristics of the recipients and donors aﬀected the outcomes? The second

question is about whether and how aid can be ever be eﬀective. Can foreign aid ever improve

economic performance and well-being? What is the best way of delivering aid to maximize

its eﬀectiveness?

While highly complementary, these two sets of questions diﬀer in the methods and data that

they can employ. The ﬁrst set of questions is the one addressed by most existing studies

of foreign aid. Among other challenges, this literature has been hindered by problems from

the aggregation of aid. Aid varies signiﬁcantly across donor and recipient countries, and over

time in many dimensions: the type of aid, where it is spent, how it is valued and how it is

administered. Thus, examining the eﬀect of aggregate aid ﬂows on aggregate outcomes such

as growth confounds the inﬂuences of many diﬀerent forces. The aggregation also makes it

very diﬃcult to develop credible identiﬁcation strategies for establishing causality. It is then

not surprising that many studies of the aggregate eﬀect of aid on aggregate outcomes have

been shown to be highly sensitive to sampling, measurement and empirical strategies.

Future studies of these questions should examine the eﬀect of a narrowed deﬁnition of aid on a

narrowed set of outcomes. This approach will facilitate the design of more rigorous empirical

strategies that improve the identiﬁcation of causal channels. Having fewer channels to consider

will also allow researchers to better account for heterogeneous eﬀects due to diﬀerences in the

method of aid delivery, or other factors that diﬀer across recipient or donor countries such as


                                              29
the level of human capital or the quality of institutions.

A signiﬁcant barrier to conducting rigorous empirical analysis is the lack of detailed data on

important aspects of foreign aid such as the cost structure or the method of delivery, as well as

important outcome variables. Thus, an important step is to make such data available. Since

individuals researchers cannot force governments to improve data availability, constructing

such databases will depend on the commitment of institutions with the necessary political

and ﬁnancial resources (e.g., the World Bank).12

Future researchers can also advance our understanding by applying political economy frame-

works. This follows naturally from the ﬁndings that strategic considerations of donor countries

are important drivers of foreign aid. For this line of research, it is useful to note that there has

been signiﬁcant temporal variation in aid ﬂows from countries in the Middle East and China,

which between 2000 and 2012, increased its ODA from approximately three hundred million

to approximately two billion USD (constant 2009 USD).13 Given that these countries have

diﬀerent strategic objectives than the major ODA DAC donors, and that they are known to

give to a diﬀerent set of countries and apply diﬀerent conditions to aid, the change in their

aid ﬂows may provide researchers with useful natural experiments.

The second set of questions, like the ﬁrst, can also be addressed with well-designed empirical

strategies and detailed data on past aid ﬂows. But since it does not hinge on how aid

has already been administered, these questions also provide a promising context for ﬁeld

experiments. For example, several of the experimental studies discussed in the review shed

light on potential ways to improve aid eﬀectiveness.

The two sets of questions are especially important to distinguish in the policy debate. To ask

whether existing aid has been eﬀective is to ultimately ask whether foreign aid policy can be

improved or should be re-designed. In contrast, to ask whether foreign aid can ever be eﬀective

is to ask whether policymakers and researchers should devote any resources to understanding

and improving foreign aid. For policymakers, it is critical to avoid using negative answers to
  12
     Also, new data centers such as the AidData center at the College of William and Mary may be able to
improve data availability to researchers.
  13
     Estimates for Chinese aid are provided by AidData.



                                                  30
the ﬁrst question to answer questions regarding the potential value of foreign aid.




                                             31
References

Alesina A, and Dollar D. 2000. Who Gives Foreign Aid to Whom and Why? J. of Econ.

Growth. 5:33–63

Banerjee A V, Duﬂo E. 2011. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight

Global Poverty. New York, NY: Public Aﬀairs

Bates R, Deaton A, Bhagwati J, Banerjee A, Amsden A, Stern N. 2007. Making Aid Work.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

Besley T J, Persson T. 2011. The Logic of Political Violence. Q. J. of Econ. 126:1411–45

Bourguignon F, Sundberg M. 2007. Aid Eﬀectiveness? Opening the Black Box. Amer. Econ.

Rev. 97:316–21

Casey K, Glennerster R, Miguel E. 2012. Reshaping Institutions: Evidence on Aid Impacts

Using a Preanalysis Plan. Q. J. of Econ. 127:1755–812

Collier P, Dehn J. 2001. Aid, Shocks, and Growth. Work. Pap., World Bank, Washington,

DC Collier P, Dollar D. 2002. Aid allocation and poverty reduction. Euro. Econ. Rev.

46:1475–500

Collier P, Hoeﬄer A. 2002. Aid, Policy and Peace: Reducing the Risk of Civil Conﬂict. Def.

and Peace Econ. 13:435–50

Collier P, Hoeﬄer A. 2004. Aid, policy and growth in post-conﬂict societies. Euro. Econ.

Rev. 48:1125–45

Crost B, Felter J, Johnston P. 2014. Aid under Fire: Development Projects and Civil Conﬂict.

Amer. Econ. Rev. 104:1833–56

Dalgaard C J, Hansen H, Tarp F. 2004. On The Empirics of Foreign Aid and Growth. Econ.

J. 114:191–216

Deaton A. 2013. The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality. Princeton,

NJ: Princeton Univ. Press

Development Initiatives. 2013. Investments to End Poverty: Real money, real choices, real

lives: Investments to End Poverty Full Report. Bristol, UK: Development Initiatives

                                            32
Djankov S, Montalvo J, Reynal-Querol M. 2008. The curse of aid. J. of Econ. Growth.

13:169-94

Dollar D, Burnside C. 2000. Aid, Policies, and Growth. Amer. Econ. Rev. 90:847–68 Dube

O, Naidu S. 2011. Bases, Bullets, and Ballots: The Eﬀect of U.S. Military Aid on Political

Conﬂict in Colombia. Work. Pap., Center for Global Development, Washington, DC

Dube O, Vargas J. 2013. Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conﬂict: Evidence from Colom-

bia. Rev. of Econ. Stud. 80:1384-421

Easterly W. 2003. Can Foreign Aid Buy Growth? J. of Econ. Persp. 17:23–48

Easterly W. 2006. Why Doesn’t Aid Work? Cato Unbound.

http://www.cato-unbound.org/2006/04/02/william-easterly/why-doesnt-aid-work

Easterly W, Levine R, Roodman D. 2003. New Data, New doubts: A Comment on Burnside

and Dollar’s Aid, Policies, and Growth (2000). Work. Pap., NBER, Cambridge, MA

Easterly W, Pfutze T. 2008. Where Does the Money Go? Best and Worst Practices in Foreign

Aid. J. of Econ. Persp. 22:29–52

Eisensee T, Stromberg D. 2007. News Droughts, News Floods, and U.S. Disaster Relief. Q.

J. of Econ. 122:693–728

Eubank N. 2012. Taxation, Political Accountability and Foreign Aid: Lessons from Soma-

liland. J. of Dev. Stud. 48:465–80

Faye M, Niehaus P. 2012. Political Aid Cycles. Amer. Econ. Rev. 102:3516–30

Galiani S, Knack S, Xu L C, Zou B. 2014. The eﬀect of aid on growth : evidence from a

quasi-experiment. Work. Pap., World Bank, Washington, DC

Garﬁnkel M R. 1990. Arming as a Strategic Investment in a Cooperative Equilibrium. Amer.

Econ. Rev. 80:50–68

Guillaumont P, Chauvet L. 2001. Aid and Performance: A Reassessment. J. of Dev. Stud.

37:66–92

Guiteras R, Mobarak A M. 2014. Does Development Aid Undermine Political Accountability?

Leader and Constituent Responses to a Large-Scale Intervention. Work. Pap., Yale University,

                                            33
New Haven, CT

Hansen H, Tarp F. 2001. Aid and growth regressions. J. of Dev. Econ. 64:547–70

Jayne T S, Strauss J, Yamano T, Molla D. 2002. Targeting of food aid in rural Ethiopia:

chronic need or inertia. J. of Dev. Econ. 68:247–88

Khilji N M, Zampelli E M. 1994. The fungibility of U.S. military and non- military assistance

and the impacts on expenditures of major aid recipients. J. of Dev. Econ. 43:345–62

Kirwan B, McMillan M. 2007. Food Aid and Poverty. Amer. J. of Ag. Econ. 89:1152–60

Kuziemko I, Werker E. 2006. How Much Is a Seat on the Security Council Worth? Foreign

Aid and Bribery at the United Nations. J. of Poli. Econ. 114: 905–930

Manacorda M, Miguel E, Vigorito A. 2011. Government Transfers and Political Support.

Amer. Econ. J.: Applied Econ. 3:1–28

McKinlay R D, Little R. 1977. A Foreign Policy Model of U.S. Bilateral Aid Allocation.

World Pol. 30:58–86

McKinlay R D, Little R.1978. A Foreign-Policy Model of the Distribution of British Bilateral

Aid, 1960 – 70. Brit. J. of Pol. Sci. 8:313–31

McKinlay R D, Little R. 1978b. The French Aid Relationship: A Foreign Policy Model of the

Distribution of French Bilateral Aid, 1964 -70. Dev. and Change. 9:459–78

Meernik J, Krueger E L, Poe S C. 1998. Testing Models of U.S. Foreign Policy: Foreign Aid

during and after the Cold War. J. of Politics. 60:63–85

Miguel E, Satyanath S, Sergenti E. 2004. Economic Shocks and Civil Conﬂict: An Instru-

mental Variables Approach. J. of Pol. Econ. 112:725–53

Nunn N, Qian N. 2014. The Determinants of Food Aid Provisions to Africa and the Developing

World. In: S. Edwards, S. Johnson and D. Weil, ed., African Successes: Sustainable Growth,

1st ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Nunn N, Qian N. 2014b. U.S. Food Aid and Civil Conﬂict. Amer. Econ. Rev. 104: 1630-66

Olken B A, Onishi J, Wong S. 2012. Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a Field

Experiment on Health and Education in Indonesia. Work. Pap., NBER, Cambridge, MA

                                             34
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2000. DAC Statistical Reporting

Directives. Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Paris, France

Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2014. DAC Members. Organiza-

tion for Economic Co-operation and Development. http://www.oecd.org/dac/dacmembers.htm

Pack H, Pack J R. 1990. Is Foreign Aid Fungible? The Case of Indonesia. Econ. J. 100:188–94

Pedersen K. 1996. Aid, Investment and Incentives. Scand. J. of Econ. 98:423–37

Polman L. 2010. The Crisis Caravan: What’s Wrong with Humanitarian Aid? New York,

NY: Henry Holt and Company

Rajan R G, Subramanian A. 2011. Aid, Dutch disease, and manufacturing growth. J. of Dev.

Econ. 94:106–18

Roodman D. 2007. The Anarchy of Numbers: Aid, Development, and Cross-Country Empir-

ics. World Bank Econ. Rev, 21:255–77

Sachs J. 2005. Four Easy Pieces. New York Times Sachs J. 2006. The End of Poverty:

Economic Possibilities for Our Time. New York, NY: Penguin Group USA

Schraeder P J, Hook S W, Taylor B. 1998. Clarifying the Foreign Aid Puzzle: A Comparison

of American, Japanese, French, and Swedish Aid Flows. World Pol. 50:294–323

Svensson J. 2000. Foreign aid and rent-seeking. J.of Inter. Econ. 51:437–61 United Nations.

2014.

UN Millennium Project | Press Archive. United Nations Millennium Project.

http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/press/07.htm

Werker E, Ahmed F Z, Cohen C. 2009. How Is Foreign Aid Spent? Evidence from a Natural

Experiment. Amer. Econ. J. Macro. 1:225–44




                                            35
                                   Table 1: Top Donors by Decade

                       !"#$%                    !"&$%                      !"'$%
      !"#$     %&'#()*       +,-./01+     %&'#()*     +,-./01+     %&'#()*       +,-./01+
       2    3#4(56/7("(58     29:;22   3#4(56/7("(58   2;:2<2   3#4(56/7("(58     2=:2>?
       ?        @)"#A5        B:BCC    7"'64/+)"D4"    =:<>;        E"F"#         <:2<C
       ;   3#4(56/G4#-6&H ?:;<<          I5)H"#*       B:CCC        @)"#A5        J:9B2
       B      I5)H"#*         ?:?9;        @)"#A5      B:?C9      I5)H"#*          J:J>2
       =    7"'64/+)"D4"      2:=B9        E"F"#       ;:C9<    7"'64/+)"D4"      J:>9;
       J        E"F"#         2:2==   3#4(56/G4#-6&H ;:>=B     3#4(56/G4#-6&H ;:B9;
       C       %"#"6"          J2J        %"#"6"       ?:;2=    K5(L5)M"#68       ?:<BC
       9      +'8()"M4"        J>>     K5(L5)M"#68     2:9<;         N("M*        ?:<?=
       <         N("M*         BJ<    G'O"4(/PG@+Q1R   2:=9;       %"#"6"         ?:<>9




36
       2>      S5M-4'H         BJC        7O565#       2:BC9       7O565#         2:<J?
                        !""$%                         ($$$%                  ($!$)*)($!+
       2         E"F"#        2=:2>>      3#4(56/7("(58     ??:;>9    3#4(56/7("(58     ?<:===
       ?     3#4(56/7("(58    2;:>9;          E"F"#         22:?2<   3#4(56/G4#-6&H 2B:B=2
       ;         @)"#A5       <:9<2         I5)H"#*         <:9;<       I5)H"#*         2;:>;<
       B       I5)H"#*        <:>B;      3#4(56/G4#-6&H <:B2=             @)"#A5        22:==<
       =    3#4(56/G4#-6&H B:;=J              @)"#A5        <:;=C         E"F"#         2>:=;C
       J     K5(L5)M"#68      ;:9;?       K5(L5)M"#68       =:;>>     K5(L5)M"#68        =:B<=
       C          N("M*       ;:=C?            7F"4#        ;:9JB        7O565#          =:?<>
       9        %"#"6"        ?:<B2          7O565#         ;:B<J        %"#"6"          =:>9J
       <        7O565#        ?:==<          %"#"6"         ;:B?<       +'8()"M4"        B:9;=
       2>      15#H")$        ?:>2C             N("M*       ;:;??        K&)O"*          B:C9B
     K&(58T/+,5)"-5/"##'"M/01+/648D')85H5#(/48/)5F&)(56/4#/H4MM4&#8/&U/?>></371./7&')A5T/0Q%1/
     1+%2/V&O8/D*/6&#&)WXYN17.
                                     Table 2: Top Recipients by Decade
                         !"#$%                     !"&$%                               !"'$%
     !"#$       %&'#()*        +,-./01+   %&'#()*      +,-./01+               %&'#()*           +,-./01+
       2          3#45"         6789:       ;-*<(        97929                  3#45"            =7=9>
       8        ?"$5@("#        87:>A       3#45"        97=92                  ;-*<(            87B=B
       =        C5D(#"E         27FF8    3#4&#D@5"       9722A              G"#-H"4D@I           879F6
       9         J&)D"          278B6       K*)5"        =7B=A                  3@)"DH           878AF
       6         +H-D)5"        278A:   G"#-H"4D@I       =7A:A               3#4&#D@5"           27B88
       F          G)"L5H        27296     ?"$5@("#       =7F29                ?"$5@("#           27A9=
       A         M')$D*          >>F      C5D(#"E        8782F                  K*)5"            27A89
       B       3#4&#D@5"         ABB        3@)"DH       87289                  %I5#"            27F>F
       >         ;-*<(           FFF       N&)4"#        87:88                 N&)4"#            2768F
      2:          %I5HD          6FF        J&)D"        87:2>                 K'4"#             279BA




37
                         !""$%                     ($$$%                            ($!$)*)($!+
       2         ;-*<(          972>B        3)"O        F7=B8              +P-I"#5@("#          97B6:
       8         %I5#"          =7668   +P-I"#5@("#      87>:B                   1!%             87BBA
       =          3#45"         87692      Q5-D)5"       876AF                C5D(#"E            876A6
       9       3#4&#D@5"        8722A     C5D(#"E        8788>                ;(I5&<5"           876:B
       6          3@)"DH        87:9:     ;(I5&<5"       872FB                ?"$5@("#           87:9=
       F      G"#-H"4D@I        87:=2        1!%         87:2B                M"#L"#5"           87:89
       A        ?"$5@("#        279A2     M"#L"#5"       87::>                  3#45"            27BA2
       B     R&L"ES5O'D         2799B     ?"$5@("#       27>88                 M')$D*            27A68
       >       ?I5H5<<5#D@      2798:       3#45"        27A:B        TD@(/G"#$/U/V"L"/K()5<     27F>=
      2:        M"#L"#5"        27=B2       %I5#"        27FF=                 JD#*"             27FA>
     Q&(D@W/+,D)"-D/"##'"H/01+/45@S')@DED#(/5@/)D<&)(D4/5#/E5HH5&#@/&P/8::>/XK1./K&')YDW/0;%1/1+%8/Z&[@/
     S*/)DY5<5D#(\]T31K.
                                  Table 3: Top Recipients by Decade – ODA as % of GDP
                          !"#$%                            !"&$%                               !"'$%
     !"#$         %&'#()*         +,-./01+          %&'#()*          +,-./01+          %&'#()*           +,-./01+
      2          3&(45"#"           627              8&)9"#            6:7              ;&<"=>"            ?67
      6          ;5"@>="#9          2A7             ;&<"=>"            6B7           C'>#D"E3>44"'         :F7
      B           GD4&(H&           2A7          C'>#D"E3>44"'         627         IJ'"(&)>"=/C'>#D"       B?7
      :            G>KD)>"          2:7           L"')>("#>"           627              C"<K>"             B27
      ?           ;&<"=>"           267           %"<K&9>"             2M7             GD4&(H&             6M7
      A           L"="5>            227             GD4&(H&            2F7            L"')>("#>"           6?7
      N             3D=>@D          2O7           3&(45"#"             2:7             1P>K&'Q             6B7
      F            8&)9"#            M7             !5"#9"             2B7                L"=>             6O7
      M           C"<K>"             M7            ;')>#"<D            267             R"#@"#>"            6O7
      2O          +=-D)>"            M7               L"=>             267               8&)9"#            2N7




38
                          !""$%                            ($$$%                            ($!$)*)($!+
        2        3&(45"#"           627              8&)9"#            6:7              ;&<"=>"            ?67
        6        ;5"@>="#9          2A7             ;&<"=>"            6B7           C'>#D"E3>44"'         :F7
        B         GD4&(H&           2A7          C'>#D"E3>44"'         627         IJ'"(&)>"=/C'>#D"       B?7
        :          G>KD)>"          2:7           L"')>("#>"           627              C"<K>"             B27
        ?         ;&<"=>"           267            %"<K&9>"            2M7              GD4&(H&            6M7
        A         L"="5>            227             GD4&(H&            2F7            L"')>("#>"           6?7
        N           3D=>@D          2O7            3&(45"#"            2:7              1P>K&'Q            6B7
        F          8&)9"#            M7             !5"#9"             2B7                L"=>             6O7
        M         C"<K>"             M7            ;')>#"<D            267             R"#@"#>"            6O7
        2O         +=-D)>"           M7               L"=>             267               8&)9"#            2N7
     S&(D4T/+,D)"-D/"##'"=/01+/9>4K')4D<D#(/>4/)DU&)(D9/"4/(HD/",D)"-D/&V/"##'"=/01+/"4/"/UD)WD#("-D/&V/C1X./;<"==/
     >4="#9/#"Q&#4/")D/DYW='9D9./;&')WDT/0I%1/1+%6/Z&54/K*/)DW>U>D#([\]^1;./]1^/9"("/V&)/C1X.
                                       Table 4: Top Recipients by Decade – Per Capita ODA

                                !"#$%                                !"&$%                                !"'$%
        !"#$           %&'#()*        +,-./01+/2%           %&'#()*        +,-./01+/2%           %&'#()*        +,-./01+/2%
         3              4&)5"#            678                4&)5"#            9:;                4&)5"#            9;9
         ;             1<=>&'?            6;@              A')=#"BC            D@@                 EF)"CG           :D;
         6               EF)"CG           ;38               1<=>&'?            D3D               1<=>&'?            6:8
         D               HCG=IC           3@J                0B"#              69J              A')=#"BC            ;3;
         :            A')=#"BC            3@3                 EF)"CG           699              K"')=("#="          ;38
         9            AL"I=G"#5           369                 A*)="            ;::                HCG=IC            ;8D
         7             M=>C)="            363                 HCG=IC           ;6D              H&(FL"#"            3@8
         @                M"&F            33@              K"')=("#="          ;;;                 A*)="            377
         J             +G-C)="            38:                N">&#             37:               N"B>="             39J
         38            O'#=F="             JD              H&(FL"#"            397                N">&#             396




39
                               !""$%                               ($$$%                              ($!$)*)($!(
         3               EF)"CG            6JD              P&F&,&            DDD                 P&F&,&            666
         ;             1<=>&'?             ;D;               E)"Q             ;;@              +R-S"#=F("#          ;;;
         6        H&F#="TUC)IC-&,=#"       ;D8              N'*"#"            3J3                 M=>C)="           ;;;
         D              N'*"#"             ;6;              AC)>="            3@3                 HS'("#            3J;
         :            A')=#"BC             ;36        H&F#="TUC)IC-&,=#"      39:                 N'*"#"            3@8
         9              4&)5"#             3J;            V=W")"-'"           39;                 4&)5"#            37D
         7            V=W")"-'"            379              4&)5"#            3D6                1<=>&'?            398
         @               HCG=IC            39@              HS'("#            3D;               A')=#"BC            3DD
         J              HS'("#             3:@             MC>"#&#            367           H&F#="TUC)IC-&,=#"      3D6
         38         N'=#C"TH=FF"'          3DD             1<=>&'?            366                 AC)>="            36J
     V&(CFX/+,C)"-C/"##'"G/YC)/W"Y=("/01+/5=F>')FCBC#(./AB"GG/=FG"#5/#"?&#F/")C/CZWG'5C5/A&')WCX/0[%1/1+%;/YC)/W"Y=("/
     G&LF/>*/)CW=Y=C#(\]^E1A.
                            Table 5: Correlates of ODA

                                          Dependent Variable: Ln ODA
                                 (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)
Ln Population                  -0.498           -0.952         -1.638         -1.824
                             (0.00107)         (0.000)       (0.0325)       (0.0319)
Lag Log GDP                     1.372            1.866          1.423         1.718
                              (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)
Lag Growth                    0.00345          -0.0226       0.0112          0.0264
                              (0.932)          (0.618)       (0.497)         (0.257)
Lag Conflict Incidence         0.0273           0.0172        0.00222       0.000203
                              (0.164)          (0.280)        (0.786)        (0.982)
Small Natural Disaster        -0.0486          -0.0843        0.0212         0.0255
                              (0.254)          (0.129)       (0.0628)       (0.0583)
Large Natural Disaster        0.00963          0.0162        -0.00398       -0.00951
                              (0.507)          (0.386)        (0.636)        (0.397)
Controls
Year FE                           N              Y              N               Y
Country FE                        N              N              Y               Y

Observations                   1,081           1,081          1,081           1,081
R-squared                       0.85            0.89           0.89            0.95

Notes: Standardized coefficients are reported. The standard errors are clustered at
the recipient country level. P-values are reported in parentheses. The data include
ODA given by OECD DAC members during 1960-2013. Observations are at the
level of the recipient country and year. Small (large) disaster is an indicator variable
which equals one if there were greater than 100 (1,000) deaths in a natural
disaster. There are a total of 1,168 small and 262 large natural disasters. Lag
conflict incidence equals one if there was at least one conflict in the past year.
There are 1,755 incidences of conflict in total. Source: OECD, WDI, COW and EM-
DAT from the Center for Research on Epidemiology of Disasters.




                                          40
                                    Table 6: Annual Non-Transferred Aid by Donor, 2006-2012

                                                                           _.(2;$%(,-#$$#E'!6E
        !"#$%&#'!(()%*' ;.<%*'=9!' ;.<%* ;.<%*'4>'.-'          ?03@'       ?0/@' I03@'         K03@'          N03@'          N0/@'
     +%*)#,'-.$'/0012/03/'                    <.<%*'=9!: 8AB.*%$,B6C,D GHC)<#E' 9#J<' !EH6(6,<$%L"#' 9#"#*.CH#(<' O#-)&##,'6('
         456*'/033'789:                                     <$%6(6(&'6(' ,<)E#(<' $#*6#-    A.,<,'(.<'     %M%$#(#,,        E.(.$'
                                                              E.(.$'      A.,<,              6(A*)E#E'                    A.)(<$6#,
                                                             A.)(<$F                        #*,#MB#$#
     !"#$%&'(&                )*+),     -)+     ./0112          +34                 .+/         .//             )             )3
     !),<$6%                   PPQ      10R     1PS13>           33         T0      U31          VR             T             UQ
     W#*&6)H                  3XRU0     QU1     V3SU0>           VV         VP      /RT          RT            3T             TP
     5&6&7&                   )*18/     4/1     +.0,/2           ),        ./+      .3-         +/,            ..            .,.
     YZ#AB'O#C)J*6A             10       //     V1STV>           Q                               Q              /             30
     9#(H%$[                  3XR3R     V0V     3RS1U>           R                   13         3VV             Q             TR
     I6(*%(E                   T/R      330     33SPV>           V                   V           1Q            30             /P
     9%&6:;                   8*//)    )*,4)    1303,2           18        .331 .8-,            1.4             /            1)8
     <;%=&6>                  .3*8,, )*3/4      +408+2          ..+        8.-     ./33         )),            1)             -8




41
     K$##A#                    /3T      30Q     URSPV>           30         Q1                   3P             0             /0
     GA#*%(E                    /0       /      33S3P>                               0            /             0              0
     G$#*%(E                   1T3       QQ      RSTV>           3          0        0           U3            33              3
     G<%*F                    3XQPP     PV3     Q/SV0>           3V         0       1/1          Q3             T            3V3
     ?&@&6                    .-*+43 +*-))      ./0-82          +.+                .--+         4//             )              .
     \.$#%                    3XVT3      RR      QSQV>           /V         /        1           VP             P
     ])^#HJ.)$&                /1U       //      PSU3>           0                               3T             V              0
     A;$B;%'&67#              -*,8)     811     ./03.2           ,+                 +)+         )./            ))            +,3
     _#M'`#%*%(E               V/1       1/     3TS0/>           3T                  0           /T             3             3V
     AC%D&>                   )*1/+     188     .101+2           -                   +8         ++,            +)            +.1
     a.$<)&%*                  VVR       QP     3RS0R>           T          /P       V           3Q             /              0
     8C%6(                    VXUV0     1/R     3PS/P>           V/         0       VV0         31U            1P             V/
     ED;7;6                   +*8-+     4-3     +-0)82           +)                 ..,         ++8            .8            )/+
     8M6<Z#$*%(E              3XPTV     QPV     V0SRR>           U          /        RT         3UV            33            VUV
     F6($;7GH(6I7C=           4*.+/    .*./)    ./0)+2           .1                 43,         )8-            +.             +/
     F6($;7GE$&$;#            +,*)3. +*,+,       80882          ..4                 /1,        .13.             3            //.
     _.<#,@'!**'"%*)#,'%$#',B.M('6('/00T'789S';B#'<.C'<#('E.(.$,'4%AA.$E6(&'<.'<.<%*'=9!'6('/03V:'%$#'B6&B*6&B<#ES'8.)$A#@'=?Y9S
                                                         Figure 1: ODA as a % of GNI, 1960-2013
                       )"&#$



                       )"%#$



                       )"!#$



                       !"(#$



                       !"'#$




     !"#$%&$'($)*+,$
                       !"&#$




42
                       !"%#$



                       !"!#$
                               )*'!$            )*+!$              )*(!$                     )**!$                %!!!$             %!)!$
                                                                                     -./0$

                                       ,-./01231$       ,-./031$           45263-7$             8191:1$           8;5<=$>5?-@23<$
                                       A59710B$         C39219:$           C019<5$              D50719E$          D055<5$
                                       F<5219:$         F05219:$           F/12E$               G1?19$            HI051$
                                       J-K57@I-06$      L5/=50219:.$       L5M$N51219:$         LI0M1E$           OI0/-612$
                                       P?139$           PM5:59$            PM3/;50219:$         Q93/5:$H396:I7$   Q93/5:$P/1/5.$

     Source: OECD DAC1 ﬂows by donor/QWIDS. WDI GNI.
                                                                    Figure 2: Total ODA and ODA from Top 10 Donors, 1960-2013

                               *)$!!!"                                                                                                             #!!$!!!"


                                                                                                                                                   ('!$!!!"
                               *!$!!!"

                                                                                                                                                   (&!$!!!"


                               #)$!!!"
                                                                                                                                                   (%!$!!!"


                                                                                                                                                   (#!$!!!"
                               #!$!!!"

                                                                                                                                                   (!!$!!!"

                               ()$!!!"
                                                                                                                                                   '!$!!!"




       01%%1"-.&"*&2334&56(&




43
                                                                                                                                                   &!$!!!"
                               (!$!!!"
                                                                                                                                                              !"#$%&'()&*+",&)%%&("-"+.&/01%&2334&56(7&




                                                                                                                                                   %!$!!!"

                                )$!!!"
                                                                                                                                                   #!$!!!"


                                    !"                                                                                                             !"
                                         (+&!"                    (+,!"                 (+'!"                    (++!"      #!!!"          #!(!"
                                                                                                         89$+&

                                                 -./012"304015"       -./012"6/.7289"     :1;94.<"               =4>4."    ?;4.@1"       3A121."
                                                 34B2/"C;4D/4"        E8;A4<"             E10F1;G4.25"           H4.424"   CGG"I8.8;5"

     Notes: Top donor is deﬁned according to ODA disbursement in 2013. Source: OECD DAC1 ﬂows by donor/QWIDS.
                                                        Figure 3: ODA from Top 10 non-DAC Donors, 1970-2012
                     &#$!!!"




                     &!$!!!"




                     %#$!!!"




     !""#$%&'$()*$
                     %!$!!!"




44
                      #$!!!"




                          !"
                               %'(!"                      %')!"                     %''!"                          &!!!"             &!%!"
                                                                                        +,-.$

                                       *+,-."/+/0123"     *45678"        92:"               ;-4<="25->=-"    *-=?-/"       @4AA=-"
                                       BA5-7."            C4?-=,"        @+D-/=-"           E=7FG,7/A,7=/"   E=,G4-/=-"

     Notes: Top donor is deﬁned according to ODA disbursement in 2013. Source: OECD.
                                                                      Figure 4: ODA Received by Top 10 Recipients, 1960-2013
                              *$!!!"




                              )$!!!"




                              ($!!!"




                              '$!!!"




                              &$!!!"




45
      !"##"$%&'$(')**+',-.'
                              %$!!!"




                              #$!!!"




                                  !"
                                       #+)!"                  #+*!"                #+,!"                    #++!"           %!!!"               %!#!"

                                               -./01234512"             6375218"           9503:;31"          <=>?7@"       A:2/:$"B78C"D7;C"
                                               <12E1231"                F72@1"             A:57"GHIJ:3>7"     K12/L1G740"   M:E18N3O=7"

     Notes: Top recipient is deﬁned according to ODA disbursement in 2013. Source: OECD DAC2 ﬂows by recipient/QWIDS.
                                        Figure 5: ODA Received by Top 10 Recipients as % of GDP, 1960-2013

                         !#+"



                         !#*"



                         !#)"



                         !#("



                         !#'"




       !"#$%&$'($)"*+$
                         !#&"




46
                         !#%"



                         !#$"



                           !"
                                $,)!"    $,*!"                      $,+!"                  $,,!"                    %!!!"   %!$!"
                                                                                   ,-./$

                                          -./01234512"     67819:3;<="      >?@"            A1281231"     B5037C31"
                                          @75="DEFG73H="   I=2J1"           K3=5219"        L12/M1D=40"   A<HN=J"

     Notes: Top recipient is deﬁned according to ODA disbursement in 2013. Small island nations are excluded. Source: OECD DAC2
     ﬂows by recipient/QWIDS. WDI data for GDP.
                                                                            Figure 6: Per Capita ODA by Recipient Income
                                                        +!!"



                                                        *!!"



                                                        )!!"
              !"#$%&'$()*+,)$-.!$/&0&+"&1$23445$67.8$




                                                        (!!"



                                                        '!!"



                                                        &!!"



                                                        %!!"



                                                        $!!"



                                                        #!!"



                                                          !"
                                                               #+(!"                        #+)!"                        #+*!"                        #++!"                $!!!"                      $!#!"
                                                                                                                                           9&)'$

                                                                                           ,-."/01"2345"$!!+"6708"#9#(!"          (9*&%"           #)9+%)"    ')9+$'"      )%#9%*&"


Notes: ODA recipients are divided into ﬁve equally sized groups according to their GDP in
a given year. Data for ODA are reported by the OECD DAC2 ﬂows by recipient/QWIDS.
Data for GDP are reported by the WDI.




                                                                                  Figure 7: Total ODA by Recipient Income
                                                        ',$$$&                                                                                                                                     #"#$%&


                                                        !,+$$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                   #"$$%&

                                                        !,*$$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                   )"#$%&
                                                        !,)$$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                            !"#$"%#&'(")*+"&#",##-./&"01234(."
                     +56")*+"7.8.25.9":;2("<==>"?@*A"




                                                                                                                                                                                                   )"$$%&
                                                        !,'$$&


                                                        !,$$$&                                                                                                                                     ("#$%&


                                                          +$$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ("$$%&

                                                          *$$&
                                                                                                                                                                                                   '"#$%&
                                                          )$$&

                                                                                                                                                                                                   '"$$%&
                                                          '$$&


                                                               $&                                                                                                                                  !"#$%&
                                                                    !-*$&                  !-.$&                  !-+$&                       !--$&                '$$$&                '$!$&
                                                                                                                                   B.'-"

                                                                            /01&234&5678&'$$-&9:3;&!,!*$&       *,+)(&           !.,-(.&           #.,-'#&    .(!,(+)&     %&<=&4==>?@<&AB7CD8?&



Notes: ODA recipients are divided into ﬁve equally sized groups according to their GDP in a
given year. Data for ODA are reported by the OECD DAC2 ﬂows by recipient/QWIDS.



                                                                                                                                    47
                                                                 Figure 8: Bilateral and Multilateral Aid
                                              ,*!-!!!$                                                                                                        !",,$



                                              ,(!-!!!$                                                                                                        !",$



                                              ,&!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!+$



                                              ,#!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!*$




                                                                                                                                                                       !"#$#%&'(%#)*+),##)-.,/)
                     !0##0123)14)5667)89.)




                                              ,!!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!)$



                                               *!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!($



                                               (!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!'$



                                               &!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!&$



                                               #!-!!!$                                                                                                        !"!%$



                                                    !$                                                                                                        !"!#$
                                                         ,+(!$   ,+)!$                    ,+*!$                  ,++!$                  #!!!$      #!,!$
                                                                                                         :'%()

                                                                           ./010234520$            670234520$        ./010234520$89$:00$;<:=$


Source: OECD DAC1 ﬂows by donor/QWIDS.



                                                                 Figure 9: Humanitarian Aid, 1960-2013
                                             *&!,!!!$                                                                                                          !"*!$



                                             *#!,!!!$
                                                                                                                                                               !"!)$


                                             *+!,!!!$


                                                                                                                                                               !"!($
                                                                                                                                                                                           !"#$%&'$(&$%)*+),--)./,0)




                                             *!!,!!!$
       1&--&2%3)24)5667)89/)




                                              (!,!!!$                                                                                                          !"!'$



                                              &!,!!!$
                                                                                                                                                               !"!&$


                                              #!,!!!$


                                                                                                                                                               !"!%$
                                              +!,!!!$



                                                   !$                                                                                                          !"!#$
                                                        *)&!$    *)'!$                    *)(!$                   *))!$                    +!!!$      +!*!$
                                                                                                         :;$()

                                                                         -..$/0-$             123456748645$          123456748645$9:$-..$/0-;$

Source: OECD DAC2a humanitarian aid.


                                                                                                        48
                                                                   Figure 10: Non-Transferred Aid for Top 10 Donors, 2006-2012
                                                         +!"!!#$



                                                         *!"!!#$



                                                         )!"!!#$
        !"#$%&'()%*+,((,-"./0"




                                                         (!"!!#$



                                                         '!"!!#$



                                                         &!"!!#$



                                                         %!"!!#$



                                                          !"!!#$
                                                                      &!!*$               &!!+$               &!!,$               &!!-$               &!%!$                &!%%$       &!%&$
                                                                                                                                  1,)("

                                                                              ./0123$415126$                                      ./0123$70/839:$
                                                                              ;2<:5/=$                                            >5?5/$
                                                                              @<5/A2$                                             4B232/$
                                                                              C9<B5=$                                             C21D2<E5/36$
                                                                              F5/535$                                             GHF$I915EJ$K2L"$A9M/1<026$B01D$/9$/9/N1<5/6$3515O$


Notes: Top donor is deﬁned according to ODA disbursement in 2013. Source: OECD.



                                                           Figure 11: Non-Transferred Aid by Type for All Donors, 2006-2012
                                                         %#!!!"




                                                         %!!!!"
                   !"#$%&'#()*&&*+,-./,0123,4556,78.9,




                                                         $#!!!"




                                                         $!!!!"




                                                          #!!!"




                                                              !"
                                                                      %!!&"               %!!'"               %!!("               %!!)"               %!$!"                 %!$$"      %!$%"
                                                                                                                                  :*'&,

                                                                              *!$+",-./0123.453672148489"48":/8/2"-/;872<"         *!%+"=>5;7?:"37;:?87"-/373"
                                                                              @!$+"A?B7"2?04?C"                                    D!$+"E:>4843721FG?"-/373"8/7"48-0;:?:"?03?H.?2?"
                                                                              I!$+"A?G?0/5>?87"1H12?8?33"                          I!%+"J?C;9??3"48":/8/2"-/;8724?3"


Source: OECD.


                                                                                                                             49
                                                                                 Figure 12: Infant Mortality Rates in Sub-Saharan Africa

                                                                                 Angola                   Congo, Dem. Rep.               Cote d'Ivoire                 Ethiopia




                                                                  2
                                                                  1.5
                                                                  1
                                                                  .5
                                                                                 Ghana                         Kenya                     Mozambique                    Nigeria




                                                                  2
                                                                  1.5
                                                                  1




50
                                                                  .5
                                                                               South Africa                    Sudan                      Tanzania                     Uganda




                                                                  2
                                                                  1.5

                              Normalized Infant Mortality Rates
                                                                  1
                                                                  .5
                                                                        1960   1980    2000   2020 1960     1980   2000      2020 1960   1980    2000    2020 1960   1980    2000   2020

                                                                                                                             Year
                                                                  Graphs by country


     Notes: The values for each country are normalized by dividing by the 1990 value for that country. Source: WDI.
