NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPERFECT COMPETITION IN SELECTION MARKETS
Neale Mahoney
E. Glen Weyl
Working Paper 20411
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20411

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

Weyl acknowledges the financial support of the Ewing Marion Kauffman foundation which funded
the research assistance of Kevin Qian. Mahoney acknowledges financial support from the Neubauer
Family Foundation. We are grateful to Miguel Espinosa, Mark Sands, Andre Veiga, and seminar participants
at the 2014 AEA Meetings, Chicago Booth, the 2014 IIOC, and the University of Tokyo for their feedback
and to Henry Mak and Michael Whinston for excellent discussions. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Neale Mahoney and E. Glen Weyl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Imperfect Competition in Selection Markets
Neale Mahoney and E. Glen Weyl
NBER Working Paper No. 20411
August 2014
JEL No. D42,D43,D82,I13,L10,L41
ABSTRACT
Standard policies to correct market power and selection can be misguided when these two forces co-exist.
Using a calibrated model of employer-sponsored health insurance, we show that the risk adjustment
commonly used by employers to offset adverse selection often reduces the amount of high-quality
coverage and thus social surplus. Conversely, in a model of subprime auto lending calibrated to Einav,
Jenkins and Levin (2012), realistic levels of competition among lenders generate a significant oversupply
of credit, implying greater market power is desirable. We build a model of symmetric imperfect competition
in selection markets that parameterizes the degree of both market power and selection and use graphical
price-theoretic reasoning to provide a general analysis of the interaction between selection and imperfect
competition. We use the same logic to show that in selection markets four principles of the United
States Horizontal Merger Guidelines are often reversed.

Neale Mahoney
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Neale.Mahoney@chicagobooth.edu
E. Glen Weyl
Microsoft Research New England
One Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
glenweyl@microsoft.com

1

Introduction

In health insurance markets, risk adjustment is increasingly used to offset the adverse selection that
occurs when consumers with higher medical costs select more generous health plans (e.g., Brown
et al., 2012). Reducing adverse selection, however, may be misguided when insurance plans have
market power. The reason is that firms facing adverse selection have an incentive to lower their
prices to encourage lower cost “young invincibles” to buy their product. Risk adjustment, precisely
because it offsets adverse selection, undermines this incentive and thus may lead to higher prices and
lower social surplus.
Conversely, in consumer lending markets, some degree of market power can be helpful. In a perfectly competitive market, lenders have an incentive to reduce down-payment requirements to attract
profitable infra-marginal customers from their rivals. These lower down-payments draw in high-risk
marginal borrowers, to whom loans are socially wasteful. This means that financial deregulation to
increase competition among lenders—such as that attempted in the U.S. in the early 2000s—may
inefficiently inflate credit supply.
Thus, selection and imperfect competition interact in rich, surprising, and potentially socially
important ways. Yet despite these features, we are unaware of any systematic analysis of imperfect
competition in selection markets. In this paper we try to fill this gap with a price-theoretic model that
builds on existing literature on both topics, and can be analyzed graphically to provide intuition.
We start, however, by providing a more-detailed treatment of our two motivating examples. We
build a model of health plan choice and calibrate it to data on the U.S. employer-sponsored insurance market. In this model, risk adjustment typically has the unintended consequence of reducing
surplus received by the firm and its workers, and often harms social welfare. To examine the effects
of market power in consumer lending, we calibrate a model of subprime auto lending to the data in
Einav, Jenkins and Levin (2012). We show that in this market, perfect competition generates a significant oversupply of loans, providing a cost subsidy to the marginal borrower of 41%. While these
calibrations do not substitute for careful empirical analysis, they suggest the forces we highlight may
be quantitatively important.
We next present a general model of symmetric imperfect competition in selection markets. To
abstract from a particular model of imperfect competition (such as Bertrand or Cournot), we use
the conduct parameter approach pioneered by Bresnahan (1989) and further developed in Weyl and
Fabinger (2013). Market power is indexed by a parameter θ that nests, as special cases, monopoly,
perfect competition, versions of symmetric Cournot competition (with or without conjectural variations), and differentiated products Bertrand competition.
This one-dimensional conduct parameter approach is enabled by the assumption that consumers’
willingness-to-pay is distributed symmetrically across products. To add selection to this model, we
need to strengthen this notion of symmetry to account variation in the cost of providing the product
to consumers of different types. Following Rochet and Stole (2002) and White and Weyl (2012), we assume that, at symmetric prices, all firms receive a representative sample of all consumers purchasing
the product in terms of their cost, and that a firm that cuts its price steals consumers with a similarly
1

representative distribution of costs from its competitors. We can then capture variation in the degree
of selection arising from different correlations between willingness-to-pay and costs across markets
with a single parameter σ.
We use this model to derive comparative statics that sometimes match, and sometimes contradict,
standard intuitions:
1. Under adverse selection, social surplus is (weakly) decreasing in market power. Adverse selection leads to undersupply, and market power only worsens this problem.
2. Under advantageous selection, when marginal borrowers are costlier than average borrowers,
social surplus is inverse-U-shaped in market power. Advantageous selection leads to oversupply, thus market power is socially beneficial up to a point as it offsets the natural tendency
towards excessive supply.
3. Despite its direct costs, increasing the extent of adverse selection may benefit consumers, and
even society, if market power and equilibrium quantity are both sufficiently high. This occurs
because increased selection makes the average marginal consumer less costly to serve, thereby
lowering price and offsetting market power.
4. Conversely, increasing advantageous selection is beneficial if the market is sufficiently competitive or quantity is sufficiently low. This occurs because increased selection both lowers the cost
of the average marginal consumer and directly lowers firm costs by creating a better average
selection of purchasers.
We also consider changes to the degree of selection that could be brought about by risk adjustment. Reducing selection through risk adjustment impacts equilibrium price and quantity identically
to a reduction in the correlation between willingness-to-pay and costs. However, the effect on social
surplus is different because implementing risk adjustment is not generically budget neutral for the
risk adjuster. We extend our results to this setting and obtain similar, but often stronger, counterintuitive findings about the interaction between market power and selection.
We illustrate the implications of our results by applying them to a canonical problem in competition policy: the merger to monopoly of two symmetric competitors. We show that several standard
intuitions embodied in the latest revision of the United States Horizontal Merger Guidelines (United
States Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, 2010, henceforth HMG) are partially or
fully reversed in selection markets. Advantageous selection can generate large values of “Upward
Pricing Pressure” (UPP), a standard indicator used to assess a prospective merger’s harm. Since markets with advantageous selection can have too much competition, this means that UPP can be large
exactly in settings where additional market power can be socially beneficial. As another example,
the merger guidelines caution that mergers between firms selling highly substitutable products are
likely to be particularly harmful as they greatly reduce competition. However, under advantageous
selection it is precisely when such intense competition between two firms exists that supply is likely

2

to be most excessive and thus the reduction in competition resulting from a merger potentially beneficial. Thus, under advantageous selection, the more substitutable are the products, the more likely
the merger is to be beneficial.
Our paper is closely related to Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010) and Einav and Finkelstein
(2011), who conduct a general analysis of perfectly competitive selection markets that builds on the
classical theory of a natural monopoly regulated to charge a price equal to average cost (Dupuit, 1849;
Hotelling, 1938).1 While this work has been influential, a constraint in applying the framework more
broadly is that the assumption of perfect competition is questionable in many important selection
markets.2 Perhaps because of this, existing work on imperfect competition has relied more heavily
on structural assumptions about firm and consumer behavior (e.g., Lustig, 2010; Starc, 2014).
While the policy-relevant conclusions we highlight motivate our analysis, we view our main
contribution as providing a general understanding of the interaction between selection and imperfect
competition. To do so, we extend the price-theoretic approach of Einav and Finkelstein, conveying
our results when possible with simple graphs and verbal descriptions, with formal mathematical
statements and proofs presented in the appendix.3 In doing so we aim to build broader intuition and
provide a foundation for empirical work in a range of socially important markets.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 presents the motivating results on
health insurance and subprime lending in more detail. Section 3 presents the model and Section 4 the
main results. Section 5 presents our application to the Horizontal Merge Guidelines, and additional
results from our calibrated health insurance model. Section 6 concludes.

2

Motivating Results

In this section, we present our motivating examples of health insurance and consumer lending, using
graphs to illustrate the logic of our arguments and calibrated models to investigate their quantitative
importance. We refer the reader to Subsection 5.2 and Subsection 5.3 for additional details on the
calibrated models.

2.1

Risk Adjustment in Health Insurance

Employers in the U.S. are increasingly offering health plan choice. A standard setup includes a base
plan, with significant cost-sharing, and a number of high-quality options, with less cost-sharing and
1 This is an application of Marshall (1890)’s observation that competitive industries with economies or diseconomies of
scale that are external to an individual firm’s production would operate identically to a monopolist regulated to charge a
price at average cost.
2 In their survey on empirical models of insurance markets, Einav, Finkelstein and Levin (2010) write that “there has
been much less progress on empirical models of insurance market competition, or on empirical models of insurance contracting that incorporate realistic market frictions. One challenge is to develop an appropriate conceptual framework.
Even in stylized models of insurance markets with asymmetric information, characterizing competitive equilibrium can be
challenging, and the challenge is compounded if one wants to allow for realistic consumer heterogeneity and market imperfections.” Similarly Chiappori et al. (2006) argue that “there is a crying need for . . . models . . . devoted to the interaction
between imperfect competition and adverse selection on risk.”
3 See Weyl (2014) for a detailed discussion of price theory methodology more generally.

3

access to a broader network of providers. At many employers, the base plan is self-insured, meaning
that the employer takes on the medical cost risk, and is free or available at a nominal employee contribution (i.e, “price”). The high-quality options are often provided by profit-maximizing insurance
companies with the employer providing a subsidy and the employee paying the rest.
A key decision for employers is how to set subsidies for the high-quality plans. Cutler and Reber (1998) argue that Harvard University’s decision to provide a constant per-employee subsidy led
to an “adverse selection death spiral” and the collapse of the high-quality plan. They propose that
subsidies be risk adjusted to account for selection, and many employers—along with other health insurance exchanges—now implement risk adjustment schemes. However, Cutler and Reber’s model,
and other work that we are aware of on risk adjustment, assumes insurers are perfectly competitive,
which contrasts with the findings of Dafny (2010) and Dafny, Duggan and Ramanarayanan (2012) on
limited competition in the health insurance sector.4
We argue that in the presence of market power, risk-adjusting subsidies may actually lead firms
to charge higher prices for insurance. The reason is that firms facing adverse selection, if and only if
their market power is sufficient to impact the composition of buyers in the market, have an incentive
to lower their prices to encourage lower cost “young invincibles” to buy their product. Risk adjustment, precisely because it offsets adverse selection, undermines this incentive and thus may lead to higher
prices and inefficiently lower take-up.
Figure 1 makes this point graphically. Panel (A) plots a perfectly competitive market, with P(q)
denoting inverse demand for the high-quality plan, or the willingness-to-pay as a function of the fraction q of potential customers who purchase the product. The lines AC (q) and MC (q) denote the cost
(net of any subsidies paid to the high-quality plan) of the average and average marginal consumer
when a fraction q of consumers take-up the plan. Because selection is adverse, the individuals most
eager for high-quality insurance are also costliest, and the cost curves are declining in quantity. The
perfectly competitive equilibrium, where the high-quality plan earns zero profits, is characterized by
the intersection of inverse demand P and AC, and is shown as point A in the figure.
Now consider a risk adjustment policy where the subsidy is adjusted to account for any difference between the cost of the consumers the select into the plan AC (q? ) and average cost in the
population AC (1). This corresponds to counter-clockwise rotation of the average cost curve about
its right-most point. Since average cost is downward sloping, this lowers average costs, shifting the
market to equilibrium with a lower price and higher quantity, shown by point B in the figure.
Risk adjustment increases employee surplus because employees face a lower price. Risk adjustment improves social surplus because we have depicted a setting in panel (A) where the average
marginal consumer is less costly than the population average (viz. MC < AC (1)) and therefore
lowering the price to AC (1) brings price closer to the social optimum of P = MC. Risk adjustment
reduces employer surplus because it requires providing a net subsidy of q? [ AC (q? ) − AC (1)]. However, since subsidies are passed through to employees, the employer can lower wages while attracting
4 Papers

that assume perfect competition or a constant markup include Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2014), Bundorf,
Levin and Mahoney (2012), Glazer and McGuire (2000), Pauly and Herring (2000), Feldman and Dowd (1982), and Carlin
and Town (2010). In contrast, Dafny (2010) and Dafny, Duggan and Ramanarayanan (2012) show that not only is the
insurance sector highly concentrated but that recent mergers have significantly raised premiums in the market.

4

Figure 1: Risk Adjustment Under Perfect Competition and Monopoly
(B) Monopoly

(A) Perfect Competition

P(Q)

B

Perfect Competition (P = AC)
AC

A
AC = MC

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

B

A
P(Q)

AC
AC = MC
MC

MC
MR
Quantity

Quantity

Note: This figure shows the effects of risk adjustment on the equilibrium price and quantity. Panel (A) shows effects
under perfect competition where the equilibrium is defined by the intersection of the inverse demand and average cost
curves (P = AC). Panel (B) shows the effects under monopoly where the equilibrium is defined by the intersection of
the marginal revenue and marginal cost curves (MR = MC).

the same pool of employees, allowing it to recover this cost.
Now suppose that this equilibrium is instead determined by the profit-maximizing behavior
of a monopolist provider, as shown in panel (B) of Figure 1.5 A monopolist maximizes profits,
q [ P(q) − AC (q)], by equating marginal revenue MR = P(q) + P0 (q)q and MC, generating the equilibrium shown in point A in the figure. As before, risk adjustment makes all consumers equally costly,
and thus reduces the plans average costs. However, because quantity is high and thus the average
marginal consumer is less costly than the population average, risk adjustment raises the monopolist’s
marginal cost, shifting the market to an equilibrium with higher price and lower quantity, shown by
point B in the figure.6 Thus, in exchange for its subsidy, the plan raises its profits at the expense of
consumers and aggregate welfare.
Nor is this outcome a mere theoretical possibility. In Section 5.2 we calibrate a model of health
plan choice, drawing on data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) and the Employer
Health Benefits Survey (EHBS). Insurance plan generosity is often characterized by the actuarial
value (AV) or the fraction of costs covered by the plan. Our model has a base plan (AV of 60%)
with an administratively set employee contribution and a number of high-quality plans (AV of 90%)
5 Panel (B) shows demand and cost curves that give rise to the exact same equilibrium price and quantity as those in
panel (A); the two cases thus correspond to different analytic interpretations of (superficially) observationally equivalent
markets.
6 For clarity we refer to “cost” as a property of an individual and “marginal” and “average costs” as properties of the
market. These are linked by averaging the costs of individuals to obtain market aggregates. In particular, the marginal cost
curve is the average cost of marginal consumers when a certain fraction of consumers are in the market, and the average
cost curve is the cost of average purchasers at that quantity.

5

Figure 2: Parameter Space Where Risk Adjustment is Harmful
1
0.9
Risk Adjustment Reduces
Social Surplus

0.8

Market Power (θ)

0.7

Risk Adjustment
Reduces Employer +
Employee Surplus

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

Risk Adjustment Beneficial

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Baseline Quantity (q*)

0.8

0.9

1

Note: This figure shows the effects of risk adjustment on welfare from the calibrated health insurance model. The vertical
axis (θ) shows an index of market power. The horizontal axis (q? ) shows shows the equilibrium fraction of consumers
with coverage. Dots show simulated markets based on the distribution of market power reported in Dafny, Duggan and
Ramanarayanan (2012) and coverage rates in the 2010 Employer Health Benefits Survey (EHBS). See text for details.

where employee contributions are determined by market forces. We assume that subsidies are risk
adjusted to account for costs under the 60% AV plan and consider risk adjustment that further compensates for the incremental 30% of costs of the 90% AV plan. We find that robustly over a range of
plausible parameter values, common risk adjustment policies are harmful.
To see this visually, consider Figure 2. The vertical axis represents the degree of market power,
parameterized by an index θ proposed by Weyl and Fabinger (2013), which equals the inverse of
the number of firms in Cournot competition (θ = 1/n), for example. The horizontal axis represents the equilibrium fraction of individuals served in the market. The dots show simulated markets
constructed using data on the distribution of market power reported by Dafny, Duggan and Ramanarayanan (2012) and coverage rates in the EHBS. The figure shows that a significant share of
markets fall in the top-right region where risk adjustment reduces social surplus by lowering quantity. Furthermore, most markets fall at least into the central region, where risk adjustment reduces
combined employer-employee surplus. Risk adjustment is thus, from the perspective of the firm and
its workers, attractive in a relatively small part of the parameter space and in a minority of markets.
In Subsection 5.2 we provide more details on the calibration. In addition to the results on risk adjustment discussed above, we show that other interventions to reduce the impacts of selection, such
as risk-based pricing or decreasing the quality of consumer information (Handel, 2012), are similarly
unattractive to employer-employee surplus and often to society. Thus, we think it is plausible that
standard prescriptions to address adverse selection may be misguided because they are based on
analysis that ignores market power.

6

Figure 3: Equilibria Under Advantageous Selection.

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Social Optimum (P = MC)
Price and Cost

Perfect Competition (P = AC)
MC

AC

P(q)
MR
Quantity

Note: This figure shows the monopoly, socially optimal, and perfectly competitive equilibria in an advantageously
selected market.

2.2

Competition and Consumer Lending

However, it is not only policies intended to address selection that can backfire in the presence of market power. Policies aimed at addressing market power can backfire in the presences of selection. In
particular, the 2008 financial crisis highlighted the large social costs of excessive consumer credit. As
documented by Mian and Sufi (2009) and others, the pre-crisis period was marked by an increase in
generosity of loan terms to subprime borrowers—with sharply reduced down-payment requirements
and less rigorous verification of borrower income—followed in close succession by an increase in default rates and reduction in profitability. This evidence is consistent with de Meza and Webb (1987)’s
argument that average marginal borrowers, who would only borrow under reduced down-payment
and documentation requirements, being worse credit risks than the average borrower. We therefore
follow them in referring to this as “advantageous selection,” in contrast with adverse selection that
occurs when the average marginal consumer has a lower cost than the average purchaser.
As de Meza and Webb explain, advantageous selection leads competitive markets to supply too
much credit. Lenders, eager to attract profitable inframarginal consumers but unable to effectively
screen them from less profitable marginal consumers, offer all borrowers more generous terms. A
monopolistic lender would internalize these “cream-skimming” externalities, but competitive firms
do not. This suggests that policies such as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which intended to bring
“greater . . . competition in the financial services industry,” could have contributed to an inefficient
credit boom.7
7 President

Clinton’s signing statement, November 12, 1999: http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=56922.

7

Figure 4: Social Markup
5,000

Social Markup (P−MC)

0

−5,000

−10,000

−15,000

−20,000

−25,000

−30,000
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Market Power (θ)

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Note: This figure shows the social markup P − MC (y-axis) of the down-payment on a $10,000 car loan as a function of
the degree of market power (x-axis). The social makeup on the down-payment is defined as the difference between the
required down-payment amount and the cost for the marginal borrower, with a negative value indicating a subsidy to
borrowers. The values are calibrated using the model and estimated parameters from Einav, Jenkins and Levin (2012)’s
study of subprime auto lending.

The economic logic behind this argument can also be demonstrated in a simple graph. Consider
the determinants of the equilibrium down-payment on a loan P, holding fixed the interest rate and
total amount borrowed. Figure 3 plots inverse demand and the average and marginal cost of supplying the loan. In contrast to Figure 1, AC and MC are upward-slopping because marginal borrowers
are more costly (i.e., riskier) than inframarginal borrowers. The socially optimal level of credit is
determined by the intersection of demand and marginal cost (P = MC). At the competitive equilibrium where firms earns zero profits (P = AC), credit is oversupplied relative to the social optimum.
A monopolist, supplying at the point where marginal revenue equals marginal cost (MR = MC),
under-supplies credit. The social optimum thus lies between perfect competition and monopoly. Indeed, as we show in Subsection 4.1, there is always an intermediate degree of market power that
achieves the social optimum, and an increase in market power is socially useful if it is below this
socially optimal level and harmful above it.
Is it plausible that market power in the 2000s was below this threshold, meaning that excessive
competition contributed to an inefficient credit boom? To investigate this question we draw on data
from subprime auto lending studied by Einav, Jenkins and Levin (2012, henceforth EJL). The setting
is useful because quasi-randomization of contract terms allow for clean estimation of the underlying market parameters and because the borrowers are similar in many dimensions to the subprime
mortgage borrowers that played a central role in the housing boom. Using EJL’s publicly-available
model calibrated to their proprietary data indicates extreme advantageous selection. For the modal
contract in their data (viz. a $10,000 car loan with a $1,000 minimum down-payment), EJL find that
8

average marginal borrowers with respect to a change in the minimum down-payment default 79% of
the time compared to only 59% among average borrowers.
The net distortion from advantageous selection can be summarized with the social markup for
the marginal borrower P − MC. Figure 4 plots the social markup (y-axis) as a function of the market
power parameter θ (x-axis). The value θ = 0.2 is a useful benchmark—with symmetric firms in
Cournot competition it corresponds to an HHI of 2,000, just above the threshold the Department
of Justice uses to define markets as highly concentrated. For θ = 0.2, the marginal borrower is
subsidized by $4,462 or 41% of the price of the car. Indeed, the marginal borrower receives a subsidy
for all θ < 0.5, or symmetric Cournot duopoly, indicating that high levels of concentration may be
desirable. Again, while our analysis should be interpreted with caution, implicit subsidies of this
magnitude could easily reverse standard prescriptions for competition policy and the design of procompetitive financial deregulations that do not consider selection.

3

Model

In this section, we describe a model of symmetric imperfect competition that nests monopoly, perfect competition and common models of imperfect competition including Cournot and differentiated
products Bertrand competition. By placing these models in a common framework, we are able to
develop results that are robust to the details of the industrial organization. Our model combines the
model of selection markets proposed by Einav, Finkelstein and Cullen (2010, henceforth EFC) and
Einav and Finkelstein (2011, henceforth EF) with the model of imperfect competition proposed by
Weyl and Fabinger (2013, henceforth WF), with suitable modifications to each to accommodate the
features of the other.
Consider an industry with symmetric firms that provide symmetric, though not necessarily identical, products.8 When firms produce symmetric quantities, prices are given by P(q), where q ∈ [0, 1]
denotes the fraction of consumers served by the market. We do not specify the cardinality of the
firms in the market to minimize the notational burden. For most of our analysis we assume, like EF,
that individuals who do not purchase the product from the industry receive no product. However,
as we discuss in some detail in Subsection 3.3, the outside option may in some cases be an alternative
product, as emphasized by EFC.
As in EF, and as described more formally by Weyl and Veiga (2014), total costs for the industry
are summarized by the aggregate cost function C (q), given by the linear aggregation of the cost
of all individuals served, and associated marginal and average cost functions MC (q) ≡ C 0 (q) and
AC (q) ≡

C (q)
q .

These may be increasing or decreasing in aggregate quantity depending on whether

selection is respectively “advantageous” or “adverse.”9
We assume that firms have no internal economies or diseconomies of scale, and thus no fixed
8 Some consumers may favor one product over another, but there must be an equal number of consumers who have the
symmetric opposite preference.
9 It is possible that these slopes have different signs over different ranges or that the two have slopes of different signs
over a particular range. All of these cases do not fall cleanly into one category or the other and are not our focus in what
follows. It would be interesting to extend our analysis to such cases.

9

Figure 5: Equilibrium Under Advantageous and Adverse Selection
(A) Advantageous Selection

(B) Adverse Selection

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Social Optimum (P = MC)

Perfect Competition (P = AC)
Price and Cost

Price and Cost

Perfect Competition (P = AC)
MC

Social Optimum (P= MC)
AC

AC
MC

P(q)

P(q)
MR

MR
Quantity

Quantity

Note: This figure shows the perfectly competitive equilibrium and monopoly and social optima. Panel (A) shows these
equilibria under in the case of advantageous selection where average costs are upward slopping. Panel (B) shows these
equilibria in the case of adverse selection where average costs slope downward.

costs. At a symmetric equilibrium, firms supply segments of the market that are equivalent in terms
of their distribution of costs and thus have average costs equal to AC (q).
Industry profits are qP(q) − C (q) = q [ P(q) − AC (q)]. A competitive equilibrium requires that
firms earn zero profits and is characterized by P(q) = AC (q). A monopolist or collusive cartel
chooses q to maximize profit by equating marginal revenue to marginal cost:
P(q) + qP0 (q) ≡ MR(q) = MC (q).

Rq

[ P( x ) − P(q)] dx and marginal consumer surplus is MS(q) ≡
=
Social welfare is CS(q) + qP(q) − C (q) and the first-order conditions for the
maximization of social welfare are
Consumer surplus is CS(q) =

CS0 (q)

0

−qP0 (q).

−qP0 (q) + qP0 (q) + P(q) − MC (q) = 0 ⇐⇒ P(q) = MC (q).
Thus, the socially optimal quantity (constrained as we are throughout the paper to uniform prices) is
characterized by P(q) = MC (q).
Panel (A) of Figure 5 shows the perfectly competitive equilibrium and monopoly and social optima in the case of “advantageous selection” where AC 0 (q) > 0 and the consumers with the highest
willingness-to-pay are least costly. Panel (B) shows the same in the case of “adverse selection” where

10

AC 0 (q) < 0 and the consumers with the highest willingness-to-pay are most costly.10

3.1

Imperfect Competition (θ)

We can nest the monopoly optimization and competitive equilibrium conditions into a common
framework by introducing a parameter θ ∈ [0, 1]. The parameter indexes the degree of competition in the market with θ = 0 under perfect competition and θ = 1 under monopoly. Equilibrium
prices are given by
P(q) = θ [ MS(q) + MC (q)] + (1 − θ ) AC (q).

(1)

Below we discuss how Equation 1 is a reduced-form representation of two canonical models of imperfect competition. Formal derivations of these representations appear in Appendix A.
1. Cournot: There are n symmetric firms that each choose a quantity qi > 0, taking the quantity
chosen by other firms as given. Price is set by Walrasian auction to clear the market so that
the price is P(q) where q = ∑i qi . If we assume that each firm gets a random sample of all
consumers who purchase the product, then the equilibrium is characterized by Equation 1 with
θ ≡

1
n.

Intuitively, just as in the standard Cournot model, firms internalize their impacts on

aggregate market conditions proportional to their market share ( n1 at equilibrium) and otherwise act as price- and average cost-takers. This model can easily be extended to incorporate
conjectural variations as in Bresnahan (1989); see WF for details.
2. Differentiated Product Bertrand: There are n single-product firms selling symmetrically differentiated products. Each firm chooses a price pi taking as given the prices of all other firms.
Consumers have a type that determines their utility for each product and their cost. The distribution of consumer types is symmetric in the interchange of any two products. In addition
to these traditional assumptions of the symmetrically differentiated Bertrand model we add
two additional assumptions proposed by White and Weyl (2012) that imply our representation
is valid. First, the distribution of costs is orthogonal to the distribution of preferences across
products given the highest utility a consumer can earn from any product. Second, the distribution
of utility among the switching consumers that definitely will buy one product but are just indifferent between any two products is identical to that among the set of all consumers who are
currently purchasing. These two assumptions imply that the average cost of consumers that
switch between firms in response to a small price change is the same as the average cost among
all participating consumers.11
In Appendix A we provide two micro-foundations for these assumptions. The first is a renormalized version of the Chen and Riordan (2007) “spokes” model that generalizes Hotelling
(1929)’s linear city model in which the dimensions of consumer’s type other than her spatial
10 We follow EF in defining the sign of selection in terms of the slope of the average cost curve as this determines the sign
MC (q)− AC (q)

of the marginal distortion under perfect competition as AC 0 (q) =
.
q
11 Even if this assumption fails, so long as average switching consumers have a cost that is strictly between that of average
exiting consumers and average purchasing consumers most of our results are left unchanged.

11

position are orthogonal to her spatial position as in Rochet and Stole (2002). The second is a
discrete choice, random utility model in the spirit of Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992)
in which, rather than utility draws being independent across products as in Perloff and Salop
(1985), the relative utility of different products is independent of the draw of the first-order statistic of utilities and the distribution of consumer costs is mean-independent of relative utilities
conditional on the first-order statistic.
In this case, again, our representation is valid if θ ≡ 1 − D where D ≡ −

∑ j6=i ∂Qi/∂p j
∂Qi/∂p
i

is the aggregate

diversion ratio, which is independent of the i chosen at symmetric prices by symmetry. Note that,
unlike in the previous case, θ will not be constant in this case; it will typically increase in price
and thus decline in quantity (WF).

3.2

Selection (σ)

We model a change in the degree of selection as a flattening or steepening of the industry average costs curve, holding population average costs AC (1) constant. Our approach contrasts with the
approach taken by Starc (2014) in her analysis of market power and selection in the Medigap supplemental insurance market. In her model, the markup of premiums over average costs depends on
the demand elasticity and an elasticity that measures the degree of adverse selection. To calculate
the counterfactual of eliminating selection, she sets this selection elasticity to zero, which results in
consumers having constant marginal costs equal to average costs at the observed equilibrium. She
finds that eliminating adverse selection in this manner raises prices and lowers consumer surplus.
In our framework, Starc (2014)’s approach to reducing adverse selection corresponds to a counterclockwise rotation of the average cost curve around the equilibrium quantity (and corresponding
shift of the marginal cost curve) until the point where marginal costs are constant and equal to average costs at the observed equilibrium value. Since marginal costs are below average costs, this causes
marginal costs to rise, accounting for Starc’s finding that eliminating selection raises equilibrium
prices. However, this rotation also raises population average costs because under adverse selection
equilibrium average costs are higher than average costs in the population. So while this exercise provides an natural accounting decomposition for markups over average costs, it does not correspond
to the standard ceteris paribus notion of changing selection (interpreted as the correlation between
willingness-to-pay and cost) holding other market primitives constant. In fact, because this rotation
leaves equilibrium average costs constant, it would leave prices constant under perfect competition,
a result that contrasts with the common intuition that, under perfect competition, adverse selection
causes prices to rise (Hendren, 2013).
We, thus, believe that a natural benchmark is to model changes in selection as a rotation of the
average cost curve holding population average costs AC (1) fixed. We operationalize this concept by
adding a parameter σ to the model. This parameter indexes the degree of selection with σ = 0 representing a situation in which costs are mean-independent of willingness-to-pay across individuals
with AC (q) = MC (q) = AC (1) and σ = 1 normalized to represent perfect correlation between costs
and willingness-to-pay as in the standard uni-dimensional model of heterogeneity in Akerlof (1970)
12

for adverse and de Meza and Webb (1987) for advantageous selection.
This parametrization maps to the type of regression approach taken to estimate the degree of
selection in the empirical selection literature. Building upon work by Chiappori and Salanié (2000),
a growing literature estimates the correlation between demand and marginal costs in range of selection markets (e.g., Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004; Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney, 2012). Consider a
standard econometric model of product choice:
v = βe0 + βe1 (c − µc ) + e.
Here willingness-to-pay v depends linearly on expect costs c, which are distributed normally in the
population c ∼ N (µc , Vc ), and a mean-zero
 idiosyncratic
 taste parameter e, which is independent
2
e
of costs and normally distributed e ∼ N 0, Vv − β 1 Vc . In this formulation, we parameterize the
variance of v with Vv , rather than parameterizing the variance of e, so that the correlation between c
and v may be adjusted holding fixed the marginal distribution of v. Similarly, we normalize βe0 and
βe1 so that changing βe1 does not impact the mean of the marginal distribution of v.
Consumers purchase the product if and only if their willingness-to-pay is greater than the price:
q = 1 ⇐⇒ v > p ⇐⇒ βe0 + βe1 c + e > p.

√

q

If we divide through by the standard deviation of the taste parameter Ve = Vv − βe21 Vc and de√
fine β 2 = 1/ Vv − βe21 Vc and the coefficients β i = β 2 βei for i = 0, 1, the model can be estimated by a
Probit regression of product choice on expected costs and premiums, assuming we have a source of
exogenous variation in premiums:
Pr(q = 1|c, p) = Φ( β 0 + β 1 c − β 2 p),
and the parameters µc and Vc can be estimated directly from the data: βe1 = β1/β2 and Vv = 1/β22 + βe21 Vc .
Standard properties of the normal distribution and some algebra yield that
d (q) = E[c|v = P(q)] = βe1
MC

r

i
Vc h√
Vc Φ−1 (1 − q) ± µc +
Vv

r
1 − βe1

Vc
Vv

!
µc

and average cost is

d
AC (q) = E[c|v ≥ P(q)] = βe1

r

Vc √
 Vc
Vv

e−


2
[ Φ −1 (1− q ) ]
r !
2
Vc

√
± µc  + 1 − βe1
µc
Vv
2πq

where the ± has the sign of βe1 . To fit our domain of σ ∈ (0, 1) , we define σ ≡ βe1

q

Vc
Vv ,

which

is always between 0 and 1 because it is the absolute value of the correlation between v and c. Then

13

letting MC (q) ≡

√

Vc Φ−1 (1 − q) ± µc and
2

AC (q) ≡

√

Vc

e−

[ Φ −1 (1− q ) ]
2
√
± µc ,
2πq

we can write equilibrium conditions by replacing average costs with σAC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1) and
marginal costs with σMC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1) in Equation 1. Collecting terms this yields
h
i
P(q) = θ MS(q) + σ θMC (q) + (1 − θ ) AC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1).

(2)

Thus we have a representation of the first-order equilibrium condition where θ indexes the degree of
market power and σ indexes the degree of selection in the market.
This linear interpolation between AC (1) and AC (q) or MC (q) obviously relies on the joint normal
structure of the example above. Another structure that yields the same results is if a fraction σ of the
population is drawn from some arbitrary joint distribution of cost and willingness-to-pay while a
fraction 1 − σ is drawn from the same marginal distributions of cost and willingness-to-pay but with
the two independently distributed of one another. More generally, reductions in parameterizations
of the dependence (i.e. “correlation”) between cost and willingness-to-pay, holding fixed population
average cost, often bring AC (q) and MC (q) towards AC (1) at each point, though not necessarily
linearly or proportionally. Given that all of the results in the next section depend only on this property
of moving towards AC (1) at each point, and not on the linear structure, our results apply more
generally than these examples.
Nonetheless, we maintain this linear form in what follows both for expositional simplicity and
because it conveniently represents one of the most commonly policies used to correct the effects of
selection: risk adjustment. Medicare Advantage is a high-profile example. In the United States,
elderly individuals with government health insurance can choose to opt out of the public Traditional
Medicare (TM) program and purchase a private Medicare Advantage (MA) plan. For each enrollee,
MA plans receive a payment from the government that is supposed to equal average costs under TM,
partially risk adjusted to account for demographics and ex-ante health conditions.
We can use our framework with one additional modification to model changes in the degree of
risk adjustment in this and other similar settings. Let 1 − σ indicate the fraction of the difference
between expected average and population average costs that is compensated for by risk adjustment.
The average risk adjustment payments in this setting are ARA(q) ≡ (1 − σ) [ AC (q) − AC (1)] with
σ = 0 indicating a setting where firms are fully compensated for any differential selection they receive
and σ = 1 indicating a setting where firms receive no risk adjustment. Firms’ perceived average costs
are the difference between their actual average costs and the average risk adjustment payments:
d
AC (q) = AC (q) − ARA(q) = σAC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1).

14

Perceived industry marginal costs, as before, are the weighted average of marginal cost and AC (1):
d (q) = σMC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1).
MC
The effects of risk adjustment on equilibrium price and quantity—and thus consumer and producer surplus—will be the same as a change in σ due to different correlations. However, the effect on
social surplus will be different because implementing risk adjustment in this manner is not budget
neutral. To reduce the degree of adverse selection, an exchange operator needs to make net payments
to insurance plans, and will therefore run a deficit. To reduces the degree of advantageous selection,
the exchange operator will run a surplus. As a result, social surplus depends only on whether quantity moves towards the socially optimal level under the original, non-risk adjusted demand and cost
curves.

3.3

Interpretation of the Outside Option

Thus far we have focused on the case where a consumer who does not purchase from the industry
receives no product. Much of the literature considers a more general case when consumers choose
between two products of different quality levels and must choose one of the two. This has been
formulated in several ways, some of which fit our model and others which do not.
The first setting, studied by EFC, is to view the product in the market as the incremental quality of
a high-quality product, such as supplemental insurance coverage to “top up” a low-quality base plan.
This model is fully equivalent to ours from a positive perspective. It is also equivalent from a normative perspective, so long as there are no externalities from the purchase of incremental quality on the
cost of providing the low-quality base product. Such externalities could be caused by moral hazard
in an insurance setting or by common-pool problems in a credit setting. For instance, Medigap supplemental insurance, which provides incremental insurance for the deductibles and coinsurance in
the baseline Traditional Medicare, blunts patients’ incentives to control utilization, thereby imposing
an externality on baseline insurance provider (Cabral and Mahoney, 2013).
A second, closely-related setting is when consumers choose between a high-quality product supplied according to our model and low-quality, base product provided at a fixed, administratively-set
price (often zero). This is the approach employed in our motivating example on employer sponsored
health insurance in Subsection 2.1. Our model corresponds to this case if suppliers receive from the
low-quality provider baseline risk adjustment to account for consumers’ cost of service under the baseline plan.12 This ensures that the low-quality provider is indifferent to how many customers she
retains and allows for an exclusive focus on the market for the high-quality product.
To see what this baseline risk adjustment means, consider an example where costs under the
low-quality baseline health insurance plan are the high-quality costs scaled down by λ < 1, as would
occur with a linear actuarial rate in the absence of moral hazard (Weyl and Veiga, 2014). Let Pe(q) and
g
AC (q) be the high-quality plan’s price and average costs. Letting P0 be the administratively-set price
12 Note

that by the neutrality of the physical incidence of taxes it is equivalent if the risk adjustment subsidy is given as
a voucher to the consumer or as a subsidy to the firm serving the consumer.

15

of the low-quality plan, the relevant price from the perspective our model is P = Pe − P0 , the net
price for the high-quality plan. Similarly, letting λ g
AC (q) be the baseline risk adjustment payment,
the relevant average cost is
AC (q) = g
AC (q) − λ g
AC (q) = (1 − λ) g
AC (q),
which is the average cost net of baseline risk adjustment.
Of course, baseline risk adjustment, which corresponds to σ = 1, is only one of many policies
an employer or other risk adjuster might decide to pursue. A risk adjuster could, for example, make
payments to fully account for costs under the high-quality plan or provide a flat subsidy and not risk
adjust at all. Risk adjustment to fully cover costs under the high-quality plan would correspond to a
subsidy of
h
i
λg
AC (q) + (1 − λ) g
AC (q) − g
AC (1) = Baseline Risk Adjustment + [ AC (q) − AC (1)] ,
which is full risk adjustment (σ = 0) in our model. Providing a flat subsidy equal to the population
average cost would correspond to
h
i
λg
AC (1) = λ g
AC (q) + λ g
AC (1) − g
AC (q) = Baseline Risk Adjustment −

λ
[ AC (q) − AC (1)] .
1−λ

This can be thought about as negative risk adjustment in our model of an amount
σ = 1+

λ
1− λ

or

1
λ
=
> 1.
1−λ
1−λ

A final approach, adopted by Cutler and Reber (1998) and Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2014),
is to allow both the prices of the high-quality and baseline product to be endogenous. Extending this
approach to imperfect competition is more problematic, as it would require either an asymmetric
treatment of the two plans or an equilibrium model where both plans are imperfectly competitively
supplied. Such a model is an interesting direction for future research, but sufficiently different from
our analysis here that we view it as beyond the scope of our work.13

3.4

Technical Notes

In the next section, we study equilibria characterized by Equation 2. To ensure a unique equilibrium
exists, we impose global stability conditions that, while not necessary for our results, simplify the
analysis. In particular we assume that P0 < min{ AC 0 , MC 0 , 0} and MR0 < min{ MC 0 , 0}. Under
these conditions there is a unique equilibrium for a constant value of θ, the case we focus on below.
While θ is not constant in the Bertrand case, all of our results below can be extended to the case
of non-constant θ with appropriately generalized stability conditions at the cost of some notational
13 See

Weyl and Veiga for a more detailed discussion of the relationship among these models under perfect competition
and Veiga and Weyl (2014) for an alternative model of imperfect competition in selection markets with endogenous product
quality.

16

complexity.

4

Results

In this section, we present results on the welfare effects of (i) market power in industries with selection and conversely (ii) selection in industries with market power. To do so, we build on the notation,
equilibrium and stability conditions of the previous section. To ease the exposition, all propositions
are stated verbally. When possible, the results are illustrated graphically assuming linear demand
and costs, and often focusing on the extreme cases of monopoly and perfect competition. Formal
statements and proofs of all results appear in Appendix C.

4.1

Imperfect Competition

Proposition 1. Market power increases producer surplus and decreases consumer surplus
As firms gain market power, they increasingly internalize the impact of their output decisions on
equilibrium price and quantity. This leads them to raise their price so long as price slopes downward
more quickly than does average cost (AC 0 > P0 ), as implied by our stability assumptions. This internalization directly leads to higher producer surplus. The higher price that results reduces consumer
surplus by the logic of the envelope condition.
Proposition 2. Under adverse selection, social surplus falls with market power. Anytime a market would
collapse as a result of adverse selection no monopolist would choose to operate.
With perfect competition, adverse selection leads to too little equilibrium quantity, as shown in
Panel (B) of Figure 5. Since market power reduces quantity, market power only further reduces social
surplus. An implication is that if the market collapses under perfect competition (Akerlof, 1970), and
therefore the market generates no social surplus, no amount of market power will restore the market
and enable it to contribute to aggregate welfare (Dupuit, 1844).
Thus, at least under adverse selection, standard intuitions about the undesirability of market
power are confirmed. However, while these results are in this sense unsurprising, they contrast with
intuitions in the contract theory literature that market power may be beneficial under adverse selection. For example, Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) argue that imperfect competition may be necessary
to sustain the existence of markets under adverse selection when non-price product characteristics
are endogenous, and Veiga and Weyl (2014) show that imperfect competition can indeed restore the
first-best, albeit in a stylized model. However, these analyses focus on the impacts of market power
on product quality rather than on the fraction of individuals supplied. Our analysis indicates a tradeoff between these quality benefits of market power and its quantity harms.14
14 In one extension of their baseline model, Veiga and Weyl consider a calibrated model that allows for both effects and
find that an intermediate degree of market power is able to achieve welfare near the first-best and that even market power
approaching monopoly leads to much higher welfare than does perfect competition. This suggests that, at least in some
settings, the quality benefits may be more important than the quantity harms we emphasize here.

17

Figure 6: Optimal Market Power Under Advantageous Selection

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)
Social Optimum (P = MC) and Oligopoly with 𝛉  =  𝛉*

Perfect Competition (P = AC)
Price and Cost

MC

C
𝛉*  M

*)  AC

-𝛉
+ (1

AC

𝛉*
  M
R
+
(1
-𝛉
)
(Q
  P

*)

MR

P(Q)

Quantity

Note: This figure shows that under advantageous selection, there is a socially optimal degree of market power strictly
between monopoly and perfect competition. The monopoly optimum (MR = MC) results in too little quantity, while
perfect competition (P = AC) results in too much. There is intermediate level of market power θ ∗ , leading to an equilibrium θ ∗ MR + (1 − θ ∗ ) P = θ ∗ MC + (1 − θ ∗ ) AC, that results in the same equilibrium level of quantity as the socially
optimum (P = MC).

Under advantageous selection our analysis more directly contradicts conventional intuitions on
the impact of market power.
Proposition 3. Under advantageous selection, social surplus is inverse-U-shaped in market power. There is a
socially optimal degree of market power strictly between monopoly and perfect competition. Additional market
power is socially beneficial below this level and socially harmful if it is above this level. The optimal degree of
market power is increasing in the degree of advantageous selection.
Perfect competition leads to excessive output under advantageous selection because, in an attempt to skim the cream from their rivals, competitive firms draw higher marginal cost consumers
into the market (de Meza and Webb, 1987). On the other hand, a monopolist, who internalizes the
industry cost and revenue curves, will produce too little. As a result, there is an intermediate degree
of market power that leads to the optimal quantity being produced.
Figure 6 shows this result graphically. The monopoly equilibrium, determined by MR = MC,
results in too little quantity. The perfectly competitive equilibrium, determined by P = AC, results in
too much. An intermediate level of market power θ = θ ∗ , which leads to the equilibrium determined
by θ ∗ MR + (1 − θ ∗ ) P = θ ∗ MC + (1 − θ ∗ ) AC, results in the same equilibrium level of quantity as the
equilibrium achieved by setting P = MC and is therefore socially optimal. Because advantageous
selection always pushes firms towards excessive production, the degree of market power required to
offset this selection and restore optimality increases with the extent of advantageous selection.
18

Table 1: Summary of Results
Panel (A): Greater Market Power
Producer Surplus
Consumer Surplus
Social Surplus

Adverse Selection

Advantageous Selection

Higher
Lower
Lower

Higher
Lower
Inverse-U shaped

Panel (B): Less Adverse Selection
Producer Surplus
Consumer Surplus
Social Surplus

Perfect Competition

Monopoly

Always zero
Higher
Higher

Higher
Lower ⇐⇒ q? > q
Lower ⇐⇒ q? > q > q

Panel (C): Less Advantageous Selection
Producer Surplus
Consumer Surplus
Social Surplus

Perfect Competition

Monopoly

Always zero
Lower
Lower

Lower
Higher ⇐⇒ q? > q
Higher ⇐⇒ q? > q > q

Note: This table summarizes the main results. Panel (A) shows the effects of increasing market power in industries
with adverse and advantageous selection. Panels (B) and (C) show the effects of reducing the degree of adverse and
advantageous selection, respectively, under perfect competition and monopoly market power.

Table 1 summarizes our results, with Panel (A) presenting the results on market power in selection markets, discussed above.

4.2

Selection

We begin our analysis of selection by considering the impact of changes in the degree of correlation
between willingness to pay and cost. Because the degree of correlation is a property of a market, and
not the result of a policy intervention, these results apply most directly to comparative statics across
markets rather than the impacts of policy interventions.15 Our results are easiest to state verbally for
the cases of monopoly and perfect competition. We thus confine our attention to these extreme cases.
Results for intermediate cases are an interpolation between these extremes and are stated and proved
in the formalization of these propositions in Appendix C.
Proposition 4. Under monopoly, reducing the degree of adverse selection raises profits but can raise or lower
consumer surplus. Less adverse selection harms consumers when demand is high (q? > q). If demand is very
15 For example, Hendren (2013) compares outcomes in markets with different degrees of correlation under the assumption of perfect competition; our comparative statics with respect to σ would allow such analysis to be extended to imperfect competition. Hendren’s analysis focuses on markets with very low quantities where the impact of reducing selection
is similar, according to our results, to that under perfect competition. However, our results in Section 5.2 suggest that the
presence of a realistic degree of market power could substantially alter comparative statics results like his in markets where
quantity is sufficiently high.

19

high (q? > q > q), and the monopolist’s pass-through is bounded above zero, less adverse selection lowers both
consumer and social surplus.
Figure 7 shows the effect of reducing the degree of adverse selection in the market. Panels in
the left column show the scenario in which is there is adverse selection and thus the average and
marginal cost curves are downward sloping. Panels in the right column show the effect of reducing
the degree of adverse selection, depicted by a counter-clockwise rotation of the average cost curve
around the point AC (1) and a corresponding shift in the marginal cost curve. The resulting average
and marginal costs curves are horizontal and have unchanged population average costs (AC (1) is
the same). Panels in the top row show the effect of this shift when the equilibrium quantity is low
(q∗ < q) and panels in the bottom row show the effect when the profit-maximizing quantity is high
(q∗ > q).16
When the equilibrium quantity is low, the reduction in selection lowers the cost of the average
marginal consumer. This lowers the price and raises equilibrium quantity. When the equilibrium
quantity is high, the reduction in selection raises the cost of the average marginal consumer, raising
the price and lowering equilibrium quantity. In this setting with linear costs, reducing the degree of
selection raises quantity whenever the profit-maximizing quantity is less than q = 12 . More generally,
reducing the degree of adverse selection reduces prices and increases quantity whenever the population average consumer has a cost lower than the average marginal consumer at the profit-maximizing
level of quantity.
By the envelope theorem, we can determine the effect of a reduction in adverse selection on a monopolist’s profits holding fixed the quantity the monopolist optimally chooses. Because a reduction
in selection lowers average costs, as those participating in the market are selected adversely, producer
surplus is necessarily increased. A reduction in the degree of adverse selection can lower welfare if
the reduction in consumer surplus is large enough to offset the increase in firm profits. This only
happens when profit-maximizing quantity is sufficiently high because in this case both the increase
in marginal cost is large and the change in average cost is small, as the firm’s average consumers are
nearly representative of the whole population. The weight placed on the former effect relative to the
latter effect in welfare terms is the monopolist’s pass-through rate, so it must be bounded above zero
at high quantities for the result to hold.
When there is advantageous selection, the conditions under which a decrease in the degree of
selection raises consumer surplus are reversed.
Proposition 5. Under monopoly, reducing the degree of advantageous selection lowers a monopolist’s profits
but can raise or lower consumer surplus. Less advantageous selection benefits consumers when demand is high
(q? > q). If demand is very high (q? > q > q) and the monopolist’s pass-through is bounded away from zero,
less advantageous selection raises both consumer and social surplus.
16 Of

course, anything that impacts equilibrium quantities must do so by shifting the demand or supply curve. The
necessary thresholds for these effects, q and q, can be defined as a function of the cost curves. We then interpret high and
low quantities in terms of vertical shifts of the demand curve that thus vertically shift the marginal revenue curve without
changing its shape.

20

Figure 7: Reducing Adverse Selection Under Monopoly
(A) Low Quantity: Adverse Selection

(B) Low Quantity: No Selection

Price and Cost

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Price and Cost

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

AC

AC
AC = MC

MC

MC

P(Q)

P(Q)

MR

MR

Quantity

Quantity

(C) High Quantity: Adverse Selection

(D) High Quantity: No Selection

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

P(Q)

AC

P(Q)

AC
AC = MC

MC

MC

MR

MR

Quantity

Quantity

Note: This figure shows the effects of reducing the degree of adverse selection in a market served a monopolist provider.
Panels (A) and (B) consider a setting where the equilibrium quantity is low and reducing adverse selection lowers price
and raises quantity. Panels (C) and (D) consider a setting where the equilibrium quantity is high and reducing adverse
selection increases price and lowers quantity.

21

The graphs for this scenario are analogous to those for adverse selection and are shown in Appendix Figure A1. Reducing the degree of advantageous selection rotates the average cost curve
around AC(1) in a clockwise direction. When the profit-maximizing quantity is low (q? < q), this
rotation increases the cost of the average marginal consumer, raising prices and lowering equilibrium quantity. When the profit-maximizing quantity is high (q? > q), the reduction in the degree of
selection lowers the cost of the average marginal consumer, lowering prices and increasing quantity.
A reduction in advantageous selection lowers industry profits by the same envelope logic discussed
above. Reduced advantageous selection lowers welfare except when quantity is sufficiently high, in
which case the increase in consumer surplus outweighs the decrease in firm profits.
Panels (B) and (C) of Table 1 summarize these results on the effects of selection in settings with
market power. The results under adverse and advantageous selection can be understood together
by noticing that a reduction in the degree of selection lowers the component of cost heterogeneity in
the population correlated to willingness-to-pay, moving average individuals at any willingness-topay quantile q towards the population average cost. Because the monopolist internalizes the costs of
the average marginal consumer, reducing selection will reduce this marginal cost exactly when the
average marginal consumer is more costly than the population average consumer. Under adverse
selection the average marginal consumer has higher cost at lower quantity and under advantageous
selection the average marginal consumer has higher cost at higher quantity. Therefore, the benefits
from reducing selection occur at low equilibrium quantities under adverse selection and high equilibrium quantities under advantageous selection.
Proposition 6. Under perfect competition, reducing the degree of adverse selection raises consumer surplus
and is socially beneficial. Reducing the degree of advantageous selection lowers consumer surplus and is socially
harmful. Producer surplus is always zero under perfect competition.
Under perfect competition, firms make no profits and thus the effect of selection on welfare is
driven entirely by consumer surplus or equivalently prices. If consumers are adversely selected,
consumers are always more costly than the population average, and therefore reducing the degree
of selection always lowers average costs and prices, making consumers and society better off. If
consumers are advantageously selected, then by the same logic, reducing the degree of selection
raises average costs and prices, and reduces consumer and social surplus.

4.3

Risk Adjustment

We next consider the impact of risk adjustment, which, as discussed in the previous section, has the
same positive impacts as changing correlations but different normative implications.
Proposition 7. Under monopoly and assuming demand is strictly log-concave and satisfies a weak regularity
condition, using risk adjustment to eliminate adverse selection has effects that are defined by the thresholds q0
and q > q0 , where q is defined exactly as in Proposition 4. The equilibrium quantity q? is defined as its value
after risk adjustment.

22

Figure 8: Risk Adjustment of Adverse Selection Under Monopoly
(B) Moderate Quantity (q0 ≤ q? < q)

(A) Low Quantity (q? < q0 )

Pre-Risk Adjustment (MR = MC)
Pre-Risk Adjustment (MR = MC)
Post-Risk Adjustment (MR = MC')

Post Risk Adjustment (MR = MC')

AC
AC' = MC'

Social Optimum (P(Q) = MC)

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

Social Optimum (P(Q) = MC)

AC
AC' = MC'

MC

MC

P(Q)
MR

MR

Quantity

P(Q)
Quantity

(C) High Quantity (q? ≥ q)

P(Q)
Post-Risk Adjustment
(MR = MC') Pre-Risk Adjustment
(MR = MC)
Social Optimum
(P(Q) = MC)

Price and Cost

MR

AC
AC' = MC'

MC

Quantity

Note: This figure shows the effects of risk adjustment of adverse selection in a market served by a monopolist provider.
Panel (A) shows a setting where full risk adjustment reduces price below the original marginal cost, leading to socially
excess quantity. Panel (B) shows a setting where full risk adjustment is beneficial but insufficient to achieve the social
optimal level of quantity. Panel (C) shows a setting where risk adjustment raises marginal costs perceived by the firm,
lowering quantity and social welfare.

23

1. If q? < q0 then there is an interior optimal quantity of risk adjustment that achieves the socially optimal
quantity. Social welfare is increasing in risk adjustment below this threshold and decreasing above it.
2. If q0 ≤ q? < q then welfare is monotonically increasing in risk adjustment and full risk adjustment
achieves the socially optimal quantity if and only if q? = q0 .
3. If q? ≥ q then risk adjustment is weakly socially harmful, and is strictly socially harmful if the inequality
is strict.
If demand is not log-concave (or violates the regularity condition) it may be that q0 = 0 so that behavior 1)
above is irrelevant or that there are multiple thresholds between 1) and 2), but one or the other always occurs
when q? < q.
Figure 8 graphically depicts these results for the different quantity ranges. The results are also
summarized in Panel (A) of Figure 9. Social surplus depends on whether quantity is moved towards
the socially optimal level under the original, non-risk adjusted demand and cost curves. Since monopoly
results in too little quantity, risk adjustment that increases quantity is beneficial, so long as it does not
increase quantity beyond the socially optimal level.
Panel (A) shows a setting where q? < q0 . In this case, risk adjustment is initially beneficial, but
full risk adjustment reduces price below the original marginal cost, leading to socially excess quantity.
Intuitively, this occurs at low quantity because this is where (under log-concavity) the monopoly
distortion MS(q∗ ) is smallest and where risk adjustment has the biggest effect on reducing perceived
marginal costs. Panel (B) shows a setting where q0 ≤ q? < q and where full risk adjustment is always
beneficial but insufficient to achieve the social optimal level of quantity. Indeed, in this setting it
would be optimal for the exchange operator to make excess transfers to the firms. Panel (C) shows
a setting where q? ≥ q, and risk adjustment raises marginal costs perceived by the firm, lowering
quantity and thereby reducing social welfare.
Proposition 8. Under monopoly and assuming that MS0 − MC 0 is globally signed, using risk adjustment to
eliminate advantageous selection has effects that are defined by the thresholds q and q00 > q, where q is defined
as in Proposition 5. The equilibrium quantity q? is defined as its value after risk adjustment.
1. If q? ≤ q then risk adjustment is weakly harmful, and is strictly socially harmful if the inequality is
strict.
2. If q < q? ≤ q00 then welfare is monotonically increasing in risk adjustment and full risk adjustment
achieves the socially optimal quantity if and only if q? = q00 .
3. If q? > q00 then there is an interior optimal quantity of risk adjustment that achieves the socially optimal
quantity. Social welfare is increasing in risk adjustment below this threshold and decreasing above it.
The threshold q00 may equal 1 in which case the last region irrelevant; this occurs if and only if MC (1) <
AC (1) + MS(1). If MS0 − MC 0 is not globally signed there may be back-and-forth between behaviors 2) and
3).
24

Figure 9: Summary of Welfare Effects of Risk Adjustment Under Monopoly
(A) Risk Adjustment under Adverse Selection
Less than full risk
adjustment is optimal

Full risk adjustment
is insufficient

Any risk adjustment
is harmful

q

q0

(B) Risk Adjustment under Advantageous Selection
Any risk adjustment
is harmful

Full risk adjustment
is insufficient

q

Less than full risk
adjustment is optimal

q00

Note: This figure summarizes the effects of risk adjustment for different ranges of the post-risk adjustment equilibrium
level of quantity q? . Panel (A) shows these ranges in an adversely selected market. Panel (B) shows these ranges in an
advantageously selected market.

The results under advantageous selection are analogous to those under adverse selection with
the regions reversed and are summarized in Panel (B) of Figure 9. When q? ≤ q, quantity is below
the socially optimal level and risk adjustment further reduces quantity. When q < q? ≤ q00 , risk
adjustment increases quantity but is insufficient to achieve the socially optimal level. When q? > q00 ,
there is an intermediate level of risk adjustment that increases quantity to the socially optimal level.
Under perfect competition, some risk adjustment is always beneficial although as before too
much risk adjustment can sometimes be detrimental.
Proposition 9. Under perfect competition and either adverse or advantageous selection:
• If q? < q then there is an interior optimal quantity of risk adjustment achieving the socially optimal
quantity and social welfare increases in risk adjustment below and decreases in risk adjustment above
this threshold.
• If q? ≥ q then welfare is strictly increasing in the quantity of risk adjustment. Full risk adjustment
achieves the socially optimal quantity if and only if q? = q.
Risk adjustment, at least initially, moves average cost towards marginal cost and thus moves
quantity towards the social optimum. However, when q? < q it may overshoot. Under adverse
selection, this occurs because AC (1) is below MC (q? ). When q? > q, even full risk adjustment is
25

insufficient. Under adverse selection, this occurs because AC (1) is above MC (q? ). When q? = q then
full risk adjustment exactly achieves the socially optimal quantity.
In Subsection 3.3 we discussed a model where negative risk adjustment (σ > 1) is possible. Local
to a small amount of risk adjustment, negative risk adjustment has precisely the opposite effect of
positive risk adjustment. More globally there are various regions in terms of q where different effects
may occur. In the interests of brevity, rather than cataloging these results, we here simply discuss an
example that will prove relevant in our application in Subsection 5.2.
Consider negative risk adjustment in the case of monopoly when q? > q, so that locally negative
risk adjustment is beneficial. If the social optimum involves full coverage (as it will in our application), then any amount of negative risk adjustment is (weakly) beneficial as it always increases
quantity. If the social optimum involves partial coverage then there is a socially optimal amount of
negative risk adjustment (σ? > 1) that achieves the social optimum and further negative risk adjustment leads to excessive insurance coverage.

4.4

Other Forces Impacting Selection

Correlation and risk adjustment are only two of many forces that impact the extent of selection. Other
commonly-discussed factors are changes in consumers’ knowledge of their own costs (Handel and
Kolstad, 2014) and changes in the permitted extent of risk-based pricing (Finkelstein and Poterba,
2006). Unlike the micro-foundations above, these interventions will not only result in a change in the
cost curves but will also shift the demand curves. In the first case, this is because greater knowledge
by consumers of their health risks will shift the distribution of willingness-to-pay for insurance. In
the second case, characteristics that are used to price risk can also be used to price discriminate.
Because accounting for such effects requires a different analytical approach than the one we
adopt here, we do not treat these forces generally. Instead, we consider specific examples that illustrate possible and plausible cases. First, in Appendix B, we show the discrimination allowed by
risk-based pricing can offset or even reverse the results we derived above about the effects of selection under market power. Second, in Subsection 5.2, we use our calibrated model of the insurance
market to study the impact of these changes. We find that allowing this price discrimination effect or
consumer misinformation actually strengthens our main results, especially our most counterintuitive
result that eliminating adverse selection may harm consumers.17

5

Applications

5.1

Merger Analysis

In this subsection we discuss how the results we developed above should change approaches to a
classic area of competition policy: the welfare evaluation of a merger. In particular, we examine a
17 However, as discussed in Subsection 5.2, price discrimination will typically increase social welfare (Fabinger and Weyl,

2014a) and thus will not tend to generate the counter-intuitive social surplus results if one accounts for the payments made
by the government for risk adjustment. Poorly informed consumers may reinforce or mitigate this effect depending on
how welfare is evaluated.

26

number of central principles articulated in the most recent revision of the United States Horizontal
Merger Guidelines (United States Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission, 2010) and
show that many qualitative findings are altered or reversed in an industry with selection.
To facilitate the analysis, we focus on a symmetrically differentiated Bertrand industry in which
a potential merger changes the industry from a duopoly to a monopoly. This is not intended to be
a realistic applied merger model, but simply to illustrate our argument in the cleanest and simplest
case, which has also been emphasized in previous theoretical merger analysis (Werden, 1996; Farrell
and Shapiro, 2010a).
1. Price-raising incentives are harmful: A basic principle of merger analysis is that the stronger are
firms’ incentives to raise prices as a result of a merger, the more suspect antitrust authorities
should be of the merger. However, to the extent that the incentive to raise prices is stronger
because of selection, rather than because of demand-side substitution patterns, mergers are
likely to be more beneficial the stronger the incentive to raise prices.
To see this, consider the “first-order” incentive of a firm to raise prices after a merger (Farrell
and Shapiro, 2010a; Jaffe and Weyl, 2013), or “Upward Pricing Pressure” (UPP), measured by
the externality a firm imposes on its rivals when it increases its sales by one (infinitesimal) unit.
When a firm increases its sales by one unit, it diverts D units from its rivals, where D is the
aggregate diversion ratio. In a market without selection, the markup associated with this unit
is M = P − MC so that the sale exerts a negative externality on its rivals of DM = D ( P − MC ).
Suppose we naïvely calculate this object in a selection market. In a market with selection, the
marginal cost perceived by an individual firm is
d (q) = σ ( D (q) AC (q) + [1 − D (q)] MC (q)) + (1 − σ) AC (1),
MC
so one would then compute
d ) = ( P − σ [ DAC + (1 − D ) MC ] − (1 − σ) AC (1)) ,
DM = D ( P − MC
where we have dropped arguments when possible for notational simplicity.
In selection markets, this term does not capture the externality imposed by a firm on it rivals.
Instead, our assumption that switching consumers are representative of all consumers and have
costs given by AC means that the incremental profit from this unit is P − σAC − (1 − σ) AC (1)
and the sale creates a negative externality on rivals of D [ P − σAC − (1 − σ) AC (1)]. As a result,
the relevant UPP in selection markets is
UPP in Selection Markets = D [ P − σAC − (1 − σ) AC (1)] =

= D ( P − σ [ DAC + (1 − D ) MC ] − (1 − σ) AC (1)) + σD (1 − D ) ( MC − AC )
= Standard UPP + σD (1 − D ) ( MC − AC ) ,

27

which is the standard measure plus an additional term σD (1 − D )( MC − AC ).
It is this additional term which reverses the standard logic. Increased advantageous selection
(larger σ when MC > AC) creates more upward pricing pressure, yet is precisely the setting
where market power can be a desirable check on cream-skimming externalities. Conversely,
greater adverse selection (raising σ when MC < AC) reduces upward pricing pressure but, at
the same time, is the setting where market power is most harmful because it further distorts
the incentive to price above marginal cost. Thus, to the extent that it is selection rather than
changes in D or M that generate upward pricing pressure, a merger is actually most desirable
when pricing pressure is large rather than small. For the rest of this subsection, we assume
σ = 1.
2. Competition-reduction is harmful: A second principle of merger analysis is when the merging
firms’ products are close substitutes, antitrust authorities should be suspect of the merger.
However, in settings with advantageous selection, mergers between firms producing highly substitutable products are exactly the settings in which there may be too much competition and
increases in market power may be beneficial.
This point can be seen using the UPP framework discussed above. In standard analysis, a
larger value of D suggests the merger is more problematic because it leads to a larger value of
UPP = D ( P − MC ). However, recall that D = 1 − θ and that under advantageous selection
social surplus is inverse-U-shaped in market power. Thus if D is sufficiently small, and as a
result θ = 1 − D is larger than the optimal level θ ∗ , the resulting merger will further increase θ
above its optimal level, and always be harmful. And if D is very large, and as a result θ = 1 − D
is smaller than θ ∗ , the resulting merger will reduce cream-skimming externalities, and may
be desirable. Thus, while under adverse selection the standard intuition is still valid, under
advantageous selection mergers may be socially beneficial (absent other efficiencies) if and only
if D is large enough.
3. Marginal costs should be used to calculate markups: A third principle of merger analysis is that
a firm’s marginal cost, rather than average cost, should be used to assess the incentive they
will have to raise prices upon merging. However, in selection markets, recall that the valid
UPP is D ( P − AC ) and not D ( P − [ DAC + (1 − D ) MC ]). Thus, if we want to use the simple
formula suggested by Farrell and Shapiro (2010a) to calculate UPP, we should use average cost
not marginal cost to calculate firms’ markups.
This result is partly an artifact of our assumption that firms have additive costs across consumers, which is analogous to firms having linear (i.e., constant marginal) costs in a standard
market. Accounting for firm-level (dis)economies of scale from forces other than selection
would require an adjusted notion of marginal cost. Nonetheless, even in this case, firm-level
marginal costs would be inappropriate for predicting UPP. And, if selection is the primary
source of non-linear cost, average cost will be more accurate in predicting UPP than the standard notion of marginal cost.
28

4. Demand data is preferable to administrative data: As a result of the focus on marginal costs, demand
side data is often preferred to administrative data to evaluate the impact of a potential merger
(Nevo, 2001). The reason is that marginal costs are hard to measure from firm administrative
data (Laffont and Tirole, 1986). Therefore, a standard approach to measuring marginal costs
suggested by Rosse (1970) is to use demand-side data to estimate the firm’s markup and recover marginal costs from first-order conditions. For example, Nevo backs out markups from a
structural model of pricing of cereals and uses these to conduct a merger analysis (Nevo, 2000).
However, in markets with selection, the demand-driven approach identifies the markup in
D ( P − [ DAC + (1 − D ) MC ])
and not the relevant markup over average cost needed to calculate D ( P − AC ). Indeed, in
selection markets, demand data is insufficient, and it is necessary to have administrative data
that reveals P and AC to calculate valid UPP. This implies that the administrative data obtained
in recent studies of selection markets (cf. Einav, Finkelstein and Levin, 2010) are likely to be
useful not only for the measurement of selection but also for antitrust policy.
Our discussion above focuses on the lowest-hanging fruit that can be derived from extending the
canonical model. Many other standard antitrust intuitions, both within and beyond merger policy,
should be reexamined in markets where selection is an important concern.

5.2

Health Insurance

In this subsection, we return to the calibrated model of health insurance choice, introduced in Section
2. In additional to quantifying the effects of risk adjustment on welfare, we also examine the effects
of other polices that could be used to impact selection, such as risk-based pricing and decision-aides
that could change a consumer’s knowledge of their costs under a given health plan.
5.2.1

Calibrated Model

We build a model of health insurance choice that matches key features of the U.S. employer-sponsored
health insurance market., focusing in particular on individual health plans with a duration of one
year. We assume that consumers are expected utility maximizers with constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences. Consumers are heterogeneous in their absolute risk aversion, denoted α,
and their health-type, denoted λ, which we assume are jointly log-normally distributed according to
ln α
ln λ

"

∼N

µα
µλ

# "
,

#!
√
Vα
ρα,λ Vα Vλ
.
√
√
ρα,λ Vα Vλ
Vλ

Consumers with health-type λ are exposed to a distribution of shocks with realized values c.
We assume that consumers health type and health outcomes are jointly log-normally distributed

29

according to
ln λ
ln c

"

∼N

µλ

# "
,

µc

#!
√
√
Vλ
ρλ,c σλ σc
.
√
√
ρλ,c Vλ Vc
Vc

This implies that a consumer’s realized health risk, conditional on their health-type, is distributed
according to
s
ln c| ln λ ∼ N

µc +

q
Vc
ρλ,c [ln λ − µλ ] , 1 − ρ2λ,c Vc
Vλ

!
.

The choice set of health plans is meant to resemble those offered by a large firm. There are a
number of symmetrically differentiated high-quality plans, such as Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) or Preferred Provider Organization (PPO) plans, which are supplied by private insurance companies, and have premiums determined by market forces. We define the outside option as
a low-quality plan, which is provided by the employer and has a premium fixed at zero. This is a
reasonable characterization of many High Deductible Health Plans (HDHP), which tend to be “selfinsured,” meaning that the employer bares the medical cost risk, and have administratively set at
premiums that are typically zero or a nominal amount.18
As discussed in Subsection 3.3, we can fit our model to this setting by defining the products in
the market as the movement from the baseline to the high-quality plan. Let P be the incremental
premium of the high quality plan ( Pe − P0 ), and let the functions c H = κ H (c) and c L = κ L (c) describe
a consumer’s out-of pocket costs under the high- and low-quality plans. The willingness-to-pay v
for moving to the high-quality plan is the value that equates the consumer’s expected utility with the
high-quality plan to that with the outside option, defined implicitly by
Ec [u(−κ H (c) − v)|α, λ] = Ec [u(−κ L (c))|α, λ].
Consumers purchase the high-quality plan if and only if their willingness-to-pay is greater than the
premium (q = 1 ⇐⇒ v ≥ P). The distribution of willingness-to-pay provides us with inverse
demand and marginal revenue curves for the industry according to the standard identities.19
To model industry costs, we assume that the employer pays the private plans the baseline riskadjusted subsidy for each consumer, that is one equal to that consumer’s expected costs in the lowquality plan. Average costs perceived by the high-quality providers are then AC (q) = Ec [c − κ H (c)|v ≥ P(q)] −
Ec [c − κ L (c)|v ≥ P(q)] and marginal costs are MC (q) ≡ AC 0 (q)q + AC (q). As shown in Section 3,
equilibrium price for the high-quality plan is determined by Equation 2:
h
i
P(q) = θ MS(q) + θ MC (q) + (1 − θ ) AC (q)
18 In

the KFF EHBS, 56% of HDHP are self-insured. Twenty-three percent of HDHP are free, and 56% require employee
payments of less than $50 per month.
19 Viz. Q ( p ) = P( v ≥ p ), P ( q ) = Q−1 ( p ) and MR ( q ) = P ( q ) + P0 ( q ) q.

30

where θ indexes the degree of competition and we normalize σ = 1 to the baseline degree of selection
in our calibration.
Calibration. We calibrate the distributions of risk aversion using values from the literature and the
distribution of health types and medical spending using values from the 2009 Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS). Table 2 summarizes the exact calibrated variables. Below we discuss the calibrated values in more detail.
• Risk aversion (α). We calibrate the distribution of absolute risk aversion to the values estimated
by Handel, Hendel and Whinston (2014), which are identified using over-time variation in the
choice set of health insurance plans offered to employees at a large firm. These values are
similar to those estimated by Cohen and Einav (2007). The mean value of α = 0.000439 implies
indifference between a 50-50 gamble for {$100, −$96} and $0 with certainty.
• Realized costs (c). We calibrate the distribution of realized medical costs c to match the population mean and standard deviation of medical spending for non-elderly individuals in the
2009 MEPS, excluding individuals with coverage from a public program such as Medicaid. The
mean level of spending for this sample is $3,139 and the standard deviation in $10,126.
• Health-type (λ). To calibrate the degree of private information, we assume that consumers
knowledge of their future health costs is the same as that which can be predicted by standard
risk adjustment software.20 The 2009 MEPS provides information on individual’s Relative Risk
Scores, which is calculated using the Hierarchical Clinical Classification (HCC) model that is
also used to risk adjust Medicare Advantage payments.
• Correlation between risk aversion and health-type (ρα,λ ). We assume that risk aversion and health
risk are uncorrelated in the population. This is probably a reasonable assumption given the
diverging estimates of the sign of this correlation in the literature.
• Correlation between realized costs and health-type (ρλ,c ). Following our model, we estimate the
correlation ρλ,c with a regression of log realized health costs on the log Relative Risk Score,
where both variables are normalized by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard
deviation. We estimate a coefficient of ρλ,c = 0.498. This estimate, combined with information
on the mean and standard deviation of the Relative Risk Scores and realized costs, allows us to
simulate the joint distributions of λ and c.
• Cost-sharing (κ H (c) and κ L (c)). We calibrate the cost-sharing of the high-quality plan to cover
90% of the cost of medical care in the population on average, known as a 90% actuarial value
(AV) plan. This is the level of coverage provided by a “platinum” plan on an Affordable Care
Act (ACA) Health Insurance Marketplace. We calibrate the low-quality plan to have an 60% AV,
20 This assumption follows standard practice in the literature (Handel, 2012; Handel, Hendel and Whinston, 2014) and is
supported by the finding from Bundorf, Levin and Mahoney (2012) of little private information conditional on an industry
standard measure of predicted health risk.

31

which is typical for an HDHP, and would qualify as a “bronze” plan on an ACA Marketplace.
The AV 90% plan has no deductible, 10% co-insurance, and an $8,000 out-of-pocket maximum.
The AV 60% plan has a $500 deductible, 40% coinsurance, and an $8,000 out-of-pocket maximum.
• Market power (θ). We calibrate the level of market power to θ = 0.5. This corresponds to Cournot
competition with two high-quality plans. While this is significantly higher than the representative values we discussed in Subsection 2.1, we focus on this value for two reasons. First, in
the EHBS, less than 1% of firms offer more than two non-HDHP options; thus the market-wide
concentration indices derived from Dafny, Duggan and Ramanarayanan (2012)’s data may understate effective market power. Second, with greater market power our results are more visible. However, as we showed above for the case of risk adjustment, they are qualitatively true
even with lower market power.

Table 2: Calibration Values for Health Insurance Model.
Parameter

Description

Mean

Std. Dev.

α

Absolute risk aversion

4.39 × 10−4

6.63 × 10−5

λ

Privately known health type

0.979

1.378

c

Realized medical spending

$3,139

$10,126

ρ

Correlation of ln λ and ln c

0.498

Note
Estimates of absolute risk
aversion from Table 3
of Handel, Hendel and
Whinston (2014).
Values for Relative Risk
Score (HCC, Private) in
the 2009 MEPS.
Realized medical spending for the non-elderly
population without public insurance in the 2009
MEPS.
Estimated from a regression of normalized log realized medical spending
on normalized log Relative Risk Scores in the 2009
MEPS.

Note: This table lists the calibrated values used in the health insurance model and their sources.

5.2.2

Results

Figure 10 shows the calibrated model graphically. Panel (A) shows the baseline equilibrium with the
degree of selection that results from the calibration (σ = 1). Panel (B) shows the equilibrium from
an alternative calibration where we keep the demand curve unchanged and reduce the variation of

32

health type λ, holding constant population average costs under the insurance contract.21 Because demand is that same and there is less variation in costs, this exercise implements the same reduction in
the degree of correlation between willingness-to-pay and costs that we explored theoretically. Panel
(C) shows the equilibrium where an exchange operator implements full risk adjustment (σ = 0) so
that consumers have constant marginal costs equal to the population average. Panel (D) shows an
equilibrium with partial negative risk adjustment: in particular the exchange operator risk adjusts
subsidies by an equal and opposite amount to the full risk adjustment payments (σ = 2).22
In the baseline scenario with no risk adjustment, premiums are $1,790 and 79.6% of the population purchases a high-quality plan. Because marginal costs are below average population costs at this
equilibrium, reducing the degree of correlation increases the cost of the marginal consumer, raising
premiums to $1,820 and reducing quantity to 78.7%. Eliminating selection by means of perfect risk
adjustment further raises the price and reduces the quality provided by the market. Negative risk
adjustment, on the other hand, reduces premiums to $1,682 and raises quantity to 84.1%.
Table 3 examines the normative implications of these counterfactuals. All values are presented as
a percentage of the first best total surplus under the baseline scenario. Under the baseline scenario,
shown in the first column, imperfect competition and selection combine to reduce total surplus to
85.7% of the first best level. Producers capture slightly less than half of this surplus, while employees
capture the remainder. By raising prices, reduced correlations, shown in the second column, lowers
employee surplus by 1.4 percentage points of the total surplus at the social optimum. Profits increase
by 3.7 percentage points due to the lower costs of providing coverage, more than offsetting the decline
in employee surplus and raising total surplus provided by the market. These results are consistent
with Proposition 4 in the setting where optimal quantity takes a high, but not very high, value (i.e.,
q > q? > q).
Full risk adjustment, shown in column 3, exacerbates the effects of reducing correlations on employee surplus. Relative to the baseline scenario, full risk adjustment reduces employee surplus by
12.5 percentage points and increases profits by 9.0 percentage points of first best total surplus. Moreover, implementing full risk adjustment requires the employer to run a deficit equal to 8.9 percentage
points of the optimized social surplus. Negative risk adjustment, shown in column 4, has the opposite effect, raising combined employee-employer surplus by 13.2 percentage points and reducing
producer surplus by 8.1 percentage points relative to the baseline level. Thus, the calibrated results
indicate that risk adjustment has the counterintuitive effect of reducing surplus for employees and
surplus provided by the market, as described in Proposition 7 in settings where the optimal quantity
is high (i.e., q? > q).
Segmenting the market, shown in the fifth column, not only allows prices to reflect cost differences across employees but also allows the insurance companies to price-discriminate by charging
different markups to different market segments. It, therefore, does not correspond cleanly to our pure
21 Because of the non-linearity of the insurance contract, holding constant population average costs under the insurance
contracts requires us to adjust the mean population cost.
22 Full negative risk-adjustment (σ = 3) has even more extreme effects in the same direction, but violates our stability
conditions and thereby creates some unnecessary expositional challenges.

33

Figure 10: Reduced Adverse Selection in Health Insurance Model
(B) Reduced Cost Heterogeneity

(A) Baseline
4000

4000
Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1790
q* = 0.796

3500

3000

2500

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

3000

2000
1500

2500
2000
1500

1000

1000

500

500

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

0
0

1

0.1

(C) Full Risk Adjustment

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

4000
Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1863
q* = 0.766

3500
3000

3000

2500
2000
1500

2500
2000
1500

1000

1000

500

500

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1682
q* = 0.841

3500

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

0.2

(D) Negative Risk Adjustment

4000

0
0

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1820
q* = 0.787

3500

0
0

1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Note: This figure shows the effects of different amounts of adverse selection in the calibrated health insurance model.
Panel (A) shows the baseline equilibrium (σ = 1). Panel (B) shows a scenario where the demand curve is unchanged but
there is a lower correlation between willingness-to-pay and marginal costs. Panel (C) shows an equilibrium with full
risk adjustment so that marginal costs are constant in the population (σ = 0). Panel (D) shows negative risk adjustment
of an equal and opposite amount to the full risk adjustment payments (σ = 2).

34

Table 3: Welfare Effects of Reducing Adverse Selection
Percent of First Best Total Surplus
Baseline
Employee + Employer Surplus
Employee Surplus
Employer Surplus
Producer Surplus
Total Surplus

49.6%
49.6%
0.0%
36.0%
85.7%

Reduced Cost
Heterogeneity

Full Risk
Adjustment

Negative Risk
Adjustment

Segmented
Market

48.3%
48.3%
0.0%
39.8%
88.1%

37.1%
45.9%
-8.9%
45.0%
82.1%

62.8%
55.4%
7.4%
27.9%
90.7%

32.1%
32.1%
0.0%
67.2%
99.3%

Note: This table shows the welfare effects of reducing the degree of adverse selection in the calibrated health insurance
model. The first column shows welfare under the baseline equilibrium (σ = 1). The second column shows welfare
in a scenario where the demand curve is unchanged but there is a lower correlation between willingness-to-pay and
marginal costs. The third column shows welfare with full risk adjustment (σ = 0). The fourth column shows negative
risk adjustment of an amount equal and opposite in sign to full risk adjustment (σ = 2). The fifth column shows welfare
when the market is segmented into four quartiles based on consumer health type λ. All values are presented as a
percentage of the first best total surplus in the baseline scenario.

cost-side parameter σ. To implement segmentation we partition the distribution of λ into quartiles
and allow the firms to charge the profit-maximizing price to each market thus defined. Appendix
Figure A2 shows plots which depict equilibrium price and quantity in each segment.
We find that the segmented markets have essentially no selection (a more-or-less flat cost curve)
so that the results under segmentation reflect the elimination of selection as well as any price discriminatory effects. Segmentation reduces employee surplus by 17.5 percentage points of the optimized
total surplus, which is more than the decline under full risk adjustment. The reduced selection combined with the ability to price discriminate raises profits by a substantial 31.2 percentage points of
the optimized total surplus. Total surplus from the market is within 1 percentage point of first best
level, but the incidence is significantly skewed, with producers capturing more than two-thirds of
the surplus generated by the market. This suggests that employers’ reluctance to adopt risk-based
pricing may not only be due to legal restrictions and concerns about reclassification risk (Handel,
Hendel and Whinston, 2014), but may also stem from the more familiar concern that allowing for
price discrimination would transfer significant surplus from employees to insurance companies.
These findings on risk adjustment and risk-based pricing are far from universal. As discussed
in Section 4, eliminating selection may raise or lower consumers and social surplus, and the same is
famously true of the price discriminatory effects of market segmentation (Aguirre, Cowan and Vickers, 2010). However, in our calibrated model, (i) eliminating selection with risk adjustment and (ii)
allowing price discrimination have similar qualitative effects: Both reduce employee surplus while
increasing insurer profits, with an effect on total welfare that is determined by which effect is dominant.
We also use the model to examine the effect of a change in correlations that would result from a
change in consumer perceptions about the distribution of risk they face. For instance, an insurancechoice decision-aide might reduce misperceptions of costs and therefore increase the degree of selec-

35

tion in the market. We model this potential misperception by generating a perceived health-type λ̂
that is jointly log-normally distributed with a consumer’s actual health-type λ with correlation ρλ,λ̂ .
We calculate equilibria where willingness-to-pay is determined by the consumer’s perceived health
type while costs are determined by the consumer’s actual health type. We calculate surplus under
perceived demand, which might be relevant if consumers are never de-biased of their misperceptions, and under the actual demand curve. Appendix Figure A3 plots the equilibrium allocations
generated by the perceived demand and marginal cost curves for different values of ρλ,λ̂ .

Table 4: Welfare Effects of Misperception of Health Risk
Correlation Between Perceived and Actual Risk

Price
Quantity
Employee Surplus
Perceived Risk
Actual Risk
Producer Surplus
Total Surplus
Perceived Risk
Actual Risk

ρλ,λ̂ = 1

ρλ,λ̂ = 0.5

ρλ,λ̂ = 0

1,754
81.3%

1,825
66.4%

1,846
66.1%

51.5%
51.5%
35.5%

2.2%
-4.8%
40.2%

1.6%
-11.9%
44.4%

87.0%
87.0%

42.4%
35.4%

45.9%
32.5%

Note: This table shows the effect of a reduction in correlation that would result from consumer misperceptions of their
health risks, modeled by allowing consumers’ perceived and actual health type to be jointly log-normally distribution
with correlation parameter ρλ,λ̂ . The first column shows the setting where perceptions are fully accurate (ρλ,λ̂ = 1), the
second column where perceptions are partially correlated (ρλ,λ̂ = 0.5), and the third column where perceived health risk
is completely uncorrelated with the truth (ρλ,λ̂ = 0). We show employee and total surplus under the demand curves
that result from the perceived health risk and actual health risk distributions. All values are presented as a percentage
of the first best total surplus in the baseline scenario where perceptions are fully accurate.

Table 4 shows the results of this exercise. The first column shows the setting where perceptions
are fully accurate (ρλ,λ̂ = 1). The second column shows a setting where consumers have perceptions
that are partially correlated with true health risk (ρλ,λ̂ = 0.5). The third column shows a setting
where perceived health risk is completely uncorrelated with the truth (ρλ,λ̂ = 0). As above, the
welfare values are shows as a percent of the optimized total surplus.
Reducing the correlation between perceived and actual health risk has the effect of decreasing the
degree of selection in the market, as shown in Appendix Figure A3. This means that, similar to the
results above, increased misperceptions raise price and reduce quantity in the market, even under the
demand curves that result from perceived risk.23 Employee surplus is even lower, and social surplus
actually falls, under actual demand curves, since the misperceptions create an allocative inefficiency
in who receives insurance coverage. This pushes against the argument, made in a perfectly competitive environment, that nudging (improving information) can hurt consumers by exacerbating the
degree of selection (Handel, 2012) and helps justify employer efforts to help employees optimize their
23 Increasing misperceptions raises producer surplus, suggesting that policy efforts to de-bias consumers through decision aides may be opposed by the insurance industry.

36

health plan choice.

5.3

Consumer Lending

We assess the potential for excess competition in consumer lending by using EJL’s model of subprime
auto lending, which they calibrate to proprietary data from a large firm. In their model, consumers
have preferences over the down-payment d and monthly loan-payments required to payoff the total
price p of the car. Costs to the firm depend on whether the consumer defaults on their loan, and
conditional on default, how many payments are made prior to default and the recovery value of the
car.
We apply our framework to this setting by modeling the down-payment as the “price” of the
product, holding fixed the total size of the loan the consumer takes out and owes in the future. We
think this choice is appropriate for two reasons. First, consumers are substantially more sensitive to
down-payments than other characteristics of the loan.24 Second, EJL consider a model with no savings so that the lender’s future revenue from a borrower depends only on her type and the amount of
her loan. Thus holding fixed the loan size when changing the down-payment is the only formulation
consistent, in their model, with our assumption that the cost of a consumer depends only on her type
and not on the price she is charged.
The market is adversely selected if lower down-payments, which increase quantity, decrease
average default rates, and thereby lower costs (AC 0 (q) < 0). The market is advantageous selected if
lower down-payments raise the average probability of default ( AC 0 (q) > 0).
We recover the demand curve and degree of selection as perceived by the firm by considering the
effects of small increase in the down-payment d holding fixed the size of the loan l = p − d for the
modal car in the data.25 Demand is highly sensitive to the down-payment with a purchase elasticity
of -0.63. There is considerable advantageous selection, with the marginal borrower with respect to the
down-payment defaulting 79% of the time relative to a default rate of 59% among average borrowers.
We assess the potential for socially excess competition by calculating the social markup as a function of industry competition. The social markup is defined as the difference between the equilibrium
price and the social marginal cost for the marginal borrower:
Social Markup = P − MC = θ MS + (1 − θ ) [ AC − MC ] .
When the social markup is positive, there is too little equilibrium quantity and social surplus is increasing as the market becomes more competitive. When the social markup is negative, there is too
much equilibrium quantity, and greater market power would improve social welfare.
The parameters of the social markup function can be recovered from the estimates of demand and
selection perceived by the firm, which following the notation in Section 3 are indicated with a “hat.”
Because of our symmetry assumption, average costs for the industry are equal to those perceived
24 Using

the same data, Adams, Einav and Levin (2009) find that consumers are indifferent between a $100 increase in
the down-payment and a $3,000 increase in the total amount borrowed.
25 The modal car has a down-payment of $1,000 and a loan size of $10,000.

37

by the firm: AC = d
AC. We can recover industry marginal costs for a given θ by rearranging the
formula for perceived marginal costs to yield MC =

d −(1−θ ) AC 26
MC
.
θ

We can similarly recover industry
d
marginal surplus from perceived marginal surplus from the perspective of a single firm: MS = 1 MS,
d =
where MS

p
b
e

θ

and e is the absolute value of the lender’s residual demand elasticity. Figure 4 in

Section 2 plots the social markup thus calculated as a function of the degree of competition. There is
a large negative social markup at reasonable levels of competition, with an implied subsidy by $4,462
when θ = 0.2, suggesting that high levels of market power may be desirable.

6

Conclusion

This paper makes three contributions. First, we propose a simple but general model nesting a variety
of forms of imperfect competition in selection markets. Second, we derive from this model several
basic, yet often counter-intuitive, comparative statics. Third, we show the empirical and policy relevance of these comparative statics by applying them to merger policy and calibrated models of health
insurance and subprime auto lending.
Our work here suggests several directions for future research. We have shown calibrated and
empirical examples where the counter-intuitive comparative statics we derived are relevant. However, it is not clear how prevalent such examples are or the breadth with which the issues we raise
are first-order in determining optimal competition or selection policy. Further empirical research is
important to investigate this question.
We have also focused on a small number of policy instruments: merger policy, risk adjustment,
cost-based pricing and consumer information campaigns. While these may be the most canonical
policies for addressing selection and market power, many others, such as price controls and restraints
on exclusive dealing, play an important role. Investigating the effect of market power on the first
policy and selection on the second would be informative.
Finally our paper contributes to a growing literature, surveyed by Weyl (2014), that connects
issues of contemporary interest to classical price theory. While we primarily used this connection to
draw out the implications of contemporary interest, our results also have implications for the classical
theory of regulation of natural monopolies. In particular, our monopoly and competition models
correspond, respectively, to an unregulated monopoly and one bound to average cost pricing. To
the best of our knowledge, the welfare comparison of these cases in a region of a monopoly’s cost
curve where cost is increasing (corresponding to advantageous selection) have not been explored in
previous literature.

26 The

d = θ MC + (1 − θ ) AC.
formula for perceived marginal costs is MC

38

References
Adams, William, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin. 2009. “Liquidity Constraints and Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending.” American Economic Review, 99(1): 49–84.
Aguirre, Iñaki, Simon George Cowan, and John Vickers. 2010. “Monopoly Price Discrimination
and Demand Curvature.” American Economic Review, 100(4): 1601–1615.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488–500.
Anderson, Simon P., André de Palma, and Jacques-François Thisse. 1992. Discrete Choice Theory of
Product Differentiation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. 1989. “Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power.” In Handbook of
Industrial Organization. Vol. 2, , ed. Richard Schmalensee and Robert Willig, 1011–1057. NorthHolland B.V.: Amsterdam, Holland.
Brown, J., M. Duggan, I. Kuziemko, and W. Woolston. 2012. “How Does Risk Selection Respond to
Risk Adjustment? New evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program.” Mimeo.
Bulow, Jeremy I., and Paul Pfleiderer. 1983. “A Note on the Effect of Cost Changes on Prices.” Journal
of Political Economy, 91(1): 182–185.
Bundorf, Kate, Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney. 2012. “Pricing and Welfare in Health Plan
Choice.” American Economic Review, 102(7): 3214–3248.
Cabral, Marika, and Neale Mahoney. 2013. “Externalities and Taxation of Supplemental Insurance:
A Study of Medicare and Medigap.” Mimeo.
Carlin, Caroline, and Robert Town. 2010. “Adverse Selection, Welfare and Optimal Pricing of
Employer-Sponsored Health Plans.” Mimeo.
Chen, Yongmin, and Michael H. Riordan. 2007. “Price and Variety in the Spokes Model.” Economic
Journal, 117(522): 897–921.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, and Bernard Salanié. 2000. “Testing for Asymmetric Information in Insurance Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(1): 56–78.
Chiappori, Pierre-André, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanié, and François Salanié. 2006. “Asymmetric
Information in Insurance: General Testable Implications.” RA, 37(4): 783–798.
Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 745–788.
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber. 1998. “Paying for Health Insurance: the Trade-Off between
Competition and Adverse Selection.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2): 433–466.
Dafny, Leemore, Mark Duggan, and Subramaniam Ramanarayanan. 2012. “Paying a Premium on
Your Premium? Consolidation in the US Health Insurance Industry.” American Economic Review,
102(2): 1161–1185.
Dafny, Leemore S. 2010. “Are Health Insurance Markets Competitive?” American Economic Review,
100(4): 1399–1431.
39

de Meza, David, and David C. Webb. 1987. “Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(2): 281–292.
Dupuit, Arsène Jules Étienne Juvénal. 1844. De la Mesure de L’utilité des Travaux Publics. Paris.
Dupuit, Jules. 1849. “De L’Influence des Péages sur l’Utilitée des Voies de Communication.”
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Jonathan Levin. 2010. “Beyond Testing: Empirical Models of
Insurance Markets.” Annual Review of Economics, 2(1): 311–336.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. 2010. “Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets
Using Variation in Prices.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3): 877–921.
Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein. 2011. “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and Empirics in
Pictures.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 115–138.
Einav, Liran, Mark Jenkins, and Jonathan Levin. 2012. “Contract Pricing in Consumer Credit Markets.” Econometrica, 80(4): 1387–1432.
Fabinger, Michal, and E. Glen Weyl. 2014a. “Price Discrimination is Typically Efficient and Egalitarian.” This paper is under preparation. Contact Glen Weyl at glenweyl@microsoft.com for notes.
Fabinger,
Michal,
and
E.
Glen
Weyl.
2014b.
“A
Tractable
Approach
to
Pass-Through
Patterns
with
Applications
to
International
Trade.”
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2194855.
Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro. 2010a. “Antitrust Evaluation of Horizontal Mergers: An Economic
Alternative to Market Definition.” Berkeley Electronic Journal of Theoretical Economics: Policies and
Perspectives, 10(1).
Farrell, Joseph, and Carl Shapiro. 2010b. “Recapture, Pass-Through and Market Definition.” Antitrust Law Journal, 76(3): 585–604.
Feldman, Roger D, and Bryan E Dowd. 1982. “Simulation of a Health Insurance Market with Adverse Selection.” Operations Research, 30(6): 1027–1042.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba. 2004. “Adverse selection in insurance markets: Policyholder
evidence from the UK annuity market.” Journal of Political Economy, 112(1): 183–208.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba. 2006. “Testing for Adverse Selection with “Unused Observables”.” http://economics.mit.edu/files/699.
Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G McGuire. 2000. “Optimal Risk Adjustment in Markets with Adverse
Selection: An Application to Managed Care.” American Economic Review, 1055–1071.
Handel, Benjamin. 2012. “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts.” American Economic Review, 103(7): 2643–2682.
Handel,
Benjamin R.,
and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2014. “Health Insurance for
“Humans”:
Information
Frictions,
Plan
Choice,
and
Consumer
Welfare.”
http://emlab.berkeley.edu/∼bhandel/wp/HIFH_HandelKolstad.pdf.
Handel, Benjamin R., Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston. 2014.
libria
in
Health
Exchanges:
Adverse
Selection
vs.
Reclassification
http://emlab.berkeley.edu/∼bhandel/wp/Exchanges_Reclassification_HHW.pdf.
40

“EquiRisk.”

Hendren, Nathaniel. 2013. “Private Information and Insurance Rejections.” Econometrica, 81(5): 1713–
1762.
Hotelling, Harold. 1929. “Stability in Competition.” Economic Journal, 39(153): 41–57.
Hotelling, Harold. 1938. “The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation and of Railway
and Utility Rates.” Econometrica, 6(3): 242–269.
Jaffe, Sonia, and E. Glen Weyl. 2013. “The First-Order Approach to Merger Analysis.” American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(4): 188–218.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and Jean Tirole. 1986. “Using Cost Observation to Regulate Firms.” Journal of
Political Economy, 94(3): 614–641.
Lustig, Joshua. 2010. “Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect Competition
in Privatized Medicare.” http://neumann.hec.ca/pages/pierre-thomas.leger/josh.pdf.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan and Co.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1449–1496.
Nevo, Aviv. 2000. “Mergers with Differentiated Products: the Case of the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 31(3): 395–421.
Nevo, Aviv. 2001. “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry.” Econometrica,
69(2): 307–342.
Pauly, Mark V, and Bradley J Herring. 2000. “An Efficient Employer Strategy for Dealing with
Adverse Selection in Multiple-Plan Offerings: An MSA Example.” Journal of health economics,
19(4): 513–528.
Perloff, Jeffrey M., and Steven C. Salop. 1985. “Equilibrium with Product Differentiation.” Review of
Economic Studies, 52(1): 107–120.
Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Lars A. Stole. 2002. “Nonlinear Pricing with Random Participation.” Review of Economic Studies, 69(1): 277–311.
Rosse, James N. 1970. “Estimating Cost Function Parameters Without Using Cost Data: Illustrated
Methodology.” Econometrica, 38(2): 256–275.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4): 629–
649.
Starc, Amanda. 2014. “Insurer Pricing and Consumer Welfare: Evidence from Medigap.” RAND
Journal of Economics.
United States Department of Justice, and Federal Trade Commission. 2010. “Horizontal Merger
Guidelines.” http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/guidelines/hmg-2010.html.
Veiga, André, and E. Glen Weyl. 2014. “Product Design
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1935912.

41

in

Selection

Markets.”

Werden, Gregory J. 1996. “A Robust Test for Consumer Welfare Enhancing Mergers Among Sellers
of Differentiated Products.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 44(4): 409–413.

Weyl, E. Glen. 2014. “Price Theory: A Short Summary.” http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2444
Weyl, E. Glen, and André Veiga. 2014. “The Leibniz Rule for Multidimensional Heterogeneity.”
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2344812.
Weyl, E. Glen, and Michal Fabinger. 2013. “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles of Incidence under Imperfect Competition.” Journal of Political Economy, 121(3): 528–583.
White, Alexander, and E. Glen Weyl. 2012. “Insulated
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1694317.

42

Platform

Competition.”

Appendix
A

Model

This appendix provides formal micro-foundations for the representations in the text.

A.1

Cournot model

Potential consumers of a homogeneous service are described by a multi-dimensional type t = (t1 , . . . t T )
drawn from a smooth
non-atomic distribution function f (t) with full support on a hyper-box
 and
T
t1 , t1 × · · · t T , t T ⊆ R . Consumers receive a quasi-linear utility u(t) − p if they purchase the service for price p. When the prevailing price is p, therefore, the set of
R consumers purchasing the service
is T ( p) = {t : u(t) ≥ p} and the number of purchasers Q( p) = T ( p) f (t)dt. T ( p) is clearly decreasing in p in the strong set order so that by our assumption of full support Q( p) is strictly decreasing.
Thus we can define the inverse demand function P(q) as the inverse of Q( p).
Each consumer also carries with her a cost of service, c(t) > 0 that must be incurred to supply
the service to her by any supplier. Thus the average cost of all individuals served when the aggregate
quantity is q is
R
c(t) f (t)dt
T ( P(q))
AC (q) ≡
.
Q ( P(q))
There are n firms that can each choose a quantity qi of the service to supply non-cooperatively.
If q ≡ ∑i qi < 1 then the prevailing market price is set by by market clearing as P(q). If q > 1 then
price is 0. Clearly no equilibrium can involve q > 1 as all firms would make losses. Firms receive
a uniform random sample of all customers who are in the market at the prevailing prices and thus
earn profits qi [ P(q) − AC (q)]. Thus, to maximize profits non-cooperatively they must satisfy
P(q) − AC (q) + P0 (q)qi −

MC (q) − AC (q)
qi = 0.
q

q

At a symmetric equilibrium where qi = n for all i this becomes


1
MS(q)
MC (q)
P(q) − 1 −
AC (q) −
−
=0
n
n
n
as claimed in the text.

A.2

Differentiated Bertrand model

There are n firms i = 1, . . . n each selling a single service. Consumers are described by two types, each
possibly multidimensional, (t, e). t is drawn as in the Cournot case. e consists of two components:
e = (l, e) where l is an integer between 1 and L, with each value of l having equal probability, and e is
drawn from a real hyper rectangle in E dimensions. The distribution of e is atomless, symmetric in all
coordinates, independent of the value of l and given by the distribution function g. The distributions
of t and e are independent.
Consumers may consume at most a single service and receive a quasi-linear utility from consuming the service of firm i, ui (t, e) − pi , where pi is the price charged for service i. Let the first order statistic of utility u? (t, e) ≡ maxi ui (t, e). We assume (without loss of generality yet) that u? (t, e) = u? (t);

43

that is that the value of the first-order statistic depends only on t and not on e. Second, and this does
entail a loss of generality, we make the following assumption.
Assumption 1. ui = u? (t) + ûi (e) so that all valuations shift up uniformly with a shift in u? induced by
changes in t.
This implies that the relative utility of services other than the one the individual most prefers,
compared to that which she most prefers, are determined purely by e and not t. Third we assume,
with only a modest loss of generality, that u? (t) is smooth in t and that ∂u?/∂tT > k > 0 for some
constant k. This implies that raising t T sufficiently causes u? > u for any fixed u and lowering it
sufficiently causes the reverse to be true.
Services are symmetrically differentiated in the sense that distribution of u (t, e) = (u1 (t, e) , . . . un (t, e))
induced by the distribution of (t, e) is symmetric in permutations of coordinates. The set of individuals purchasing service i is
Ti ( p) = {(t, e) : ui (t, e) ≥ pi ∧ i ∈ argmaxi ui (t, e) − pi }
R
and the demand for good i is thus Qi ( p) = T ( p) f (t, e)d(t, e).
i
As in the Cournot example, the cost of serving a consumer depends on her type. However, we
make the substantive assumption now that cost depends only on t and not on e.
Assumption
2. The cost of serving a consumer of type (t, e) is c(t) and thus the total cost faced by firm i is
R
Ci ( p) = T ( p) c(t) f (t, e)d(t, e).
i

This assumption states that only the determinants of the highest possible utility a consumer can
achieve, and not of her relative preferences across services, may directly determine her cost to firms.
Given the independence of t and e, this assumption implies a clean separation between determinants
of relative “horizontal” preferences across services and “vertical” utility for the most preferred service
that also determines the cost of service. Absent this assumption it is possible that the consumers that
firms attract from their rivals when lowering their price are very different in terms of cost from the
average consumers of the service more broadly.
Let 1 ≡ (1, . . . , 1). Then by symmetry Qi ( p1) = Q j ( p1) ∀i, j and similarly for Ci and Cj . Let
the aggregate demand Q( p) ≡ nQi ( p1) for any i and similarly for aggregate cost. Then we define
the inverse demand function P(q) as the inverse of the aggregate demand. Average cost is then
C ( P(q))
AC (q) ≡
and marginal cost MC (q) ≡ C 0 ( P(q)) P0 (q).
q
We now describe two particular models satisfying these assumptions and show how they yield
the reduced-form representation we use in the text. Any other micro-foundation of these assumptions should also yield our representation, but the notation required to encompass different cases is
sufficiently abstract and not relevant enough to any results we derive. We thus omit it here and focus
on specific micro-foundations.
First consider a random utility model in the spirit of Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992)
proposed by White and Weyl (2012) in the context of heterogeneity of preferences for non-price product characteristics. L = n and the value of l represents which product is the individual’s favorite.
e = (e1 , . . . , eE ) and E ≥ n − 1. We assume that
ui (u? (t), l, e)
is increasing in ei? where i? is i if i < l and is i − 1 if i > l and that it is constant in all other ei where
i ≤ n − 1 and not i? . We also assume that ui is smooth in its arguments other than l, bounded and
that and that limei? →ei? ui (u? (t), l, e) = u? (t) and limei? →ei? ui (u? (t), l, e) = 0 for any value of the
44

other entries u? , l and e−i? where ei and ei are respectively the lowest and highest values of ei . This
implies that raising ei? sufficiently for any i while holding fixed the other components of e makes (in
the limit) service i equally desirable to the most desirable service for the individual and lowering it
makes it always uncompetitive with the best service regardless of the price differential.
An individual firm i’s profits are pi Qi ( p1 , . . . pi , . . . pn ) − Ci ( p1 , . . . pi , . . . pn ). Thus the first-order
condition for the optimization of any firm i is
pi

∂Qi
∂Ci
+ Qi =
.
∂pi
∂pi

(3)

Because price does not appear in the interior of the integrals defining Qi and Ci , the derivatives
of these with respect to pi is, by the Leibniz Rule applied to multidimensional integrals (Weyl and
Veiga, 2014), given by the sum of the effects of the extensive margin effects from the change in the
boundaries of integration. There are many such boundaries, so we use a shorthand notation for
from product i
them. ∂TiX ( p) ≡ {(t, e) ∈ Ti ( p) : u? (t) = pi } denotes the set of exiting consumers

who are just indifferent between buying service i and no service. ∂TijS ( p) ≡ (t, e) ∈ Ti ( p) ∩ Tj ( p)
denotes the set of switching consumers between services i and j who are just indifferent between the
two services, but prefer purchasing one over purchasing nothing. To formally define the density of
consumers on such boundaries it is useful to express the multidimensional integrals representing Qi
and Ci more explicitly.
At symmetric prices p, every individual i with t T above this threshold buys from her most preferred services l and any individual below this threshold buys no service. If a single price pi is
elevated to pi + δ then all individuals with l 6= i continue to buy their preferred product as at symmetry. However, individuals with l = i and u? (t) ∈ ( p, p + δ) will stop consuming any service and
those with l = i and e j? sufficiently close to e j? will switch to purchasing service
j. Let t?T ( p; t−T ) be

defined implicitly by u? (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) = p and let e?j? ∆; u? (t), e−{1,...,n−1} be implicitly defined
for positive ∆ by



u? (t) − u j u? (t) , e?j? ∆; u? (t), e−{1,...,n−1} e−{1,...,n−1} = ∆
where e−{1,...,n−1} is all components of e other than the first n − 1 and the dependence of u j on the
other components of e is dropped as these do not impact u j .
Then when prices are symmetric except for price pi being above the other prices, we can write
Qi ( p, . . . , pi , . . . , p) =
1
n

Z
t−T

Z e? ( pi − p;u? (t),e
−{1,...,n−1} )
1

Z tT

Z
e−{1,...,n−1}

t?T ( pi ;t−T )

···

Z e? ( pi − p;u? (t),e
−{1,...,n−1} )
n

e1

en

f (t) g(e)d (t, e)

and similarly
Ci ( p, . . . , pi , . . . , p) =
1
n

Z

Z tT

Z
t−T

e−{1,...,n−1}

t?T ( pi ;t−T )

Z e? ( pi − p;u? (t),e
−{1,...,n−1} )
1

···

Z e? ( pi − p;u? (t),e
−{1,...,n−1} )
n

e1

en

c(t) f (t) g(e)d (t, e) .

To fill in the first-order condition (Equation 3), we need to differentiate these using the Leibniz rule.
∂Qi
( p1) =
∂pi

45

−

1
n



R

f (t−T ,t?T ( p;t−T )) g(e)
d t , e + (n
X
∂Ti ( p1) ∂u?/∂tT (t−T ,t? ( p;t−T )) ( − T )
T

− 1)

R

f (t) g(e− j? ,e j? )
∂TijS ( p1)

∂u j/∂e

j

(t,e− j? ,e j? )

d t, e

− j?




(4)

for any j 6= i by symmetry and similarly
∂Ci
( p1) =
∂pi
"

− n1

R

(
(

?
c(t) f (t) g e− j? ,e j?
R
c(t− T ,t?
T ( p;t− T )) f (t− T ,t T ( p;t− T )) g(e) d ( t
− T ,e )+( n −1) ∂T S ( p1) ∂u
?
∂T X ( p1)
∂u?/∂t (t
j/∂e j t,e− j? ,e j?
i
ij
T − T ,t T ( p;t− T ))

) d t,e ?
( −j )
)

#
.

(5)

By contrast and following the same logic
1
dQi
( p1) = −
dp
n
and

dCi
1
( p1) = −
dp
n

Z
∂TiX ( p1)

Z
∂TiX ( p1)

c (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) f (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) g (e)
d (t−T , e) .
∂u?/∂t T ( t− T , t? ( p; t− T ))
T

Thus by symmetry
0

Q ( p) = −
and
0

C ( p) = −

f (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) g (e)
d (t−T , e)
∂u?/∂t T ( t− T , t? ( p; t− T ))
T

Z
∂TiX ( p1)

f (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) g (e)
d (t−T , e)
∂u?/∂t T ( t− T , t? ( p; t− T ))
T

c (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) f (t−T , t?T ( p; t−T )) g (e)
d (t−T , e) ,
∂u?/∂t T ( t− T , t? ( p; t− T ))
T

Z
∂TiX ( p1)

so that

R
MC ( Q( p)) =

∂TiX ( p1)

R

c(t−T ,t?T ( p;t−T )) f (t−T ,t?T ( p;t−T )) g(e)
d (t−T , e)
∂u?/∂t ( t− T ,t? ( p;t− T ) )
T
T

∂TiX ( p1)

f (t−T ,t?T ( p;t−T )) g(e)
∂u?/∂t

T

(t−T ,t?T ( p;t−T ))

.

d (t−T , e)

Furthermore
Z
∂TijS ( p1)


Z
Z

c ( t ) f ( t ) g e− j? , e j?
 d t, e− j? = n
c(t) f (t)dt
∂u j/∂e j t, e− j? , e j?
Ti ( p)
e− j?
AC ( Q( p)) Q( p)

g e− j? , e j?

Z

e− j? ∂u j/∂e j

g e− j? , e j?
∂u j/∂e j



t, e− j? , e j?


 d t, e− j? =



t, e− j? , e j?


 d t, e− j? ≡ − AC ( Q( p)) s( p)

where s( p) is the density of consumers diverted to a rival from a small increase in one firms price
starting from symmetric prices p. Thus we can rewrite Expression 4 as
Q 0 ( p ) − ( n − 1) s ( p )
1
= Q0 ( p)
,
n
n [1 − D ( Q( p))]
(n−1)s( P(q))

where D (q) ≡ − Q0 ( P(q))−(n−1)s( P(q)) is the aggregate diversion ratio (Farrell and Shapiro, 2010b), the
fraction of consumers lost to a small increase in prices by a single first that go to rivals rather than
the outside good. We can also rewrite expression 5 as
0

Q ( p)

MC ( Q( p)) +

D ( Q( p))
AC ( Q( p))
1− D ( Q ( p )

n
46

.

Then Equation 3 becomes, at symmetric prices
MC ( Q( p)) +
Q( p)
p
+
= Q0 ( p)
Q ( p)
n [1 − D ( Q( p))]
n
0

D ( Q( p))
AC ( Q( p))
1− D ( Q ( p )

n

=⇒

that at any symmetric equilibrium
P(q)
D (q)
− MS(q) = MC (q) +
AC (q)
1 − D (q)
1 − D (q)
because MS(q) =

Q( P(q))
.
Q0 ( P(q))

Letting θ (q) ≡ 1 − D (q) this becomes

P(q) − θ (q) MS(q) = θ (q) MC (q) + [1 − θ (q)] AC (q)
as reported in the text.
A second model that delivers our form builds on the Chen and Riordan (2007) “spokes” extension
of the Hotelling linear city model, combining it with modifications from Rochet and Stole (2002).
There are n firms i = 1, . . . , n. For every pair of firms, (i, j) with i < j there is a line segment of unit
length of potential consumers who will only consider purchasing either service i or service j. Thus
i ( i −1)
n ( n −1)
there are 2 such segments and we denote the segment (i, j) by the integer 2 + ( j mod i ).
e = (l, e) where l is the integer representing the line segment on which the consumer lives and
e ∈ (0, 1) is the distance of the consumer from i or 1− her distance from j. In particular let i (l ) ≡
i ( i −1)
maxi∈Z: i(i−1) <l 2 and let j(l ) ≡ l mod i (l ); then e is the distance of the consumer from i (l ). There
2

are an equal number of consumers on each segment so n(n2−1) of the consumers are on each segment.
In addition to maintaining our assumptions about t and e, we make two modifications to the
set-up of Chen and Riordan:
1. We modify the exact form of consumer utility. In particular, u? (t) is the utility a consumer earns
from service i (l ) if e ≤ 12 and from good j(l ) if e ≥ 21 regardless of the other details of her position.
This contrasts with the standard Chen and Riordan, and Hotelling (1929), model because it
implies no transport cost to an individual’s most preferred service.
2. Consumers’ highest possible utility is not constant across consumers but instead follows a distribution u? (t).
3. The gross utility a consumer derives from purchasing from j(l ) if e < 21 is u? (t) − (1 − 2e)t,
where t is a transportation cost parameter absent in the Chen and Riordan model. If e > 21 the
consumer derives gross utility of u? (t) − (2e − 1)t from purchasing from i (l ).
4. We allow arbitrary smooth and symmetric-about- 12 distributions of e on the unit interval, as
long as this distribution is the same for all l.
Calculations to derive the representation in the text are tedious and extremely similar to those
in our modified Anderson, de Palma and Thisse model above. We therefore omit these calculations
and simply explain why there results are the same. At symmetric prices, every consumer purchases
from her most preferred firm, i (l ) if e ≤ 12 and j(l ) if e > 12 . All consumers with the same t make
the same purchase decision at this price because only u? impacts their total utility. Consumers with
e = 21 are “switchers” between a pair of firms (if u? (t) ≥ p) and have the same distribution of t
as all purchasers by the independence of e and t. Thus switchers will be representative of the full

47

population of consumers and exiters everywhere will be on average identical. This is precisely what
gave rise to our structure above.

B

Example with Large Demand-Driven Effects of Risk-Based Pricing

One intervention commonly applied in selection markets is cost-based pricing. In Subsection 5.2 we
showed that these discriminatory effects may reinforce the cost-based effects of selection. In this
appendix we discuss how price discriminatory effects of cost-based pricing may instead reverse the
results we established about the impact of changing the degree of selection in Section 4.
Proposition 5 states that increasing advantageous selection increases monopoly profits. However, clearly allowing cost-based pricing may never hurt a monopolist as she may maintain uniform
pricing. It will generically aid the monopolist. Thus her gains from price discrimination swamp the
effects we highlight.
To see that impacts on consumers may also be reversed by price discriminatory effects, consider
our result (Proposition 4 and 5) that decreasing adverse and advantageous selection may both benefit
consumers, depending on the equilibrium quantity. This may be true of cost-based pricing, but not in
one simple, extreme case. Suppose that there is only a single dimension of heterogeneity determining
both cost and valuation and that we move from uniform pricing to full cost-based pricing. This operates as perfect, first-degree price discrimination, extracting all surplus from consumers regardless
of the equilibrium quantity and thus contradicting the natural extrapolation of our result.
Thus cost-based pricing cannot cleanly be interpreted as an example of increasing selection in our
framework; price discrimination may be more important in some cases than are cost-based effects.
However, in the leading counter-intuitive case we emphasize, the two effects reinforce one another
to lower consumer surplus.

C

Proofs

Throughout we assume that θ, σ ∈ [0, 1], that selection is either globally adverse or advantageous
(either AC 0 , MC 0 > 0 or AC 0 , MC 0 < 0 for all q) and impose a global equilibrium stability condition:
P0 < min{ AC 0 , MC 0 , 0} and MR0 < min{ MC 0 , 0}. Most of the results may be obtained absent these
global monotonicity assumptions, but the additional expositional complexities add little insight. We
also assume that θ and σ are constant parameters, independent of q; all results can be extended to the
case when this fails, but again, the additional notation is cumbersome.
Lemma 1. Let F (q) ≡ P(q) − σ (θ MC (q) + (1 − θ ) AC (q)) + (1 − σ) AC (1) − θMS(q). Then F 0 < 0.
Proof. The derivative of the expression is
P0 − σθ MC 0 − σ(1 − θ ) AC 0 − θMS0 =





σ θ MR0 − MC 0 + (1 − θ )( P0 − AC 0 ) + [1 − σ] θ MR0 + (1 − θ ) P0 < 0.
by our monotonicity assumptions.
Proposition (Formal) 1. For θ ∈ (0, 1),

∂PS
∂θ

≥0≥

∂CS
∂θ ,

with strict inequality if q? > 0.

Proof. By the implicit function theorem,
F0

∂q?
∂q?
MS (q? ) + σ [ MC (q? ) − AC (q? )]
− σ [ MC (q? ) − AC (q? )] − MS (q? ) = 0 =⇒
=
.
∂θ
∂θ
F0
48

Focusing on the numerator



MS + MC − AC = − P0 q + σAC 0 q = q σ AC 0 − P0 − (1 − σ) P0 > 0
∂q?

by our monotonicity assumptions. Thus by Lemma 1, ∂θ < 0 if q 6= 0 and weakly if q = 0. This
immediately implies that price rises in θ by monotonicity and thus that CS falls. Producer surplus is
PS(q) = q [ P(q) − σAC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1)]
so



PS0 (q) = P(q) − σAC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1) + q P0 (q) − σAC 0 (q) =
P(q) − MS(q) − σMC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1) < F 0 (q)

as MS + MC − AC, MS > 0 by the argument above so long as θ < 1. Thus at q? for any θ < 1,
PS0 < 0.
?
Proposition (Formal) 2. If AC 0 < 0 and θ ∈ (0, 1), ∂SS
∂θ ≤ 0, strictly if q > 0.
Rq
Proof. SS(q) = 0 ( P(q) − [σMC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1)]) dq so SS0 (q) = P(q) − σMC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1).
Thus
SS0 (q? ) = σ (1 − θ ) [ AC (q? ) − MC (q? )] + θ MS (q? ) > 0

because MS > 0 and AC 0 (q) =
fact that

∂q?
∂θ

MC (q)− AC (q)
q

< 0. Thus the result follows from the chain rule and the

< 0 as shown in the proof of the previous proposition.

Proposition (Formal) 3. If AC 0 > 0 and q? > 0 for every (θ, σ) ∈ (0, 1)2 , ∃θ ? ∈ (0, 1) such that
?
(< / =)0 if θ < (> / =)θ ? . ∂θ
∂σ > 0 if σ ∈ (0, 1).

∂SS
∂θ

>

Proof. By the logic of the previous proof, SS0 (q) = P(q) − σMC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1) so


SS00 (q) = P0 (q) − σMC 0 (q) = (1 − σ) P0 (q) + σ P0 (q) − MC 0 (q) < 0.
Thus social surplus is concave in quantity. Quantity is below its optimal level at θ = 1 by the standard
monopoly argument and quantity is above its optimal level at θ = 0 by the argument in the proof of
the previous proposition. Thus the result follows from the fact, shown in the proof of Proposition 1,
∂q?
that ∂θ < 0.
∂q?

Proposition (Formal) 4. ∂σ has the same sign as AC (1) − θ MC (q? ) − (1 − θ ) AC (q? ). If AC 0 < 0 then
∂q?
providing a specific subsidy to the industry can only cause the sign of ∂σ to move from being negative to being
positive; a sufficiently large such subsidy guarantees this sign is positive. If θ = 1 then ∂PS
∂σ has the same sign
dP(q? )

as AC 0 . Again if θ = 1, AC 0 < 0 and if the pass-through rate, ρ(t) ≡ dt > M > 0 for some M and all t
∂CS
?
such that q? ∈ (0, 1) then ∂PS
∂σ + ∂σ > 0 starting from a sufficiently large subsidy − t such that q < 1.
Proof. With a specific tax (negative specific taxes are specific subsidies), the equilibrium condition is
P(q) − σ (θ MC (q) + (1 − θ ) AC (q)) + (1 − σ) AC (1) − θ MS(q) − t = 0.
Thus by the Implicit Function Theorem
F 0 (q? )

∂q?
− [θMC (q? ) + (1 − θ ) AC (q? ) − AC (1)] = 0 =⇒
∂σ
49

θ MC (q? ) + (1 − θ ) AC (q? ) − AC (1)
∂q?
=
.
∂σ
F 0 (q? )

(6)

Because F 0 < 0 by Lemma 1, this has the same sign as AC (1) − θMC (q? ) − (1 − θ ) AC (q? ) regardless
∂q?
of the degree of tax or subsidy. By the same arguments as above, ∂t < 0. Thus if AC 0 , MC 0 < (>)0 the
sign of this expression can only move, with an increase in tax, from being positive to being negative
(from being negative to being positive).
Furthermore as t (a sufficiently large subsidy) becomes arbitrarily negative (a sufficiently large
subsidy is give), q? → 1. Thus the denominator on the right-hand side of Equation 6 must approach
∂q?
θMC (1) − AC (1), which is negative if AC 0 < 0 and thus ∂σ > 0 eventually.
As before PS(q) = q [ P(q) − σAC (q) − (1 − σ) AC (1)]. When θ = 1 profits are maximized over
?
?
q so by the envelope theorem we can calculate ∂PS
∂σ while holding fixed q yielding AC (1) − AC ( q ).
For q? < 1 this clearly has the same sign as AC 0 . By the envelope theorem for consumers and this
result for producers
∂CS
∂q?
= −q? P0 (q? )
= −ρ(t)q? [ MC (q? ) − AC (1)] ,
∂σ
∂σ
where the second equality uses the fact that when θ = 1,
P0 (q? )

MC (q? ) − AC (1)
∂q?
= ρ(t) [ MC (q? ) − AC (1)]
= P0 (q? )
∂σ
F 0 (q? )

as the tax enters linearly into the expression for F. Thus
∂CS ∂PS
+
= −ρ(t)q? [ MC (q? ) − AC (1)] + AC (1) − AC (q? ) .
∂σ
∂σ
As t becomes sufficiently negative, q? → 1 so that the second term vanishes and the first term is
bounded away from 0 as MC (q? ) − AC (1) grows in absolute value (becomes more negative) monotonically in q? and ρ(t) > M > 0 by hypothesis.
Note that this result is formulated in terms of subsidies, but these are equivalent to upward
demand shifts of we confine attention to in-market quantities and thus ignore the impact on the
subsidy provider, as we do here.
Proposition (Formal) 5. If AC 0 > 0 then giving a specific subsidy to the industry can only cause the sign
∂q?
of ∂σ to move from being positive to being negative; a sufficiently large such subsidy guarantees this sign is
dP(q? )

negative. If θ = 1, AC 0 > 0 and if the pass-through rate, ρ(t) ≡ dt > M > 0 for some M and all t such
∂CS
?
that q? ∈ (0, 1) then ∂PS
∂σ + ∂σ < 0 starting from a sufficiently large subsidy − t such that q < 1.
Proof. This follows exactly from the logic of the proof of Proposition (Formal) 4.
Proposition (Formal) 6. If θ = 0 then

∂SS
∂σ

has the same signs as AC 0 .

Proof. At θ = 0 there is no producer surplus so only the impact on consumer surplus is relevant.
∂P(q? )
Because P(q) = σAC (q) + (1 − σ) AC (1), ∂σ has the same sign as AC (q) − AC (1) (given that
P0 > AC 0 by our stability assumptions) which is opposite to that of AC 0 . By the envelope theorem,
dCS
0
dP = − q. Thus the impact of σ on consumer and thus social surplus has the same sign as AC .
For the following results, σ represents risk-adjustment rather than correlation. Again we use a
tax or subsidy to shift the demand curve and measure welfare now with respect to the primitive
50

demand and supply curves, including the tax/subsidy, excluding any impacts of the tax/subsidy on
the government budget and ignoring the risk adjustment (as this is just a transfer) except through
its impacts on equilibrium quantity. We let q?? denote the socially optimal quantity. In what follows
we treat the “specific tax” t a simply a uniform inverse demand/cost shifter and thus irrelevant to
welfare quantities.
Proposition (Formal) 7. Let q0 = q? when σ = 0 (full risk-adjustment). If θ = 1, AC 0 < 0 and MS0 >
MC 0 then there exist thresholds q0 < q that are invariant to the level of a specific tax t such that
1. If q0 < q0 then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and there exists σ? ∈ (0, 1) such that at σ? , q? = q?? .

2. If q0 = q0 then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and q? = q?? when σ = 0.

3. If q0 < q0 < q then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and q? < q?? even when σ = 0.

4. If q0 = q then

∂q?
∂σ

= 0 and q? < q?? .

5. If q0 > q then

∂q?
∂σ

> 0 and q? < q??

q0 > 0 if limq→0 P0 (q)q = 0. q0 ranges between 0 and 1 as a sufficiently large tax or subsidy is imposed.
The additional discussion about the direction of welfare in the text follows from this result and
the observation that under our stability assumptions welfare is strictly concave in quantity.
This proposition imposes two additional conditions not discussed previously: that MS0 > AC 0
and that limq→0 P0 (q)q = 0. Log-concavity of direct demand is sufficient, but not necessary, for
the first condition assuming that MC 0 < 0, as it implies MS0 > 0 (Weyl and Fabinger, 2013) and
thus clearly > MC 0 . We have typically assumed that when AC 0 < 0, MC 0 < 0 as well. The second
condition is neither necessary nor sufficient for log-concavity but is true of every log-concave demand
function we are aware of, as shown by Fabinger and Weyl (2014b). It also implies that demand is logconcave at sufficiently high prices as, letting p ≡ limq→0 P(q) and Q be the direct demand,
lim P0 (q)q = 0 ⇐⇒ lim

q →0

p→ p

Q( p)
.
Q0 ( p)

Bulow and Pfleiderer (1983) show that the sign of the derivative of
Q0

Q
Q0

positive if and only if Q is

Q( p)
lim p→ p Q0 ( p)

locally log-concave; clearly
< 0 so
only if in the limit this quantity is increasing
(towards 0). Thus it is closely connected to log-concavity and limq→0 P0 (q)q = 0 are closely-allied
concepts and thus we view the gap between them as being a “regularity” condition, as quoted in the
text.
If the first condition fails it is possible that there are other points of switching between regimes 1)
and 3) from the proposition; this does not lead to qualitatively different behavior, but would be more
complex to state and thus we omitted discussing it in the text. If the second condition fails, then, as
discussed in the text, it is possible (though not necessary) that even at very low q0 full risk-adjustment
is still insufficient.
Proof. First note that risk-adjustment payments are pure transfers and thus social surplus is invariant
to them except in how they impact quantity. Second, note that their impact on quantity is precisely
as in Proposition (formal) 4 as the equilibrium equations are identical to there. This establishes the
∂q?
claims about ∂σ . Point 5) follows because quantity is always too low when AC 0 > 0 and becomes
51

∂q?

only lower with risk-adjustment; it may never cross q because there ∂σ = 0 . Point 4) follows directly
from this observation: if q? = q if σ = 1, q? is invariant to σ. All of this is, as claimed, invariant to the
value of t by the same logic in the proof of Proposition (Formal) 4.
∂q?
On the other hand when q? < q if σ = 1 then ∂σ < 0 but by the same logic q? < q for all
σ ∈ [0, 1]. By the logic in the proof of Proposition (Formal) 3, social welfare is concave in quantity and
quantity is too low when σ = 1. Thus either social surplus monotonically increases as q falls or social
surplus reaches a peak and then declines beyond some point if q becomes too low. Which occurs is
determined by the sign of SS0 (q0 ) as, by concavity and monotonicity of q? in σ, SS0 (q? ) < SS0 (q0 )
for all σ > 0.
SS0 (q0 ) = P (q0 ) − MC (q0 ) = MS (q0 ) + AC (1) − MC (q0 ) .
Thus if MS (q0 ) > MC (q0 ) − AC (1) then q? ≤ q0 < q?? while if MS (q0 ) = MC (q0 ) − AC (1) then
q? ≤ q0 = q?? and if MS (q0 ) < MC (q0 ) − AC (1) then there is an interior optimal σ as there was
an interior optimal θ ? in Proposition (Formal) 3 and as described in point 1). Note that this is all
invariant to t as this has no impact on either MS or AC (1) − MC as it shifts the latter two in parallel.
By definition of q, q0 < q implies that MC (q0 ) > AC (1). Thus if limq→0 MS(q) = 0 then for
sufficiently small q0 the second case holds. Conversely MS (q0 ) > 0 for all q0 > 0 and as q0 → q,
again by definition of q, MC (q0 ) → AC (1) and thus the first case holds.
q0 is then simply defined as the threshold between these regimes, which exists by the assumption
that MS0 > MC 0 and thus MS0 − MC 0 + AC (1) has a single crossing of 0 (from below to above). The
range claim on q0 as a function of t follows from the fact that F 0 < 0.
Proposition (Formal) 8. Let q0 be defined as in Proposition (Formal) 7. If θ = 1, AC 0 > 0 and MC 0 − MS0
is signed globally, there exist thresholds q00 > q that are invariant to the level of a specific tax t, with q being
identical to its value in Proposition (Formal) 7, such that
1. If q0 < q then

∂q?
∂σ

> 0 and q? < q?? even at σ = 1.

2. If q0 = q then

∂q?
∂σ

= 0 and q? < q?? for all σ ∈ [0, 1].

3. If q < q0 < q00 then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and q? < q?? even at σ = 0.

4. If q0 = q00 then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and q? = q?? when σ = 0.

5. If q0 > q00 then

∂q?
∂σ

< 0 and there exists a σ? ∈ (0, 1) such that at σ? , q? = q?? .

q00 < 1 if and only if MC (1) − AC (1) < MS(1) and, as in Proposition (Formal) 7, adjusting t traces
out the full possible range of q0 .
The additional conditions in this result have less intuitive content than those in the previous
proposition. Again MC 0 − MS0 being signed is necessary to ensure a simple structure on the regions
of potential outcomes. A sufficient condition for this is log-convexity of demand as in this case MC 0 >
0 > MS0 , assuming that MC 0 has the same sign as AC 0 . But MS0 > MC 0 > 0 would also satisfy the
condition and would have demand being very log-concave.
The second condition has little intuitive content, but is only possible in the case when MC 0 >
MS0 . It states that the downward distortion from market power is smaller than the upward distortion from advantageous selection (that would occur under perfect competition) when equilibrium
quantity is sufficiently high.
52

Proof. The proof follows precisely the logic of Proposition (Formal) 7, mutatis mutandis for the differences between the adverse and advantageous cases.
Proposition (Formal) 9. If θ = 0 then

∂q?
∂σ

has the same sign as − AC 0 . If q0 ≤ q then there exists a

σ? ∈ [0, 1) such that at σ? , q? = q?? . If q0 > q then SS0 (q? )
σ ∈ [0, 1].

∂q?
∂σ

> 0 and q? − q?? has the sign of AC 0 for

Proof. The first claim follows directly from the logic of Proposition (Formal) 6 and the fact that the
equilibrium conditions with θ = 0 are the same for a given σ under the two models as above.
The second claim comes from a logic similar to the preceding two propositions. Social surplus
is still concave for the same reasons. At σ = 1 is it is always declining in σ because for AC 0 > 0
quantity is too high and for AC 0 < 0 quantity is too low. It is thus sufficient to verify whether this
sign is maintained or not at q0 . We just consider one of the four cases; the other three are analogous.
Suppose that q0 < q and that AC 0 < 0. Then by definition of q, MC (q0 ) > AC (1).
SS0 (q0 ) = P (q0 ) − MC (q0 ) = AC (1) − MC (q0 ) < 0,
reversing the sign compared to SS0 (q? ) when σ = 1 and implying an interior optimum by the reasoning in the proof of the previous two propositions.

53

Figure A1: Reducing Advantageous Selection under Monopoly
(B) Low Quantity: No Selection

(A) Low Quantity: Advantageous Selection

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)
Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

MC

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

MC

AC = MC

AC

AC

P(Q)

P(Q)

MR

MR

Quantity

Quantity

(D) High Quantity: No Selection

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

Monopoly Pricing (MR = MC)

MC

MC

P(Q)

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

(C) High Quantity: Advantageous Selection

P(Q)

AC = MC

AC

AC

MR

MR

Quantity

Quantity

Note: This figure shows the effect of reducing the degree of advantageous selection in a market served a monopolist
provider. Panels (A) and (B) consider a setting where the equilibrium quantity is low and reducing advantageous selection raises price and lowers quantity. Panels (C) and (D) consider a setting where the equilibrium quantity is high and
reducing advantageous selection lowers price and increases quantity.

54

Figure A2: Risk-Based Pricing: Segmented Market
(B) Second Risk Quartile

(A) First Risk Quartile
2500

3000
p* = 1744
q* = 1

p* = 1201
q* = 0.946

2000

2500

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

2000
1500

1000

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

1000

500

0
0

1500

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

500

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

0
0

1

0.1

(C) Third Risk Quartile

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0.8

0.9

1

p* = 2848
q* = 0.994

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

3000
Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

0.5
0.6
Quantity

3500

2500

1000

2500
2000
1500
1000

500

0
0

0.4

4000
p* = 2229
q* = 1

3000

1500

0.3

(D) Fourth Risk Quartile

3500

2000

0.2

500

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

0
0

1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

Note: This figure shows the effects of risk-based pricing, achieved by segmenting the market into quartiles using the
risk-type parameter λ. The first risk quartile corresponds to the set of consumers with the lowest expected costs and the
fourth risk quartile corresponds to the consumers with the highest expected costs in the market. See Subsection 5.2 for
more details.

55

Figure A3: Misperceptions: Imperfect Correlation Between Perceived and Actual Risk
(B) Partial Misperceptions: ρλ,λ̂ = 0.5

(A) Fully Accurate Perceptions: ρλ,λ̂ = 1
4000

4000
Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1770
q* = 0.801

3500

3000

2500

Price and Cost

Price and Cost

3000

2000
1500

2500
2000
1500

1000

1000

500

500

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1825
q* = 0.783

3500

0
0

1

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

(C) Full Misperceptions: ρλ,λ̂ = 0
4000
Demand
MR
Perceived MR
AC
MC
Perceived MC

p* = 1846
q* = 0.771

3500

Price and Cost

3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Quantity

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Note: This figure shows the effects of consumer misperceptions about health risk, modeled by allowing consumers’
perceived health type λ̂ and actual health type λ to be jointly log-normally distribution with correlation parameter ρλ,λ̂ .
See Subsection 5.2 for more details.

56

