NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELLING FAILED BANKS
Joao Granja
Gregor Matvos
Amit Seru
Working Paper 20410
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20410

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We thank Charlie Calomiris, Chris James (discussant), Anil Kashyap, Elena Loutskina, Toby Moskowitz,
Enrico Perotti, Phil Strahan, Amir Sufi, Rob Vishny, and seminar participants at Chicago Booth and
the NBER for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Joao Granja, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Selling Failed Banks
Joao Granja, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru
NBER Working Paper No. 20410
August 2014
JEL No. E65,G18,G21
ABSTRACT
We study the recent episode of bank failures and provide simple facts to better understand who acquires
failed banks and which forces drive the losses that the FDIC realizes from these sales. We document
three distinct forces related to the allocation of failed banks to potential acquirers. First, a geographically
proximate bank is significantly more likely to acquire a failed bank: only 15% of acquirers do not
have branches within the state. Sales are more local in regions with more soft information. Second,
a failed bank is more likely to be purchased by a bank that has a similar loan portfolio and that offers
similar services, highlighting the role of failed banks’ asset specificity. Third, low capitalization of
potential acquirers decreases their ability to acquire a failed bank and potentially distorts failed bank
allocation. The results are robust to restricting the data to actual bidders, confirming that they are not
driven by auction eligibility criteria imposed by the FDIC. We relate these forces to FDIC losses from
failed bank sales. We organize these facts using the fire sales framework of Shleifer and Vishny (1992).
Our findings speak to recent policies that are predicated on the idea that a bank’s ability to lend is
embodied in its collection of assets and employees and cannot be easily replaced or sold.

Joao Granja
MIT - Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-685
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
jgranja@mit.edu
Gregor Matvos
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmatvos@chicagobooth.edu

Amit Seru
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amit.seru@chicagobooth.edu

I. Introduction
The great recession and its aftermath saw an unprecedented number of banks being taken into
receivership by the FDIC and then sold at auctions. These failures impose substantial costs on
the FDIC: the average cost of a sold failed bank from 2007 to 2013 was approximately 28% of
the failed bank’s assets. The resolution of bank failures led to Deposit Insurance Fund costs of
approximately $90 billion, leaving the fund with a negative balance of almost $21 billion at the
height of the crisis in 2009 (Davison and Carreon, 2010). Small and medium-sized banks, which
are typically sold at FDIC auctions, have also been large beneficiaries of government programs
during the same period.1 For example, the Treasury department does not expect to recover all of
the $791 million of TARP funds that were awarded to 26 failed banks in our sample (Office of
the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, 2014). In spite of the
importance of failed bank resolutions during the recent crisis, little is known about the forces that
affect sales of failed banks since the S&L crisis (James and Wier, 1987; James, 1991).
The goal of this paper is to study the recent episode of bank failures and provide simple facts that
allow us to understand who acquires failed banks and which forces drive the losses that the FDIC
realizes from these sales. We document three distinct forces that affect the allocation of failed
banks to potential acquirers: the distance of a potential acquirer from the failed bank, the
similarity of the business of a potential acquirer to that of the failed bank, and the capitalization
of the potential acquirer. We show that these forces are also related to the losses the FDIC
realized from bank failures. We conclude by interpreting these facts within the fire sales setting
of Shleifer and Vishny (1992).
The first fact we document is that local banks are by far the most likely acquirers of failed banks.
We find striking results: only about 15 percent of failed banks are sold to a bank that does not
currently have branches within the same state, and more than one-third of failed banks are sold to
a bank that has at least one branch in the same zip code. Formally stated, we find that a
geographically proximate bank is significantly more likely to acquire a failed bank. This result is
robust to the inclusion of failed bank fixed effects and potential acquirer/quarter fixed effects.
This implies that this effect is identified not by the inherent quality of the failed bank or of the
acquirer, but rather by the relative distance between the failed banks’ and acquirers’ branch
networks. Consistent with the idea that soft information deteriorates with geographic distance,
we find that in regions with more soft information, acquisitions of failed banks by local banks
are more likely. Our evidence is not consistent with the idea that information technology and the
integration in banking markets have allowed geographically distant banks to acquire failed banks
(Cochrane, 2013).
1

State chartered banks, which constitute 65% of failed banks in our sample, received approximately $50 billion of
TARP funds to help them absorb liquidity shortfalls during the financial crisis.
1

We also uncover a second force that affects the allocation of failed banks to potential acquirers:
differences in banks’ specializations. Some failed banks focus more on consumer lending, others
on mortgages, still others on commercial loans. We find that failed banks are significantly more
likely to be sold to potential acquirers whose portfolios of loans have a similar composition,
whether on the dimension of residential real estate loans, commercial and industrial loans,
consumer loans, or commercial real estate (CRE) loans. Banks also differ in the services they
offer, with some banks providing insurance and brokerage services while other banks do not. A
failed bank is more likely to be acquired by a bank that offers similar services. Failed bank and
acquirer/quarter fixed effects ensure that these results are not driven by inherent characteristics
of the failed bank or potential acquirer; rather, it is the relative similarity between the portfolio
composition and services offered by potential acquirers and a given failed bank that explains
who is most likely to acquire it. The effects we document are economically meaningful. For
instance, the likelihood of acquisition declines by a third of the mean if a potential acquirer’s
CRE portfolio share distance from the failed bank differs by one standard deviation.
The third force that affects who acquires a failed bank is the capitalization of potential acquirers.
We draw on the insight from Shleifer and Vishny (1992) that in auctions of distressed assets
potential buyers may be distressed as well, and therefore unable to purchase the assets. We show
a monotonic relationship between the capitalization of potential local acquirers and their
propensity to acquire failed banks: the 20% best capitalized local buyers acquire over 30% of
failed banks, while the 20% worst capitalized local buyers acquire only 10% of failed banks.
Next we examine how these forces interact with each other to affect the allocation of failed
banks. We want to understand whether capitalization of potential acquirers affects how failed
banks are allocated along the dimension of distance and business similarity. The notion is that
even though local banks are the most likely acquirers of a failed bank, they may not be able to
take advantage of their higher valuations if they are distressed. Failed banks would then be sold
to distant banks that are better capitalized even if distant banks value the failed banks less.
Similarly, low capitalization of potential acquirers in related businesses may prevent the sale of
the failed bank to these otherwise likely acquirers.
Consider local potential acquirers, defined as being within 100 miles of the failed bank. If their
capitalization is at the median, the probability of acquisition declines with distance
approximately 35% faster than if the capitalization of local bidders is one standard deviation
below the median. Similarly, local potential acquirers in related lines of business are most likely
to acquire a failed bank if they are well capitalized. However, low capitalization of these buyers
forces the sale of a failed bank to acquirers that are in less related lines of business. As before,
we obtain these results after accounting for failed bank and acquirer/quarter fixed effects,
2

implying that these results are not driven by inherent failed bank or potential acquirer
characteristics. Overall, these results suggest that the three forces that affect the allocation of
failed banks interact in a meaningful way.
There are two broad channels that can explain the results on failed bank allocation. Under the
first alternative, failed bank allocation is driven by choices of potential acquirers: a bank acquires
a failed bank because it chooses to bid more for the failed bank than other potential acquirers,
which either bid less or choose not to participate in the bidding process. Under the second
alternative, the FDIC chooses which banks are allowed to bid in an auction through its eligibility
criteria, and it is these criteria that affect failed bank allocation. To separate these alternatives,
we compile the list of actual bidders of each failed bank in our sample. We show that our results
persist even when we constrain our sample to the actual acquirers that have been approved by the
FDIC and thus satisfy the eligibility criteria. Therefore, our results are unlikely to be driven by
FDIC eligibility criteria. We reach the same conclusion when we directly impose FDIC criteria
on the set of potential acquirers in our sample.
The sale of failed banks results in substantial costs to the FDIC. We show that the costs to the
FDIC depend on the composition of potential acquirers for a failed bank, and that this
composition is related to the forces we describe above. The results described above suggest that
potential acquirers located close to the failed bank and that are in similar lines of business are
most likely to purchase a failed bank, if they are well capitalized. If their capitalization is low, on
the other hand, then the failed bank has to be sold to another bank, which presumably values the
failed bank less. We show that lower capitalization of potential acquirers best suited to purchase
a failed bank results in significantly higher cost of resolution for the FDIC. The 20% of failed
banks with the highest share of well-capitalized local bidders have resolution costs of
approximately 25% of assets. For the lowest quintile, the costs are over 33% of assets. This is a
large change relative to a standard deviation of resolution costs of 12%. We show that these
results are also robust to accounting for fixed effects of the quarter and the state where the failed
bank is located, which implies that macroeconomic conditions and regional characteristics of the
failed bank do not drive our findings.
One possible concern with the last set of results is that the capitalization of local acquirers may
be low because they were exposed to the same negative local shock as the failed bank. The
capitalization of local potential acquirers could then proxy for the severity of regional shocks that
impact the failed bank. Such a correlated shock would cause both higher costs to the FDIC and
low capitalization of local potential buyers. We address this concern by exploiting variation in
capitalization of local buyers that is plausibly exogenous to the regional economic environment
of the failed bank. Because different parts of the U.S. were exposed to different price declines
after 2006, we establish that the geographic portfolio of a bank influences the losses a bank
3

suffers in the aftermath. We then exploit losses that potential acquirers incur due to house price
drops in regions outside the failed bank’s operational area to instrument for the capitalization of
local acquirers. Since we focus only on losses incurred outside the region of the failed bank,
these losses are by construction unrelated to local economic conditions. The instrumental
variable results confirm our findings. Last, we provide several tests to ensure our results are
robust to alternative ways of measuring FDIC resolution costs, and to heterogeneity in bid
characteristics.
We interpret the facts we document within the fire sales setting of Shleifer and Vishny (1992).
Our first set of results shows that potential acquirers that are located close to a failed bank, and
that are in similar lines of business, are most likely to purchase it. These acquirers are best suited
to acquire a failed bank from the perspective of its assets. However, if the capitalization of these
acquirers is low, then the bank is sold to an acquirer that is more distant, and whose business
lines are less similar, but that is better capitalized. The latter values the bank less, so the failed
bank is not allocated to the best user. By relating these forces to costs of the resolution, we are
able to quantify the costs of fire sales to the FDIC. Therefore, in addition to sources of FDIC
costs, which have been measured in the literature (James, 1991), we find fire sales to be a
substantial component of FDIC costs.
Our results are relevant to the current policy debate of whether and how to support the banking
system after negative shocks. Supporting the banking system is broadly based on the notion that
a bank is special, and its ability to lend is embodied in its collection of assets and clients’
relationships with its employees, which may not be easily or quickly replaced. Opponents argue
that even if a particular bank is not easily replaced, failed banks can be sold efficiently and
swiftly to a large pool of available banks in the system. Therefore bank support is not needed.
The argument rests on the premise that deregulation and information technology have made
selling banks efficient. Our facts suggest that fire sales of failed banks misallocate bank assets
and employees, and provide an opportunity to measure some of these costs. Therefore,
policymakers have to weigh the costs of fire sales against costs of supporting banks outright.
Our paper is related to several strands of literature. First, it is most directly related to the bank
failures literature. The literature has mostly studied the S&L crisis (James and Wier, 1987;
James, 1991) with a focus on the characteristics of the failed banks or the method the FDIC uses
to dispose them. We focus on the allocation of the failed bank to potential acquirers, exploring
the match between the failed bank and the potential acquirer as a key determinant of failed bank
allocation and the losses borne by the FDIC. Our facts speak to the literature that examines
whether government should bail out failed banks when the best users of assets are liquidity
constrained (Acharya and Yorulmazer, 2008; Acharya, Shin and Yorulmazer, 2010).

4

We also contribute to the literature on relationship banking and the importance of soft
information in loan production. The literature suggests that relationships add value because
banks have information about borrowers (e.g., Diamond, 1984; James, 1987). The literature also
argues that relationships increase the availability of credit and reduce interest rates on loans,
especially for small firms (e.g., Berger and Udell, 1995; Petersen and Rajan, 2002). Other work
suggests that deregulation and technological change brought significant changes in the banking
system (e.g., Kroszner and Strahan, 1999), but small banks may be able to maintain the
advantages they gain from relationship banking in the wake of these changes (e.g., Berger et al.,
1998; Berger et al., 2005). A related recent strand of literature has argued that despite significant
improvements in financial innovation over the past few years, such as securitization, the location
of the branch network still matters for a bank’s investment decisions (Gilje, Loutskina and
Strahan, 2013). Our paper contributes to this work by arguing that these dimensions play a
critical role in the allocation of failed banks: the information embedded in relationships is still
relevant and must be taken into account when analyzing the effects of bank mergers or failures.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II we discuss the institutional
background. In Section III we present our data sources. Section IV provides descriptive statistics.
Sections V and VI outline the main empirical results. Section VII discusses our findings in the
context of the Shleifer and Vishny (1992) framework, and Section VIII concludes.
II. Institutional Background
Federal and state banking regulators regularly monitor the financial condition of depository
institutions to limit the risks of individual bank failures. If the banking institution becomes
critically undercapitalized, the primary regulator of the depository institution will initiate the
resolution activities by sending a failing bank letter to the FDIC.2 The FDIC contacts the
management of the failing depository institution and engages a third-party financial advisor to
compile initial information and perform an asset valuation review. The financial advisor
identifies a sample of assets and estimates a loss factor in each asset category. The FDIC uses
these estimates to set the reservation value on the subsequent sale of the assets of the depository
institution, and chooses the resolution structure.
During the recent financial crisis, the FDIC chose the Purchase and Assumption (P&A)
transaction as the resolution method in the great majority of receivership cases (roughly 95%).
Accordingly, we will focus on such transactions in our analysis. In a P&A transaction, the FDIC
uses a process that resembles a first-price sealed bid auction to sell some or all of the assets and
liabilities of the depository institution. The FDIC will opt for another resolution method only
2

Under FDIC regulations, a depository institution is critically undercapitalized if its ratio of tangible equity to total
assets is equal to or less than 2.0%.
5

when the auction does not generate any bidding interest or when the highest bid is below the
FDIC’s reservation value.
After the FDIC gathers financial information and chooses a resolution method, it starts marketing
the failed depository institution to a pool of potential buyers that had previously expressed their
interest in bidding for failed institutions. To receive regulatory approval to bid in a P&A
transaction, the potential bidder must be a chartered financial institution or an investor group that
has received a conditional charter or is in the process of obtaining a “de novo” charter.
Moreover, the financial institution must be well capitalized and possess a CAMELS rating of 1
or 2, a satisfactory Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) rating, and a satisfactory anti-moneylaundering record.
The FDIC provides all approved bidders with information about the failed institution. The
information package contains loan reviews, schedules representing the value of the items on the
failed bank’s balance sheet, and operational information. Potential bidders have the opportunity
to review the individual loan documents as part of their on-site due diligence. Industry
documents suggest that the due diligence period is merely four to six days for a team of six to
eight people, which is severely compressed relative to a typical merger and acquisition.
The bidding generally starts twelve to fifteen days before the scheduled closing of the failed
bank. The bidders can place one or more sealed bids for the failed bank. The Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) of 1991 mandates the FDIC to choose the bid
that is least costly to the Deposit Insurance Fund (DIF). To meet this requirement, the FDIC
evaluates all submitted bids using its proprietary least-cost test model and selects the bid whose
terms entail the least estimated cost for the DIF if those costs are below the reservation value set
by the FDIC.
When a failing depository institution enters receivership, the claims of the insured depositors are
transferred to the FDIC, which is subrogated to the claims of depositors. The FDIC subrogated
claim has a first lien on the proceeds of the receivership. The DIF took a loss on most bank
failures that occurred during the recent financial crisis, suggesting that the receivership proceeds
do not cover the FDIC’s subrogated claim and that the FDIC is the residual claimant in most
receiverships (Hynes and Walt, 2010). Since the beginning of 2008, the DIF lost approximately
$90 billion due to depository institution failures. The fund reached a negative balance during the
third quarter of 2009 but has since recovered and stood at $33 billion as of December 31, 2012,
which corresponded to 0.45% of the total insured deposits in the system (Davison and Carreon,
2010). The FDIC answered to the large losses on its DIF by raising deposit insurance premiums
and collecting a special assessment of 5 basis points on all depository institutions.

6

III. Data and Key Variables
We obtain data with the terms and characteristics of each government-assisted deal from SNL
Financial. The dataset contains information on the resolution method used for each failed bank.
From 2007 to 2013, the FDIC acted as receiver for 492 commercial and savings banks and used
the P&A transaction as the resolution method in 467 receiverships.3 In the remaining 25 cases,
there were either no interested bidders or the bids fell below the FDIC’s reservation value, and
consequently the FDIC opted for liquidating the estate of the failed bank and paying off the
insured depositors. We exclude these cases because there is no data on cost of resolution that is
available.
As stated above, the FDICIA mandates the FDIC to choose the least costly option to the DIF. To
comply with that mandate, the FDIC estimates the cost of each bid for the failed bank using a
proprietary algorithm, and selects the bid with the lowest estimated cost. The estimated cost of
resolution associated with each P&A transaction is disclosed by the FDIC and is also available in
the SNL Financial database.
We obtain the financial characteristics of failed banks, all other commercial banks, and savings
banks operating in the United States from the quarterly Reports of Condition and Income that
banks file with the FDIC, and obtain financial information on savings banks prior to 2012 from
SNL Financial. These regulatory reports provide detailed information on the size, capital
structure, and asset composition of each commercial and savings bank. To construct the primary
sample we exclude from the analysis (i) six P&A deals in which the FDIC marketed several bank
subsidiaries of a single holding company in the same resolution process; (ii) the governmentassisted deals involving Washington Mutual Bank and the IndyMac Federal Savings Bank,
because their complexity required a special resolution method involving direct negotiation with
the interested bidders; and (iii) the resolution process of the Independent Bankers’ Bank of
Springfield, which required the creation of a bridge bank that was later sold to another Bankers’
Bank specializing in providing correspondent services to its client banks.
Bank location data for each commercial and savings bank come from the Summary of Deposits
(SOD) database provided by the FDIC. This database contains information on the geographical
coordinates, location, and deposits of each branch of every commercial and savings bank
operating in the United States. We complement the SOD dataset by assigning latitudes and
longitudes to each branch address whenever geographical coordinate data are missing. We
geocode branch addresses into coordinates via Google Geocoding. We compute measures of
geographical distance between the branch networks of each failed bank and all other commercial
3

We restrict our analysis to this period since we do not have detailed data on transactions prior to 2007. Note,
however, that the transactions before this period correspond to a tiny fraction relative to those observed in the post2007 period.
7

and savings banks operating the United States in the year prior to the bank failure. We calculate
geographical distance between banks using two metrics. First, we construct a variable that
captures the average geodetic distance between all branch pairs. Second, we create a set of
indicator variables that take the value of 1 if a commercial or savings bank has at least one
branch in the same zip code as any of the branches of the failed bank. We also compute the
indicator at the county and state level.
IV. Descriptive Statistics
The period from 2007 to 2013, which we study, saw an unprecedented number of banks being
taken into receivership by the FDIC and then sold at auctions. This fact can be clearly seen in
Figure 1, which shows the number of bank failures from 1994 onward. From 1994 to 2006 the
average annual number of bank failures is five, and does not exceed fifteen. In contrast, 2010
saw a peak of bank failures at 157.
These bank failures impose substantial costs on the FDIC. Figure 2A shows the distribution of
resolution costs and the size of failed banks that were sold during our sample. The median failed
bank’s assets are $211 million, with a significant dispersion (standard deviation of $2 billion).
Similarly, the costs of resolution in the sample are relatively large, with a median of $55 million
and standard deviation of $765 million. Figure 2B shows that resolution costs are sizable relative
to the assets of the failed bank: the median resolution cost from 2007 to 2013 was 28% of total
assets of the failed bank.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of key variables used in our analysis for failed banks
(Panel A), their acquirers (Panel B), and their potential acquirers, i.e. banks that did not fail
(Panel C) over the sample period. Failed banks tend to be smaller, experience higher losses on
their loan portfolio, and have worse financial health relative to acquirers or potential acquirers.
All banks tilt their lending to real estate, which constitutes more than 60% of their asset
portfolio. These patterns also emerge if we stratify the sample yearly rather than pooling the
sample. Relative to other banks, eventual acquirers tend to be larger and have a slightly larger
residential and commercial real estate tilt in their loan composition.
Most interestingly, acquiring banks tend to be located closer to failed banks relative to other
potential acquirers. The average distance between the eventual acquirer and a failed bank is 200
miles, rather than 900 miles for other potential acquirers. The loan portfolios of eventual
acquirers are also more similar to those of the failed bank than are portfolios of other potential
acquirers. The average share of CRE loans for an eventual acquirer differs from that of the failed
bank it acquired by 18 percentage points (pp). For potential acquirers, this difference is 35 pp.

8

These patterns will be fundamental to the facts that we will robustly establish in our main
analysis.
We also note some additional key statistics of failed banks and eventual acquirers in our sample.
At the time of the failure, failed banks assets average $759 million, with a standard deviation of
$2.441 billion. These banks are largely state chartered (65%), and 5% are part of a bank holding
company holding more than one commercial and savings bank. The assets of acquirers in the
sample average $11.275 billion; 55% of acquirers are state chartered and 26% are organized as a
multibank holding company.
In Table 2 we formally present some of these same inferences by estimating a logit of the event
that a potential acquirer acquires a failed bank as a function of the financial and asset
characteristics of the potential acquirer. For notational simplicity we use  . to denote a logit
and estimate the following specification:

Pr  yijt  1     Γi X it  Γ j X jt  t   ijt  ,
in which i indexes a failed bank at time t, and j indexes a potential acquirer. The dependent
variable yijt is a dummy variable, with 1 indicating that potential bidder j acquired failed bank i
at time t, and 0 if not. We account for characteristics of failed banks by including a plethora of
failed bank characteristics, X it , and potential acquirer characteristic , X jt , as discussed in notes to
Table 2. We also include quarter fixed effects, t , to account for any macro movements. The
results from this analysis mirror the descriptive statics in Table 1 (Panels B and C). The
probability that a given potential acquirer acquires a failed bank is correlated with acquirer’s
characteristics in an economically meaningful way. For instance, a standard deviation increase in
the Tier 1 Capital Ratio of the potential acquirer increases the likelihood of acquisition by 7.6 pp,
evaluated at the mean values of other variables.4
V. Failed Bank Acquisition
V.A The Role of Distance
V.A.1 Are Failed Banks Sold Nonlocally?

4

Similarly, the marginal effects of the Leverage Ratio and % Core Deposits variables are also economically large.
Evaluated at mean values of other variables, a standard deviation increase in Leverage Ratio and % Core Deposits
raises the likelihood of acquisition by 1.5 and 2.9 pp, respectively.
9

We begin our main analysis by asking whether geographic proximity of a potential acquirer to
the failed bank increases the probability of an acquisition. One could imagine that the proximity
of the potential acquirer does not play a role. As Cochrane (2013) contends, failed banks could
be “swiftly bought up by other banks even out of state.”
A simple cut of the raw data in Figure 3 suggests that failed banks are rarely sold to distant
banks. In Figure 3A we sort potential acquirers into 20 bins, which contain an equal number of
potential acquirers, sorted by the average distance of their branch networks to that of the failed
bank. More than 60% of failed banks during the sample period are acquired by the 5% of
potential acquirers that are located closest to the failed bank. The distance of the branch networks
of these potential acquirers from the branch network of the failed bank is less than 196 miles.
The results are also striking if we restrict the sample to the 5% of closest potential acquirers, as
in Figure 3B. The potential acquirers with an average branch network distance of less than 21
miles, which represent the 0.25% closest potential acquirers, acquire over 12% of failed banks.
The patterns are similar when we use an alternative metric of distance in Appendix Figure A.1.
These figures clearly show that most failed banks are sold very locally, and that the share of
banks sold declines quickly with distance.
We formalize this insight by building on the specification from Table 2. We estimate a
conditional (fixed effect) logit specification; for notational simplicity we use  ., it  to denote
a fixed effect logit with a it fixed effect:

Pr  yijt  1     ΓX jt  1dijt , it  ,
in which i indexes a failed bank being auctioned at time t, and j indexes a potential acquirer. The
dependent variable yijt is a dummy variable, with 1 indicating that potential bidder j acquired
failed bank i at time t, and 0 if not. The dependent variable of interest is dijt , which measures the
average distance of the branch network of the potential acquirer from the branch network of the
failed bank. We control for characteristics of a potential acquirer, such as its asset size,
composition of loans, and capitalization in X jt .
In the specification we also condition on failed bank fixed effects  it . We do so to ensure that
our results are driven by the distance between the failed bank and the acquirer, not the
characteristics of the bank being sold. One concern could be that failed banks that are far away
from potential acquirers also have worse assets, or assets that are very specific. Alternatively,
states’ regulation or regulators may affect which types of banks are located in a given state (see
Agarwal et al. 2014), as well as the distance to potential acquirers. Failed bank fixed effects  it
10

control for these alternatives. Moreover, failed bank fixed effects subsume any time variation,
such as aggregate trends in bank sales, since the failure happens at one point in time, as well as
between-state variation. The variation in our estimates therefore comes from within failed bank
differences in geographic proximity of potential acquirers to the failed bank. We cluster the
standard errors at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.
Table 3A presents the results and confirms the intuition from Figure 3. The coefficient on
distance, 1 , is negative and statistically significant. Potential acquirers that are located farther
from a failed bank have a lower probability of acquiring it. This estimate is economically
meaningful. The average marginal effect of a 100-mile increase in the distance between the
failed bank’s and potential acquirer’s branch networks is to reduce the expected probability of
acquisition by 3 pp. The effect of distance is stronger conditional on being located close to the
failed bank: a 100-mile increase in distance reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 13.6 pp for
potential acquirers within 100 miles of the failed bank, but only 0.25 pp for potential acquirers
1,000 miles away from the failed bank.
Next, we perform a serious of robustness checks to further confirm that failed banks are sold
very locally. To better understand the effect of distance, we restrict our subsample to acquirers
whose branches are within a 200-mile radius. In unreported tests we find that the effect of
distance persists when we restrict ourselves to the subsample of these more plausible potential
acquirers. To ensure that our results are not driven by unobserved characteristics of potential
acquirers, we include acquirer/quarter fixed effects  jt and estimate the following specification:

Pr  yijt  1      jt  1dijt , it  .
All failed bank and acquirer factors are subsumed in fixed effects. The remaining variation we
exploit is the interaction between the characteristics of the potential acquirer and the failed bank
and the relative distance between them. Because of the acquirer/quarter fixed effects, the sample
of potential acquirers in these conditional logit tests is limited to banks that acquired a failed
bank in the same quarter in which that failure occurred. In spite of this very limited sample, our
results in columns 2 and 3 are quantitatively and qualitatively similar to the baseline estimates.
Because banks had substantial exposures to the real estate sector, we explore how house price
dynamics faced by the failed bank shape the effect of distance (see Keys et al., 2012). In Table
3B we stratify the sample based on whether the failed bank is in a coastal area, which
experienced larger boom-bust house price cycles during the last decade. Alternatively, we
stratify directly based on house price growth experienced in the failed bank region. The results
presented in columns 1 to 4 show that in each of these subsamples, distant banks have a lower
probability of purchasing a failed bank. The estimated coefficients also suggest that the effect of
11

distance is slightly less pronounced if failed banks are located in coastal states or operating in
areas that had experienced high house price growth between 2001 and 2006. For instance, a 100mile increase in distance reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 2.6 and 3.1 pp in coastal and
noncoastal states, respectively. Similarly, a 100-mile increase in distance reduces the likelihood
of acquisition by 2.3 and 3.5 pp for failed banks located in areas with high and low house price
growth, respectively. In Table 3C we assess whether these effects vary based on failed banks’
specialization. We stratify failed banks based on the percentage of CRE, Residential, and C&I
loans held by the failed bank. The results of Table 3C show that the effects of distance are
present across all subsamples, although the sales are most local for failed banks with a low share
of CRE loans.
There are several potential reasons why failed banks sales are local. A large literature has studied
how the transmission of soft information within banks deteriorates with geographic distance
(Stein, 2002; Petersen and Rajan, 2002). A distant potential acquirer will not be able to operate
the acquired failed bank very efficiently because of the loss in soft information. Nearby banks
might also be better able to exploit economies of scale, such as lower overhead, easier servicing
of branches and joint ATMs, or greater market power (Akkus, Cookson, and Hortacsu, 2014).
Next we explore the conjecture that the effect of distance in failed bank acquisitions is related to
soft information loss.
V.A.2 Does Distance Reflect Soft Information?
If soft information deteriorates with distance, an acquisition by a local bank would be especially
valuable in the sale of failed banks with an important soft information component. Because
banks in our sample had substantial exposures to the real estate sector, we exploit variation in the
amount of soft information about real estate values. We do so by measuring the quality of hard
information contained in public tax assessments of real estate values following Garmaise and
Moskowitz (2004).
Property tax authorities periodically evaluate the quality of property assessments in their
jurisdictions. The most popular measure of assessment quality is the coefficient of dispersion
used by Garmaise and Moskowitz (2004). The central input is the ratio between the market value
of properties recently sold and their assessed value, which is frequently determined by statute.
Suppose that the assessed value is legislated at 33% of market value. If assessments measure
market values perfectly, then the ratios of assessed values to market value are the same for all
assessed properties, 33%. Outside investors can then rely on the hard information collected by
the tax authorities to closely track the market value of a property. Consider the opposite situation
in which the ratios are dispersed—some assessed values are 10% of the actual value, others are
50%. Then the assessed values provide little information to outside investors. The coefficient of
12

dispersion (COD) formally measures how dispersed the ratios are.5 When public assessments are
less accurate, the measure is larger and investors have to rely on soft information about local real
estate market conditions rather than public assessments.
We exploit this measure to examine whether local banks are more likely to acquire a failed bank
in areas with more soft information, using the following specification:

Pr  yijt  1      jt  1dijt   2 dijt CODij , it  ,
in which CODij represents the coefficient of dispersion, our measure of the importance of soft
information in the real estate market. The level effect of CODij is absorbed by the failed bank
fixed effect  it . Our independent variable of interest is the interaction between the distance of
potential acquirers and the amount of soft information in the local market, dij CODij , with the
corresponding coefficient of interest  2 . As in other specifications, we also include
acquirer/quarter fixed effects  jt and cluster the standard errors at the level of the failed bank’s
state headquarters.
The results are presented in Table 4. In column 1 we use a dummy variable to capture the degree
of soft information in a failed bank’s portfolio. Specifically, we use an indicator that takes a
value of 1 if the failed bank is in an above-median COD area (High COD) and 0 otherwise. The
coefficient on distance 1 is negative and statistically significant, which indicates that distant
potential acquirers are less likely to acquire failed banks even in markets with less soft
information. More importantly, as the interaction term reveals, local soft information
significantly increases the advantage of local banks. If we compare areas with above-median soft
information to those below median, we find that the coefficient of distance increases over 50
percent. For potential acquirers within 100 miles of the failed bank, a 100-mile increase in
distance reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 17.6 pp in high-COD areas, whereas the same
increase in low-COD areas reduces the likelihood of acquisition by just 11.4 pp. The incremental
effect of COD on the marginal effect of distance rapidly disappears as we move farther away
from the failed bank. For potential acquirers within 300 miles from the failed bank, a 100-mile
increase in distance reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 7.4 pp in high-COD areas, whereas
the same increase in low-COD areas reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 6.5 pp. We obtain
similar inferences when we use a continuous measure of COD in column 2 instead.

∑

The coefficient of dispersion is calculated as
100, where
is the assessment-to-market
ratio for the
property sold,
is the median of the assessment-to-market ratio of the sold properties, and N is
the number of properties sold.
13
5

Garmaise and Moskowitz (2004) make a strong case that COD measures plausibly exogenous
variation in soft information.6 Even if that were not the case, the variation we use to identify our
effect is based on the interaction between COD and distance between a bank and a potential
acquirer. Because we include both failed bank and acquirer/quarter fixed effects these results are
not driven by the fact that banks or potential acquirers are different in areas of high rather than
low COD. To generate our results, areas with high administrative mismeasurement would be
areas in which local banks are a relatively better match for the failed bank in that area and a
relatively worse match for distant failed banks on dimensions that are not related to distance or
soft information. In areas with little administrative mismeasurement, the result would be
reversed. We think this alternative, while possible, may be unlikely.
We also use alternative measures of soft information. Following Granja (2013) and Agarwal et
al. (2014), we measure whether the failed bank was publicly traded before failure and whether
the failed bank is large relative to the sample of failed banks. The idea behind these proxies is
that public information is more readily available for these banks. Therefore soft and local
information play a larger role in acquiring private and smaller banks, which should provide an
advantage to local potential acquirers. We confirm this conjecture in columns 3 and 4 of Table 4.
Overall, these results paint a clear picture. Failed banks are generally acquired by very local
banks and are rarely sold out of state. This effect is robust to failed bank and potential acquirer
fixed effects, and is present across regions that saw different housing boom-bust cycles over the
last decade as well as among failed banks with different specializations. These effects are
exacerbated for banks in areas with more soft information. These results suggest that the
valuations of potential acquirers differ, with local banks valuing failed banks more, especially in
areas with pervasive soft information.
V.B The Role of Asset Specificity
In Section V.A.1, we showed that geographic proximity of a potential acquirer to the failed bank
increases the probability of an acquisition. Next, we examine whether asset specificity affects the
allocation of failed banks to potential acquirers. Some failed banks focus more on consumer
lending, others on mortgages, still others on commercial loans. Banks also differ in the services
they offer, with some banks providing insurance and brokerage services while other banks do
not. Given that banks specialize in different types of loans, their assets and human capital are
likely specialized as well. It is possible that the potential acquirer best suited to deploy these
assets is specialized in a similar way.

6

They control for the level of heterogeneity in local properties and the house price growth rate in the region. The
authors also find that property age and COD have a strong positive correlation, which allays concerns of selective
offering of properties with shorter income histories in regions with high COD.
14

There are substantial differences in the portfolio composition of failed banks. The average failed
bank’s portfolio comprises 58% CRE loans, but there are large differences between failed banks,
with a 20 pp standard deviation. For residential loans the mean is 24% and standard deviation is
18 pp (Table 1). As mentioned earlier, these substantial differences in portfolios are not unusual
and are also observed in the potential bidders and actual acquirers.
One simple way to examine whether failed banks are more likely to be acquired by banks with
similar portfolios is to compute the correlation between the portfolios of the failed bank and the
acquirer. The correlation between the share of CRE loans of acquirers and failed banks is 0.295,
which shows that failed banks are sold to acquirers with similar portfolios. This relationship can
also be seen in Figure 4A: we sort potential acquirers on their portfolio distance from the failed
bank and group them into quintiles. We then plot the share of failed banks (as a percentage of
total failed banks in our sample) that were acquired by potential acquirers in different quintiles
for the CRE portfolio distance metric. Approximately 33% of failed banks are acquired by the
20% of potential acquirers with the most similar share of CRE loans in their portfolio.
Conversely, fewer than 5% of failed banks are acquired by the 20% of potential acquirers whose
CRE portfolio shares are most dissimilar. A parallel pattern is presented in Figure 4B when we
sort potential acquirers by their residential loan portfolio share. These simple cuts of raw data
suggest that failed banks are acquired by banks with similar portfolios. The results with other
portfolio metrics are similar, though substantially weaker. This is reasonable: as mentioned
earlier, most banks in our sample have their asset holdings in commercial and residential real
estate.
We formally examine whether similarity to the failed bank increases the probability of
acquisition building on the conditional logit specification from above:

Pr  yijt  1      jt  1 portfolio distanceijt  2 dijt , it  ,
in which yijt is a dummy variable, with 1 indicating that potential bidder j acquired failed bank i
at time t, and 0 if not. The independent variable of interest is portfolio distanceijt , which
measures the absolute difference in the loan portfolio composition between the failed bank and a
potential acquirer. For example, in the first specification portfolio distanceijt measures the
absolute difference between the portfolio shares of residential mortgages. As before, we control
for the failed bank fixed effect  it and the potential acquirer/quarter fixed effect  jt . Therefore
our results are not driven by portfolio composition of failed banks or potential acquirers but the
interaction of the two. We also directly control for geographic distance, dijt , to make sure our
results are not driven by the correlation between business similarity and geographic proximity.
We cluster the standard errors at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.
15

Table 5A presents the results. We measure the distance in portfolios using five different
specifications. We compute the absolute difference in the share of residential, commercial and
industrial, consumer, and CRE loans. We test different measures of asset specificity first
individually and then simultaneously. All coefficients are negative, suggesting that potential
acquirers whose portfolio composition differs from the failed bank are less likely to acquire the
failed bank. Because banks are likely similar on several portfolio dimensions simultaneously, it
is difficult to separately identify the effects of different portfolio categories; i.e., the measures are
nearly multi-collinear. The last specification shows that, while the signs on all the portfolio
distance metrics are maintained when the measures are included simultaneously, the only
statistically significant coefficient is on CRE loans. Accordingly, we will focus on CRE loans as
the metric of portfolio distance in our analysis.
These effects are also economically large: a one-standard-deviation increase in the absolute
difference between the residential loan portfolio shares of potential acquirers and failed banks
reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 8.8 pp, whereas a one-standard-deviation increase in the
absolute difference of CRE loan portfolio shares reduces the expected probability of acquisition
by 9.7 pp. Not surprisingly, given the large exposure of banks in our sample to real estate, the
effect of a change in the portfolio distances of C&I or consumer loans is less important. A
standard-deviation increase in the absolute difference between the C&I or consumer loan
portfolio shares reduces the likelihood of acquisition by 6.4 and 2.6 pp, respectively, and the
results are not statistically significant. These findings suggest that different dimensions of asset
specificity play an important role in who acquires failed banks.
Next, we examine whether the similarity in financial services provided by the potential acquirer
and the failed bank affects acquisition probabilities. Banks provide several different services,
organized in fiduciary and custodian businesses and insurance, brokerage, and lease businesses.
One would expect that a bank that has experience in insurance would be better able to manage a
failed bank that also provides insurance services than would a potential acquirer with no
insurance business. Therefore a potential acquirer’s valuation of a failed bank should increase if
they operate similar businesses in terms of financial services.
Table 5B presents the results in which we estimate the specification from above, but examine
whether the potential acquirer and failed bank provide the same services. Again, the failed bank
and potential acquirer fixed effects absorb the direct effect that providing services by the failed
bank or a potential acquirer would have on the probability of acquisition. The coefficients are
positive for all services when these are included separately as well as together, suggesting that if
a failed bank provides a service, such as insurance, then a potential acquirer that provides the
service is more likely to acquire it. These effects are economically meaningful. For instance, if
both the failed bank and the potential acquirer offer insurance activities, the likelihood of
16

acquisition increases by 4.1 pp, which is large compared with the conditional mean of 5%.
Overall, the results of this section suggest asset specificity plays an important role in how failed
banks are allocated.
V.C The Role of Capitalization of Potential Acquirers
The third force that may affect who acquires a failed bank is the capitalization of potential
acquirers. We draw on the insight from Shleifer and Vishny (1992) that in auctions of distressed
assets potential buyers may be distressed as well, and may therefore be unable to purchase the
assets.
A simple cut of the raw data in Figure 5A suggests that capitalization of potential acquirers is an
important factor in failed bank acquisitions. We sort local potential acquirers into quintiles
according to their capitalization. The 20% best capitalized potential acquirers obtain over 30% of
failed banks that go to local acquirers, while the 20% worst capitalized acquirers obtain 10% of
failed banks. Next, we sharpen the analysis by restricting the sample to the most likely buyers:
local potential acquirers that have the highest portfolio composition overlap with the failed bank
based on CRE. We again sort potential acquirers into quintiles on capitalization and show the
share of failed banks acquired for each quintile in Figure 5B. The potential acquirers in the best
capitalized quintile acquire over 25% of failed banks in this sample, while the least capitalized
quintile acquires approximately 9% of failed banks. These simple cuts of the data suggest that
the capitalization of potential acquirers may play an important role in the allocation of failed
banks.
We explore this question more formally by estimating the following conditional logit
specification:

Pr  yijt  1     1capitalization jt +ΓX jt  2 portfolio distijt  3dijt , it  ,
in which capitalization jt measures the capitalization of a potential acquirer. The coefficient of
interest 1 measures the effect of potential acquirer capitalization on the probability of acquiring
a failed bank. it captures failed bank fixed effects, ensuring the estimate is not driven by the
poor capitalization of the overall pool of interested acquirers for a given failed bank. X jt controls
for other characteristics of potential acquirers. We also condition on geographic distance and the
portfolio distance between the potential acquirer and the failed bank to ensure that their
correlation with capitalization is not driving the results. We cluster the standard errors at the
level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.

17

We present the results in Table 6. We measure potential acquirers’ capitalization through either
their Tier 1 Capital Ratio or their Leverage Ratio. As shown in columns 1 and 2, better
capitalized potential acquirers according to either measure are more likely to acquire a failed
bank. Since local banks are much more likely to acquire a failed bank, we re-estimate the
specification focusing only on potential acquirers within 100 miles. In unreported tests we find
that, even within the pool of local banks, it is the better capitalized banks that are more likely to
acquire a failed bank.
V.D Interaction of Distance, Asset Specificity, and Capitalization
We have documented three distinct forces that affect the allocation of failed banks to potential
acquirers: the distance of a potential acquirer to the failed bank, the relatedness of the business of
a potential acquirer to that of the failed bank, and the capitalization of the potential acquirer.
Next we examine how these forces interact with each other. We want to understand whether
capitalization of potential acquirers affects how failed banks are allocated along dimensions of
geographic distance and business similarity. The idea is that local banks are the most likely
acquirers of a failed bank, but they may not be able to take advantage of their higher valuations if
they are distressed. Failed banks would then be sold to distant banks that are better capitalized
even if distant banks value the failed banks less. Similarly, low capitalization of potential
acquirers in related businesses may prevent the sale of the failed bank to these otherwise likely
acquirers.
We estimate whether in areas with less well-capitalized local acquirers failed banks are sold to
relatively more distant potential acquirers. We estimate the following conditional logit
specification:

Pr  yijt  1      jt  1dij  2 dij local capitalizationijt , it  ,
in which local capitalizationijt measures the capitalization of local banks (potential acquirers).
We include failed bank, it , and potential acquirer/quarter,  jt , fixed effects. Therefore we study
the effect that the capitalization of other local potential acquirers has on the effect of distance for
a given potential acquirer. Note that the level of local capitalizationij is absorbed by the failed
bank fixed effects, it . Because the direct effect of distance between the failed bank and a
potential acquirer, dijt , is not absorbed by the fixed effects, we control for it directly. Our
coefficient of interest is  2 , the interaction between the capitalization of local banks and distance
18

of the potential acquirer. We cluster the standard errors at the level of the failed bank’s state
headquarters.
We use two measures of local banks’ capitalization: The first is the median capitalization of local
potential acquirers, with local potential acquirers defined as banks whose branch network
overlaps in at least one zip code with the branch network of the failed bank. The second is the
share of local potential acquirers that are “well capitalized.” We define a local potential acquirer
as well capitalized if its Tier 1 capital ratio is above the median Tier 1 capital ratio of all
potential local acquirers (across all failed banks in that quarter). The results are presented in
columns 3 to 6 of Table 6. The results confirm that if local potential acquirers are poorly
capitalized, distance to the failed bank is less of an impediment to acquiring it. This result is
robust to different measures of local capitalization. Consider local potential acquirers, located
within 100 miles of the failed bank. If their capitalization is at the median, the probability of
acquisition declines with distance approximately 35% faster than if the capitalization of local
bidders is one standard deviation below the median. These results are consistent with the idea
that nonlocal banks are more likely to acquire a failed institution when local banks are poorly
capitalized.
Capitalization of potential acquirers also affects the allocation of failed banks along the
dimension of asset similarity. If potential acquirers whose asset portfolios are similar to those of
the failed bank are distressed, they might not be able to take advantage of their higher valuations.
Failed banks would then be sold to banks whose asset portfolios are not as similar. Results in
Table 6 confirm that if potential acquirers with similar asset portfolios are poorly capitalized,
then the failed bank is more likely to be sold to potential acquirers with less asset similarity.
Overall, these results suggest that the three forces that affect the allocation of failed banks
interact in a meaningful way. Local potential acquirers in related lines of business are most likely
to acquire a failed bank if they are well capitalized. However, low capitalization of these buyers
forces the sale of a field bank to more distant acquirers that are in less related lines of business.
V.E What Drives Failed Bank Allocation? Bank Choices versus the FDIC’s Eligibility Criteria
There are two broad channels that can explain our results. First, failed bank allocation is driven
by the choices of potential acquirers: a bank acquires a failed bank because it chooses to bid
more for the failed bank than other potential acquirers, which either bid less or choose not to
participate in the bidding process. Alternatively, as we briefly describe in Section II, the FDIC
chooses which banks are allowed to bid in an auction through its eligibility criteria, and it is
these criteria that effectively determine failed bank allocation. Both alternatives are intriguing,

19

and both may affect the allocation of failed banks. Nevertheless, we attempt to disentangle the
two channels below, allowing for a cleaner interpretation of our results in Section VII.
The FDIC follows a two-step process: first, it restricts which bidders are eligible to bid in failed
bank auctions; second, from the eligible bids it chooses the one that minimizes the cost of the
failed bank resolution to the Deposit Insurance Fund. To be allowed to bid in a failed bank
auction, a potential acquirer must have an adequate Community and Reinvestment Act (CRA)
record, a CAMELS rating of 1 or 2, and a Federal Reserve Bank Holding Company (BHC) rating
of 1 or 2. Its total assets must exceed two times the size of the failed bank if it is located in the
same state, four times the size of the failed bank if it is located in a contiguous state, and five
times the size of the failed bank if it is located in a nonadjacent state.7
To disentangle whether our results are driven by banks’ choices or FDIC bidding eligibility
criteria, we conduct two sets of tests. The first set of tests estimates our previous regressions on a
sample in which we directly account for eligibility criteria imposed by the FDIC. The second set
of results re-estimates our regression on a sample of actual bidders, whose eligibility is selfevident from their being allowed to bid.
The first set of tests start by re-estimating the main results on distance and asset specificity for
the subset of potential acquirers that are eligible to bid according to the FDIC criteria described
above. We present the results in Table 7.8 In columns 1 and 2 we replicate specifications from
Table 3 and Table 5, in which we control for failed bank and acquirer/quarter fixed effects. We
explicitly impose the relative size criterion on the sample. We do not have information on
CAMELS, CRA record, or the FED BHC rating of banks. Because we use acquirer/quarter fixed
effects in a fixed effect logit, however, these regressions only use data from potential acquirers
that have bid at least once in any given quarter. This implies that the institutions that are a part of
these regressions must have CRA, CAMELS, and FED BHC ratings that satisfy the FDIC
criteria in the quarter they were allowed to bid. In fact, any FDIC criteria that are acquirerspecific are accounted for by potential acquirer/quarter fixed effects. Note that the size eligibility
criteria are relative to the size of the failed bank, and are therefore not absorbed and must be
directly imposed. Imposing these criteria significantly decreases the number of observations of
potential acquirers, from approximately 9,000 to approximately 5,000 observations. While
noisier, the results in these two columns are very similar quantitatively to those in the
unrestricted sample.

7

For instance, see the website of the Texas Department of Banking: http://www.dob.texas.gov/banks-trustcompanies/bidding-failing-bank.
8
We find that there seems to be some discretion in how these rules are imposed by the FDIC. Approximately 25%
of the winning bidders do not strictly meet the size criterion.
20

In the next column, we test the capitalization result for the sample of eligible bidders. As in
Table 6, these regressions are not estimated with acquirer/quarter fixed effects. Again, even
though the number of observations drops significantly, to 763,000 from 3 million, our results are
similar: better capitalized banks are more likely to acquire a failed bank. In columns 4 and 5 we
show that the results from Table 6, interacting local capitalization of potential acquirers and
distance, also remain unchanged once we constrain ourselves to the sample of eligible potential
acquirers.
In the second set of tests we constrain our sample to potential acquirers that we know were
eligible to bid on a given failed bank—the actual bidders. We compile the list of actual bidders
using information on the auction of each failed bank in our sample. Estimating the results on this
sample eliminates concerns about FDIC eligibility since the sample now consists of potential
acquirers that were allowed to bid by the FDIC. These specifications do not include potential
acquirer/quarter fixed effects due to very few cases where the same acquirer bid for different
targets in the same quarter. Even though the sample of potential acquirers is severely restricted
and reduced to 943 observations, the results in columns 6–10 of Table 7 show that our inferences
from earlier tables remain the same.
Restricting the results to actual bidders yields quantitatively very similar results to those in the
unrestricted sample. The only exception is the effect of distance, which is substantially smaller
among actual bidders relative to all potential acquirers. We already impose the FDIC distance
criteria directly when we estimate the results in columns 1–5, and we find a large distance effect,
similar to that of the unrestricted sample. This suggests that the decline in the effect of distance is
not driven by FDIC criteria, but rather that far-off banks choose not to bid in the first place.
Jointly, these results confirm that our previous results are robust to eligibility criteria imposed by
the FDIC.
VI. FDIC Losses and Allocation Outcomes
As we describe in Section IV, there are substantial costs that the FDIC incurs in selling a failed
bank, and these costs differ significantly across failed banks. We next explore the link between
the forces that affect the allocation of failed banks and the costs of these sales to the FDIC.
Our previous analysis is at the level of the potential acquirer–failed bank pair, showing that
potential acquirers are most likely to purchase a failed bank if they are located close to the failed
bank, are in similar lines of business, and are well capitalized. Because banks are sold in
auctions, our results imply that such potential acquirers are willing to pay the most for failed
banks. The costs to the FDIC then might depend on the composition of potential acquirers for a
failed bank, and how this composition is related to the forces we describe above. A simple cut of
21

the data presented in Figure 6A suggests that there is a link between the capitalizations of the
pool of local potential acquirers and the cost to the FDIC. For each bank we compute the share of
well-capitalized potential acquirers and sort failed banks into quintiles according to this measure.
The 20% of failed banks with the highest share of well-capitalized local potential acquirers have
resolution costs of approximately 25% of assets. For the lowest quintile, the costs are over 33%
of assets. This is a large change relative to a standard deviation of resolution costs of 12%. We
obtain similar inferences if we sort banks based on the other capitalization ratio in Figure 6B.
These simple plots suggest that the forces that affect the allocation of failed banks to potential
acquirers have a substantial impact on FDIC losses.
As in Figure 6, we study the link between the capitalizations of the pool of local bidders and the
cost to the FDIC, but we do so by estimating the following linear regressions:

cost its    1local banks ' capitalizationits  s  t  ΓX its  its ,
in which i indexes a bank, which failed at quarter t in state s. cost its measures the estimated cost
of resolution of the failed bank to the FDIC. local banks ' capitalizationits is the dependent
variable of interest, which measures how well capitalized local potential acquirers are. Because
aggregate conditions were highly correlated with the severity of banking failures, we control for
the quarter in which the failed bank was sold, t . State fixed effects s control for differences in
regulation and local conditions between the states in which banks fail, such as severity of the
great recession or constraints faced by regulators which might lead to forbearance. X its contains
failed bank characteristics such as size, portfolio composition, and capitalization prior to failure.
We cluster the standard errors at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.
The results are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8A. As in Section V.D we measure local
banks’ capitalization as the median capitalization of banks whose branch network overlaps in at
least one zip code with the branch network of the failed bank, or by the share of local banks that
are well capitalized. The results are robust to perturbations of these definitions. The magnitudes
are also substantial. A one-standard-deviation increase in the median capitalization of local
banks reduces the estimated cost of resolution by 2.3 pp of the assets of the failed bank. This
represents approximately 19% of the standard deviation in the cost of resolution of failed banks.
The last four columns try to tighten the link between the forces that affect the allocation of failed
banks and the costs to the FDIC. Potential acquirers located close to the failed bank that are in
similar lines of business are most likely to purchase a failed bank, if they are well capitalized. If
their capitalization is low, however, then the failed bank has to be sold to another bank, which
presumably values the failed bank less. We test this conjecture in columns 3 and 4, measuring
22

similarity based on the distance of CRE loan portfolios between the failed bank and potential
local acquirers. A one-standard-deviation decrease in the median capitalization of the local
acquirers with similar loan portfolios increases the costs of resolution by 1.15 pp, or almost 10%
of the standard deviation. These effects are less pronounced but still relevant when we analyze
difference in the portfolio shares of other loan types. These findings suggest that lower
capitalization of potential acquirers best suited to purchase a failed bank results in a significantly
higher cost of resolution for the FDIC.
In the previous section we also found that in areas with more soft information local banks have
an advantage in acquiring a failed bank. We explore whether soft information is related to costs
of resolution by estimating the following specification:

cost its    1CODijs  s  t  ΓX its   its ,
in which, as in section V.A.2, CODijs is the coefficient of dispersion that measures the amount of
soft information in a market. We also proxy for soft information by considering whether the bank
is publicly traded or not. The results in columns 5 and 6 suggest that, all else equal, a higher
degree of soft information significantly exacerbates the cost of resolution. The cost of resolution
of failed banks that are publicly traded is 3.74 pp lower than that of non-publicly-traded failed
banks. This is in line with Granja (2013), who argues that the effect of being publicly traded
partially stems from the greater information transparency of publicly traded banks. Moreover,
bank failures in areas with little soft information (low COD) are 2.2 pp less costly. Our
inferences survive in the last two columns when we include the capitalization variables along
with the proxy for soft information.9 Overall, the findings of this section suggest that the forces
that affect the allocation of failed banks are also linked with substantial costs of failed bank sales
to the FDIC.
VI.A Robustness to Regional Shocks
One possible concern with the last set of results is that the capitalization of local acquirers may
be low because they were exposed to the same negative local shock as the failed bank. The
capitalization of local potential acquirers could then proxy for the severity of regional shocks to
the failed bank, lowering its value. Such a correlated shock would cause higher cost to the FDIC
when local potential buyers are poorly capitalized. We already condition on state fixed effects in
the specification above, so for such shocks to affect our results, they would have to be at a more
local level, such as MSA.

9

The findings are similar with COD as a proxy for soft information. We omit these results for brevity.
23

We address this concern by exploiting variation in capitalization of local buyers that is
exogenous to the regional economic environment of the failed bank. Because regions of the U.S.
were exposed to different house price declines after 2006, the geographic portfolio of a bank may
influence the losses a bank suffered in the aftermath. We exploit losses that potential acquirers
incur due to house price drops in regions outside the region of failed bank operations to
instrument for the capitalization of local acquirers. This instrument likely satisfies the exclusion
restriction by construction.
We first compute the exposure of each potential acquirer to house price declines outside of the
regions in which the failed bank operates. For each potential acquirer–failed bank pair in our
sample, we compute a house price index from the first quarter of 2006 to bank failure. We weigh
the change in the MSA house price index10 by the level of deposits of the potential acquirer in
the same MSA. We do so only for regions that do not overlap with regions in which the failed
bank operates. As before, consider failed bank i with branches in regions i , which fails at time
t, and a potential acquirer j with branches in regions  j and deposits per branch r of d jr . Denote
the MSA house price index of region r as prt . We construct the weighted price index as
pijt 

 p

r j i

rt

 pr 2006 

d jr



r j i

d jr

.

On average, the weighted house price index declines by 5% from 2006, which is consistent with
the economic conditions faced by the U.S. since the financial crisis.
Define the change in the level of Tier 1 capital ratio of the potential acquirer since 2006 as

capitalization jt  capitalization jt  capitalization j 2006 . We study the impact of nonlocal changes
in house prices for each potential acquirer–failed bank on this change:

capitalization jt    1pijt  it  ΓX jt   ijt
We also include additional buyer characteristics and failed bank fixed effects in the first stage
and cluster the standard errors at the level of the state where the failed bank’s headquarter is
located. Nonlocal house price declines are statistically significantly associated with the change in
the level of Tier 1 capital ratio of the potential acquirer. The first-stage estimate is statistically
significant (β1=6.60 and t=17.5) and well above the conventional threshold of assessing the
strength of the instrument (F=304). The estimate is also economically meaningful—a standard
deviation decrease in the level of our weighted house-price index (16 bp) decreases the Tier 1
capital ratio by 105 bp. This is a large change relative to the median to 75th percentile difference
in Tier 1 capital ratio of potential buyers of 4.5%.
10

We use the Federal Housing Finance Agency quarterly MSA house price index.
24

Our nonlocal house price instrument generates variation in the capitalization of an individual
potential acquirer. As in the baseline specification we measure local banks’ capitalization as the
median capitalization of banks whose branch network overlaps in at least one zip code with the
branch network of the failed bank, or by the share of local banks that are well capitalized. Here
we use the predicted values of capital ratios of individual local potential acquirers,


capitalization , to construct the same measures.11 The results are presented in Table 8B,
ijt

columns 1 and 2, and show that our inferences from Table 8A remain the same. As in Table 8A,
we also compute the instrumented capitalization of local potential acquirers whose share of CRE
loans is closest to the failed bank. Our instrumented results again mirror those from the simple
OLS specification in Table 8A.
One concern with the instrumental variable may be that the house price changes in MSAs
without failed bank branches are still correlated with house price changes in MSAs in which the
failed bank operates, because of the proximity of the regions. Note that this concern should be
mitigated to some extent since we directly account for the state fixed effect s in the regression,
which controls for any such correlation between MSAs in the same state. Nevertheless, as a
robustness check, we estimate our regressions constructing the IV to exclude MSAs in which the
failed bank operates as well as MSAs contiguous to failed bank operations. The results in
columns 3 and 4 reveal similar findings. In the last specification (columns 5 and 6) we exclude
all MSAs from the states in which the failed bank operates when constructing the IV. We find
similar results with this alternative specification as well.
VI.B Robustness to Bid Characteristics and Measures of Resolution Costs
We conclude our analysis by conducting additional robustness tests. We introduce additional
controls for the terms of the winning bid to our main results. These include an indicator variable
that takes the value of 1 if the deal was for all loans and deposits of the failed bank, an indicator
variable that takes the value of 1 if the deal was for no loan but all deposits of the failed bank, an
indicator variable that assumes the value of 1 if the deal was for no loans and only the insured
deposits of the failed bank, an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the transaction
includes a loss share agreement, and a variable that indicates the loss share percentage in the first
tranche of the loss share agreement. We also include a control for the number of bids in each
P&A transaction. We present the results in columns 1 and 2 of Table 8C, and we find our results
are robust to the inclusion of bid characteristics.

11

Even though

is at the level of potential acquirer and time, jt, the predicted value
is at the level of the potential acquirer, time, and the failed bank, ijt, because the instrument is at
the failed bank level.
25

Next, we use an alternative measure of the costs of resolution of a failed bank. Instead of the cost
estimates provided by the FDIC, we can measure the actual premia or discounts offered for
assets and deposits of the bank by the winning bidder. Bidders can offer to acquire the assets of
the failed bank at a discount but also to pay a premium for the deposits of the failed bank (both
as a percentage of the failed bank’s assets). We take the difference in the discount and the
premium to obtain a net discount offered by the bidder on the failed banks’ assets and liabilities.
We again control for other bid characteristics. The results presented in columns 3 and 4 of Table
8C show that the results with this alternative measure are quantitatively very similar, suggesting
that the asset discount and deposit premium are primary inputs into FDIC costs.
VII. Discussion and Interpretation: Fire Sales of Failed Banks
In this section we interpret the facts that we have documented within the framework of fire sales
(Shleifer and Vishny, 1992). The insight from Shleifer and Vishny (1992) is that in auctions of
distressed assets, potential buyers with the highest valuations may be distressed and are therefore
unable to purchase the assets. Auctions of failed banks in our sample are plausibly subject to fire
sales. Because of bank run fears, auctions are swift, and bidding generally starts twelve to fifteen
days before the scheduled closing of the failed bank. Moreover, because most of these auctions
occurred during the great recession and its aftermath, several banks that might have been highvalue acquirers were themselves distressed.
For fire sales to affect the allocation of failed banks two conditions have to be met. First,
potential acquirers must differ in their ability to use the failed bank. If all potential acquirers can
use the failed bank in the same way, then the fire sale cannot affect the allocation. In other
words, failed banks have to exhibit asset specificity for fire sales to have meaningful
consequences for allocation. Second, the best users of failed banks must be distressed themselves
and therefore unable to purchase the failed bank. The failed bank is then purchased by wellcapitalized acquirers that are less effective at operating it.
Our first set of results in Section V examines the probability that a given potential acquirer
purchases a failed bank. Because failed banks are sold at auctions, potential acquirers whose
willingness to pay is higher are more likely to win the auction. Conversely, if certain potential
acquirers are more likely to acquire a given failed bank, we conclude that they value the bank
more than other potential acquirers. We first show that there are two forces that generate
different valuations for a failed bank among potential acquirers. First, geographically closer
potential acquirers are more likely to acquire a failed bank, and the effect of distance seems to be
related to the deterioration of soft information with distance. These results suggest that potential
acquirers’ valuations of failed banks, on average, decline with distance. Second, we find that
potential acquirers that are in similar lines of business as the failed bank are more likely to
26

purchase a failed bank, suggesting higher valuation by these acquirers. These results establish
two dimensions over which acquirers’ valuations for a failed bank can differ. Potential acquirers
that are geographically close to the failed bank and in similar lines of business are best suited to
acquire a failed bank from the perspective of the assets of the failed bank.
Differences in valuations between potential acquirers do not lead to fire sales if the potential
acquirers with highest valuations also purchase the failed bank. We show that acquirers with low
capitalization, likely distressed themselves, have a lower probability of acquiring a failed bank.
Moreover, we examine how the capitalization of the potential acquirers best suited to purchase a
failed bank affects auction outcomes: when local banks and banks that are in similar lines of
business are poorly capitalized, the failed bank is more likely to be allocated to distant acquirers
whose business is less related to that of the failed bank. Our interpretation of these findings is
that lower capitalization of potential acquirers that are best suited to purchase a failed bank
results in failed banks’ allocation to less suitable acquirers. Fire sales introduce distortions into
the sale of failed banks.
In Section VI we study how the costs of selling a failed bank incurred by the FDIC are linked to
the forces that affect the allocation of failed banks. We show that lower capitalization of the
potential acquirers best suited to purchasing a failed bank is related to increased resolution costs
for the FDIC. These are the banks that we show are likely to be subject to fire sales and allocated
to less suitable acquirers. Overall, our findings suggest that lower capitalization of potential
acquirers that are best suited to purchasing a failed bank results in fire sales, which impose a
significantly higher cost of failed bank resolutions on the FDIC.

VIII. Conclusion
In this paper we provide simple facts that aid our understanding of failed bank sales. Despite
deregulation and progress in information technology, failed bank sales in the great recession and
its aftermath remain very local: fewer than 15% of failed banks are sold to banks that do not
currently have branches within the same state as the failed bank. In addition, failed banks are
more likely to be acquired by banks with similar loan portfolios and in similar lines of business.
These two effects interact with the capitalization of potential acquirers. Poor capitalization of
nearby acquirers in similar lines of business distorts the allocation of failed banks, which are sold
to less similar banks located farther from the failed bank. The results are robust to restricting the
data to actual bidders, confirming that they are not driven by auction eligibility criteria imposed
by the FDIC. We link facts on banking allocation to the costs to the FDIC of selling a failed
bank. When a failed bank’s most likely acquirers are poorly capitalized the FDIC incurs
significantly higher costs.
27

These facts can be organized using the fire sales framework of Shleifer and Vishny (1992). Local
banks in similar lines of business have the highest valuation for a failed bank. However, if they
are distressed as well, then the failed bank has to be sold to a bank whose valuation is lower, but
which is well capitalized. The failed bank is then sold at a larger discount, imposing higher costs
on the seller, the FDIC.
Selling failed banks is one of the procedures that have been proposed to ensure the functioning of
the banking system after negative shocks. This approach is particularly appealing because it
keeps the bank in place, potentially preserving the value embodied in the collection of assets and
in relationships between bank employees and clients, which may not be easily or quickly
replaced. Our facts suggest that the selling process is not frictionless, imposing its own costs.
These costs have to be weighed by policy makers and regulators against the costs of other
methods of supporting banks.

References
Acharya, Viral V., Hyun Song Shin, and Tanju Yorulmazer. (2011) "Crisis Resolution and Bank
Liquidity." Review of Financial Studies 24.6, 2166-2205.
Acharya, Viral and Tanju Yorulmazer. (2008) "Cash-in-the-market pricing and optimal
resolution of bank failures." Review of Financial Studies, 21.6, 2705-2742.
Agarwal, Sumit, David Lucca, Amit Seru and Francesco Trebbi. (2014). “Inconsistent
Regulators: Evidence from Banking” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Akkus, Oktay, and Ali Hortacsu. (2014). The Determinants of Bank Mergers: A Revealed
Preference Analysis. Working paper, University of Chicago.
Berger, A. N., and Udell, G. F. (1995). Relationship lending and lines of credit in small firm
finance. Journal of Business, 68, 351–382.
Berger, A. N., Saunders, A., Scalise, J. M., and Udell, G. F. (1998). The effects of bank mergers
and acquisitions on small business lending. Journal of Financial Economics, 50, 187–229.
Berger, A. N., Miller, N. H., Petersen, M. A., Rajan, R. G., and Stein, J. C. (2005). Does function
follow organizational form? Evidence from the lending practices of large and small banks.
Journal of Financial Economics.
Cochrane, John. (2013). “The Grumpy Economist John Cochrane’s blog” (blog).
http://johnhcochrane.blogspot.com/2013/09/miron-and-rigol-go-after-classic.html
Davison, L. and Carreon, A. (2010). “Toward a long-term strategy for deposit insurance fund
management” FDIC Quarterly, Vol. 4, No. 4, p. 29-37, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
Diamond, D. W. (1984). Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring. Review of Economic
Studies, 51, 393–414.
28

Garmaise, Mark J., and Tobias J. Moskowitz. (2004). "Confronting information asymmetries:
Evidence from real estate markets." Review of Financial Studies 17, no. 2, 405-437.
Gilje, Erik, Elena Loutskina, and Philip E. Strahan. (2013) Exporting liquidity: Branch banking
and financial integration. Working paper no. 19403. National Bureau of Economic Research
Granja, João. (2013). "The relation between bank resolutions and information environment:
Evidence from the Auctions for failed banks." Journal of Accounting Research 51, 1031-1070.
Hynes, Richard M., and Steven D. Walt. (2010). "Why Banks Are Not Allowed in Bankruptcy."
Washington & Lee Law Review 67, no. 3.
James, Christopher. (1987). Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans. Journal of
Financial Economics, 19, 217–235.
James, Christopher. (1991). "The losses realized in bank failures." The Journal of Finance 46,
no. 4, 1223-1242.
James, Christopher, and Peggy Wier. (1987). "An analysis of FDIC failed bank auctions."
Journal of Monetary Economics 20, no. 1, 141-153.
Keys, Benjamin J., Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig. (2012). "Lender screening and the role of
securitization: evidence from prime and subprime mortgage markets." Review of Financial
Studies 25, no. 7, 2071-2108.
Kroszner, Randall S., and Philip E. Strahan, (1999). “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114(4), 1437-1467.
Office of the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, (2014).
“Quarterly Report to Congress”.
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan. (2002). "Does distance still matter? The
information revolution in small business lending." The Journal of Finance 57, 2533-2570
Stein, Jeremy C. (2002). "Information production and capital allocation: Decentralized versus
hierarchical firms." The Journal of Finance 57, 1891-1921.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W Vishny. (1992). Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A
Market Equilibrium Approach. Journal of Finance 47, no. 4: 1343-1366.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics of the sample used in the analysis. Cost is the cost borne by the FDIC in the resolution process of each
failed bank as a percentage of the total assets of the failed bank at assumption. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers is the median
Tier1 capital ratio in the set of local potential acquirers of the failed bank. Local potential acquirers are potential acquirers whose branch network
overlaps with that of the failed bank in at least one zipcode. % Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers is defined as the percentage of local potential
acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratio is above the median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential acquirers. COD is defined as the average Coefficient
of Dispersion (COD) in the sales ratio studies of property tax assessments of residential properties in the assessment jurisdictions where the failed bank
operates branches. High COD is an indicator variable that takes the value one if COD is above median. Publicly Traded is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one if the failed bank was registered with the SEC in the previous quarter. Size is defined as the total assets (RCFD2170) of the
bank (in thousands). Liquidity Ratio is measured as the ratio between liquid assets (Cash + Fed Funds Sold + Securities (excluding MBS/ABS) and
total assets. % Residential Loans is measured as the percentage of residential loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). % CRE Loans is measured
as the percentage of Commercial and Real Estate (CRE) Loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). % C&I Loans is measured as the percentage of
Commercial and Industrial (C&I) loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). % Consumer Loans is measured as the percentage of Consumer loans
relative to total loans (RCFD2122). 30-89PD Ratio is defined as the loans that are 30–89 days past due (RCFD1406) over total loans. NPL Ratio
is defined as non-performing loans (non-accrual) (RCFD1403) and 90 days or more past due (RCFD1407)) over total loans. OREO Ratio is defined
as other real estate owned (RCFD2150) divided by total assets. Unused Commitment Ratio is defined as unused commitments divided by unused
commitments and total loans. Tier 1 Capital Ratio is the ratio between Tier 1 (core) Capital and total risk-weighted assets. Leverage Ratio is the
ratio between Tier 1 (core) Capital and (adjusted) total assets. Wholesale Funding Ratio is defined as the sum of large time deposits, subordinated
debt and debentures, gross federal funds purchased, repos, and other borrowed money divided by total assets. % Core Deposits is total core deposits
(transaction accounts + savings deposits + time deposits less than $100,000) divided by total deposits. Distance is average pairwise distance (in 100
mile increments) between all pairs of branches of the failed bank and potential acquirer. State Bank is defined as an indicator variable that takes the
value of one if the bank is regulated by a state regulator. Multibank BHC is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the bank is part of a
Bank Holding Company that owns more that one commercial or savings bank. Distance (% Res. Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed
bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in residential loans. Distance (% CRE Loans) is the absolute difference between the
failed bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in CRE loans. Distance (% CI Loans) is the absolute difference between the
failed bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in C&I loans. Distance (% Cons. Loans) is the absolute difference between the
failed bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in consumer loans.

Panel A: Summary Statistics of Failed Banks
N

Mean

St. Dev.

p25

p50

p75

Resolution Cost and Local Market Characteristics
Cost

438

0.281

0.120

0.200

0.273

0.366

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers

424

11.711

1.480

10.575

11.629

12.714

% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers

424

0.477

0.237

0.333

0.500

0.650

COD

317

13.546

7.477

9.600

11.500

15.640

High COD

317

0.505

0.501

0.000

1.000

1.000

Publicly Traded

434

0.260

0.439

0.000

0.000

1.000

438

759,751

2,441,545

102,913

210,851.5

492,491

Liquidity Ratio

438

16.288

7.666

10.621

15.041

20.605

% Residential Loans

438

26.250

19.312

12.311

23.314

32.692

% CRE Loans

438

57.481

19.805

46.353

60.259

70.157

% C&I Loans

438

10.777

8.909

4.544

8.455

14.439

% Consumer Loans

438

2.224

3.160

0.375

1.157

2.844

30-89PD Ratio

438

4.281

3.399

1.975

3.584

5.699

NPL Ratio

438

15.892

9.212

9.523

14.641

19.882

OREO Ratio

438

5.183

4.880

1.686

3.853

7.343

Asset and Financial Characteristics
Size

Unused Commitment Ratio

438

5.947

5.622

2.577

4.711

8.347

Tier 1 Capital Ratio

438

1.627

3.203

0.336

1.718

2.900

Leverage Ratio

438

1.231

2.219

0.276

1.260

2.110

Wholesale Funding Ratio

438

32.344

14.117

22.990

31.283

41.214

% Core Deposits Ratio

438

72.056

14.046

63.208

74.108

81.522

State Bank

438

0.649

0.477

0

1

1

Multibank BHC

438

0.055

0.228

0

0

0

30

Table 1: Summary Statistics (contd.)
Panel B: Summary Statistics of Acquirers
N

Mean

St. Dev.

p25

p50

p75

Size

417

11,275,389

38,244,003

504,464

1,405,573

3,628,005

Liquidity Ratio

417

16.754

10.345

9.564

14.907

21.081

% Residential Loans

417

24.531

14.843

14.196

23.459

30.940

% CRE Loans

417

48.698

18.415

36.394

52.013

62.160

% C&I Loans

417

15.034

8.692

8.193

14.058

19.758

% Consumer Loans

417

5.212

7.148

0.969

2.627

7.165

30-89PD Ratio

417

1.323

1.183

0.524

0.968

1.731

NPL Ratio

417

3.924

4.962

1.123

2.301

4.557

OREO Ratio

417

0.964

1.264

0.166

0.522

1.201

Unused Commitment Ratio

417

14.320

8.327

8.866

13.683

18.373

Tier 1 Capital Ratio

417

16.774

13.211

11.203

13.380

17.093

Leverage Ratio

417

10.695

5.179

8.260

9.690

11.730

Asset Characteristics

Financial Characteristics

Book Equity Ratio

417

11.975

5.236

9.430

11.115

13.224

Wholesale Funding Ratio

417

23.263

9.358

16.790

22.069

28.793

% Core Deposits Ratio

417

80.512

9.145

74.877

81.990

86.855

State Bank

417

0.559

0.497

0

1

1

Multibank BHC

417

0.260

0.438

0

0

1

Distance

414

2.010

3.524

0.000

1.000

2.000

Distance (% Res. Loans)

416

15.293

14.672

4.691

10.841

21.110

Distance (% CRE Loans)

416

18.944

15.160

7.875

15.370

26.441

Proximity to Failed Bank

Distance (% C&I Loans)

416

8.916

7.723

3.078

7.104

11.992

Distance (% Cons. Loans)

416

4.530

6.630

0.784

1.977

5.999

31

Table 1: Summary Statistics (contd.)
Panel C: Summary Statistics for all Potential Acquirers
N

Mean

St. Dev.

p25

p50

p75

Size

3466810

1,714,011

31,925,725

72,038

150,311

341,356

Liquidity Ratio

3466810

23.825

15.780

12.822

20.147

30.815

% Residential Loans

3409603

31.023

21.430

15.724

26.545

40.800

% CRE Loans

3411532

35.120

21.703

17.078

33.817

50.958

% C&I Loans

3411532

13.226

10.447

6.352

11.305

17.746

% Consumer Loans

3411532

6.671

10.016

1.437

3.914

8.197

30-89PD Ratio

3411532

1.441

1.640

0.348

0.956

1.971

NPL Ratio

3411470

2.629

3.812

0.490

1.486

3.287

OREO Ratio

3457074

0.745

1.473

0.000

0.216

0.843

Unused Commitment Ratio

3404039

10.628

7.726

5.415

9.899

14.820

Tier 1 Capital Ratio

3464686

21.974

90.736

11.400

13.960

18.610

Leverage Ratio

3464693

11.587

10.588

8.300

9.540

11.660

Asset Characteristics

Financial Characteristics

Book Equity Ratio

3464693

12.069

9.928

8.692

10.123

12.392

Wholesale Funding Ratio

3465970

21.954

11.014

14.362

20.967

28.365

% Core Deposits Ratio

3431750

79.639

11.717

74.227

81.467

87.250

State Bank

3470905

61.1

48.7

0

1

1

Proximity to Failed Bank
Distance

3428866

9.175

6.069

5.000

8.000

12.000

Distance (% Res. Loans)

3401228

22.085

19.260

7.546

16.560

30.807

Distance (% CRE Loans)

3403145

30.732

20.505

13.528

28.085

45.400

Distance (% C&I Loans)

3403145

10.127

9.582

3.482

7.563

13.786

Distance (% Cons. Loans)

3403145

6.041

9.663

1.207

3.242

7.251

32

Table 2: Acquisition Likelihood and Failed Bank/Acquirer Characteristics
This table reports the coefficients from a logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer j
acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Size (acquirer) is the standardized value of total assets (RCFD2170) measured using constant 2009:Q1 prices.
% Residential Loans (acquirer) is measured as the percentage of residential loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). % CRE Loans (acquirer)is
measured as the percentage of Commercial and Real Estate (CRE) Loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). % C&I Loans (acquirer) is measured
as the percentage of Commercial and Industrial (C&I) loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). Tier 1 Capital Ratio (acquirer) is the ratio of Tier
1 (core) capital and total risk-weighted assets. Leverage ratio (acquirer) is the ratio of Tier 1 (core) capital and (adjusted) total assets. % Core
Deposits (acquirer) is total core deposits (transaction accounts + savings deposits + time deposits less than $100,000) divided by total deposits. Other
unreported control variables are: Liquidity Ratio is measured as the ratio of liquid assets Cash + Fed Funds Sold + Securities (excluding MBS/ABS)
and total assets. Unused Commitment ratio is measured as total unused commitments divided by the sum of total unused commitments and total loans.
% Consumer Loans is measured as the percentage of Consumer loans relative to total loans (RCFD2122). NPL ratio is defined as non-performing
loans (non-accrual (RCFD1403) and 90 days or more past due (RCFD1407)) over total loans. OREO ratio is measured as other real estate owned
(RCFD2150) divided by total assets. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Pr(acquisition)

Size (acquirer)

0.041***

0.042***

0.041***

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

% Residential Loans (acquirer)
% CRE Loans (acquirer)
% C&I Loans (acquirer)
Tier 1 Capital Ratio (acquirer)

0.009*

0.009**

0.009*

(0.005)

(0.004)

(0.005)

0.034***

0.033***

0.036***

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.016***

0.016***

0.017***

(0.006)

(0.006)

(0.006)

0.001***
(0.000)

Leverage Ratio (acquirer)

0.009***
(0.004)

% Core Deposits (acquirer)

0.018***
(0.005)

Observations

3,385,778

3,385,778

3,384,401

Quarter fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Failed Bank Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

33

Table 3: Geographic Proximity
Table 3 reports the coefficients from a fixed-effects logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer
j acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Distanceis average pairwise distance (in 100 mile increments) between all pairs of branches of the failed
bank and potential acquirer. Potential acquirer controls (unreported) include Size, Liquidity Ratio, % CRE Loans, % C&I Loans„ NPL Ratio, OREO
Ratio, Unused Commitment Ratio, and Tier1 Capital Ratio. Column (1) of Panel A includes Failed Bank fixed effects and the above potential acquirers
controls. The specifications in columns (2) and (3) of Panel A include Potential-Acquirer and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects, respectively.
The introduction of Potential-Acquirer and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter fixed effects eliminates observations with invariant dependent variables at the
level of the Potential-Acquirer and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter, resulting in a reduction of the number of observations from column (1) to columns (2)
and (3). Panel B reports the results from a fixed-effects logit regression using the specification in column (3) of Panel A on coastal/non-coastal areas and
on high/low house price growth (2001:Q1–2006:Q4) areas. Coastal is defined as an indicator variable taking the variable of one if the state headquarter
of the failed bank is located in a coastal state, where coastal state is defined as any state with a coastline on the Atlantic, Pacific Ocean, and Great
Lakes. High HPI growth (01-06) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the house price index (HPI) growth in the failed bank’s branch
service area over the 2001:Q1–2006:Q4 period is greater than the median level of HPI change for all failed banks. The House Price Index growth (01-06)
is calculated using the all-transactions indexes at the MSA and state non-metropolitan levels provided by the Federal Housing Finance Agency. We
calculate the House Price Index growth for each failed bank by weighting the HPI growth (01-06) variable for each bank by the percentage of deposits of
the failed bank in each area. Panel C repeats the analysis of column (3) of Panel A stratifying the sample based on the median levels of CRE, Residential,
and C&I loans held by the failed banks in the sample. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the failed bank’s
state headquarters.

Panel A: Geographic Distance and Acquisition Likelihood
(1)

(2)

(3)

Pr(acquisition)

Distance

-0.624***

-0.679***

-0.545***

(0.095)

(0.102)

(0.089)

3,202,315

93,666

9,231

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer Controls

Yes

Yes

No

Potential-Acquirer Fixed-Effects

No

Yes

No

Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects

No

No

Yes

Observations

Panel B: Geographic Distance and Acquisition Likelihood: Heterogeneity across Regions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Pr(acquisition)

Coastal

Non-Coastal

High HPI growth

Low HPI growth

-0.420***

-0.712***

-0.375***

-0.865***

(0.087)

(0.164)

(0.056)

(0.101)

4,819

4,412

4,644

4,587

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Distance
Observations

34

35
(0.117)
4,624

(0.090)
4,607
Yes
Yes

Observations

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

-0.636***

Low CRE

High CRE
-0.466***

Distance

(2)

(1)

Yes

Yes

4,652

(0.118)

-0.565***

(4)

Yes

Yes

4,579

(0.098)

-0.526***

Low Residential

Pr(acquisition)

High Residential

(3)

Panel C: Geographic Distance and Acquisition: Heterogeneity across Lending Specialization

Table 3: Geographic Proximity (cont’d)

Yes

Yes

4,735

(0.123)

-0.575***

High C&I

(5)

Yes

Yes

4,496

(0.081)

-0.510***

Low C&I

(6)

Table 4: Interaction of Soft Information and Distance
This table reports the results of a fixed-effects logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer j
acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Distanceis average pairwise distance (in 100 mile increments) between all pairs of branches of the failed bank
and potential acquirer.COD is a measure of soft information and is defined as the average Coefficient of Dispersion (COD) in the sales ratio studies of
property tax assessments of residential properties in the assessment jurisdictions where the failed bank operates branches. High COD is an indicator
variable that takes the value one if COD is above the median COD in the sample. Publicly Traded is an indicator variable that takes the value of one
if the failed bank was registered with the SEC in the previous quarter, and Large is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the total assets
of the failed bank are larger than the median size of the subset of failed banks in the quarter prior to failure. All specifications include Failed Bank
Fixed-Effects and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the failed
bank’s state headquarters.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Pr(acquisition)

Distance
High COD×Distance

-0.475***

-0.357**

-0.668***

-0.694***

(0.092)

(0.139)

(0.103)

(0.129)

-0.238**
(0.095)

COD×Distance

-0.017*
(0.010)

Publicly Traded×Distance

0.341***
(0.101)

Large×Distance

0.267**
(0.122)

Observations

6,635

6,635

9,231

9,231

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer/quarter Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

36

Table 5: Role of Asset Overlap
This table reports the results of a fixed-effects logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer j
acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Panel A analyzes similarity of loan portfolio composition. Panel B examines the impact of similarity between
Lines of Business of Failed Bank and Potential Acquirers. Distance (% Residential Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and the
potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in residential loans. Distance (% CRE Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and
the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in CRE loans. Distance (% CI Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and the
potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in C&I loans. Distance (% Consumer Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and
the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in consumer loans. Fiduciary Business in Both is an indicator variable that takes the value of one
if both the failed bank and potential acquirer report strictly positive revenues from fiducuary business in the quarter prior to the resolution. Insurance
Business in Both is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if both the failed bank and potential acquirer report strictly positive revenues
from insurance activities in the quarter prior to the resolution. Brokerage Business in Both is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if both
the failed bank and potential acquirer report strictly positive revenues from brokerage activities in the quarter prior to the resolution.Lease Financing
Business in Both is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if both the failed bank and potential acquirer report strictly positive revenues from
lease Financing activities in the quarter prior to the resolution. The same line of business segment variables (Fiduciary Business in Both, Insurance
Business in Both, Brokerage Business in Both, Lease Financing Business in Both) are only defined for commercial banks because the regulatory
financial reports of savings banks prior to the discontinuation of the Office of Thrift Supervision did not breakdown revenue by business segment. All
specifications include Failed Bank Fixed-Effects and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are
clustered at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.

Panel A: Distance of Loan Portfolio Composition
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Pr(acquisition)
Distance (% Residential Loans)

-0.012**

-0.005

(0.005)

(0.006)

Distance (% CRE Loans)

-0.012***

-0.011**

(0.005)
Distance (% C&I Loans)

(0.005)
-0.007

-0.005

(0.008)

(0.008)

Distance (% Consumer Loans)

Distance

Observations

-0.002

0.004

(0.008)

(0.007)

-0.543***

-0.540***

-0.543***

-0.544***

-0.540***

(0.088)

(0.088)

(0.088)

(0.088)

(0.088)

9,225

9,225

9,225

9,225

9,225

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer/quarter Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

37

Table 5: Role of Asset Overlap (contd.)
Panel B: Lines of Business Overlap
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Pr(acquisition)
Fiduciary Business in Both

0.863***

0.989***

(0.306)

(0.342)

Insurance Business in Both

0.772***

0.748***

(0.205)
Brokerage Business in Both

(0.192
0.414*

0.246

(0.216)

(0.228)

Lease Financing Business in Both

Distance

Observations

0.065

-0.043

(0.623)

(0.640)

-0.572***

-0.582***

-0.579***

-0.579***

-0.580***

(0.097)

(0.099)

(0.098)

(0.098)

(0.097)

7,506

7,416

7,416

7,416

7,416

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Potential-Acquirer/quarter Fixed-Effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

38

39
Yes
Yes
No

Potential-Acquirer Controls

Potential-Acquirer/quarter Fixed-Effects

No

Yes

Yes

3,202,315

(0.087)

(0.095)

3,202,315

-0.626***

(0.003)

0.010***

(2)

-0.624***

(0.014)

0.043***

Failed Bank Fixed-Effects

Observations

CRE Distance

Distance

% Well-Capitalized Close CRE Potential Acquirers×CRE Distance

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio Close CRE Potential Acquirers×CRE Distance

% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers×Distance

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers×Distance

Leverage Ratio (potential acquirer)

Tier 1 Capital Ratio (potential acquirer)

(1)

(4)

Yes

No

Yes

8,924

(0.084)

-0.550***

(0.025)

-0.098***

Yes

No

Yes

8,924

(0.108)

-0.367***

(0.117)

-0.380***

Pr(acquisition)

(3)

Yes

No

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

9,343

(0.017)

(0.005)

9,343

-0.007

(0.002)

-0.004*

(6)

-0.018***

(0.002)

-0.005**

(5)

Table 6 reports the results of a fixed-effects logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer j acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Tier 1
Capital Ratio (potential acquirer) is the Tier 1 capital ratio of the potential acquirer. Leverage Ratio (potential acquirer) is the common leverage ratio of the potential acquirer (the ratio of Tier
1 (core) capital and (adjusted) total assets). Distance is average pairwise distance (in 100 mile increments) between all pairs of branches of the failed bank and potential acquirer. Distance (%
CRE Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in CRE loans. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers
is defined as the median Tier 1 capital ratio of the failed bank’s local potential acquirers. Local potential acquirers are potential acquirers whose branch network overlaps in at least one zip
code with the branch network of the failed bank. % Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers is defined as the percentage of local potential acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratio is above the
median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential acquirers. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio Close CRE Potential Acquirers is defined as the median Tier 1 capital ratio in the group of close CRE
potential acquirers. Close CRE potential acquirers are potential acquirers that are within the first quartile of loan portfolio closeness according to the CRE distance metric. % Well-Capitalized
Close CRE Potential Acquirers is defined as the percentage of close CRE potential acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratiosis above the median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential acquirers.
Potential-Acquirer controls include Size, Liquidity Ratio, % Residential Loans, % CRE Loans, % C&I Loans, % Consumer Loans, 30-89PD Ratio, NPL Ratio, OREO Ratio, Unused Commitment
Ratio. Specifications (3)-(6) include Failed Bank Fixed-Effects and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the
failed bank’s state headquarters.

Table 6: Financial Health of Local Banks

40
5,248
FDIC
Yes
No
Yes

Eligibility Criteria

Target-Specific fixed-effects

Potential-Acquirer Controls

Potential-Acquirer/quarter Fixed-Effects

(0.087)

Yes

No

Yes

FDIC

5,242

(0.008)

-0.010

-0.519***

(0.096)

(2)

-0.526***

Observations

% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirer×Distance

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirer×Distance

Tier 1 Capital Ratio (potential acquirer)

CRE Distance

Distance

(1)

(6)

(0.031)

-0.080**

No

Yes

Yes

FDIC

763,692

4,987

Yes

No

Yes

FDIC

Yes

No

Yes

FDIC

No

Yes

Yes

Bidder

No

Yes

Yes

Bidder

943

No

Yes

Yes

Bidder

916

No

Yes

Yes

Bidder

No

Yes

Yes

Bidder

916

(0.134)

(0.145)

4,987

-0.375***

(0.019)

(0.023)

(0.026)

-0.088***

(10)

-0.359**

-0.070***

(0.031)

-0.097***

(9)

-0.083***

940

(0.009)

-0.015*

(0.031)

-0.076**

(8)

(0.014)

943

(0.032)

-0.081**

(7)

(0.015)

(0.126)

-0.344***

Pr(acquisition)

(5)

0.026*

(0.089)

-0.518***

(4)

0.037**

(0.095)

-0.572***

(3)

Table 7 reports the results of a fixed-effects logit regression. The dependent variable Pr(acquisition) takes the value of one if potential acquirer j acquires failed bank i and zero otherwise. Columns
(1)–(5) analyze the likelihood of acquisition in the subset of potential acquirers that are eligible to bid for a failed bank according to the FDIC’s size eligibility criteria. Columns (6)–(10) repeat
the analysis in the subset of potential acquirers j that placed a bid in the auction of failed bank i. Distanceis average pairwise distance (in 100 mile increments) between all pairs of branches
of the failed bank and potential acquirer. Distance (% CRE Loans) is the absolute difference between the failed bank’s and the potential acquirer’s percentage of total loans held in CRE loans.
Tier 1 Capital Ratio (potential acquirer) is the Tier 1 capital ratio of the potential acquirer. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers is defined as the median Tier 1 capital ratio
of the failed bank’s local potential acquirers. Local potential acquirers are potential acquirers whose branch network overlaps in at least one zip code with the branch network of the failed bank.
% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers is defined as the percentage of local potential acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratio is above the median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential
acquirers. Specifications (1)–(5) include Failed Bank Fixed-Effects and Potential-Acquirer/Quarter Fixed-Effects. Specifications (6)–(10) include Failed Bank Fixed-Effects and Potential Acquirer
controls. Potential-Acquirer controls include Size, Liquidity Ratio, % CRE Loans, % C&I Loans, % Consumer Loans, NPL Ratio, OREO Ratio, Unused Commitment Ratio. Standard errors are
presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.

Table 7: Robustness: Eligibility Requirements

41

359
0.571
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.033**
(0.015)

(4)

433
0.515
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.037**
(0.015)

(5)
Cost

316
0.540
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.022*
(0.012)

(6)

(7)

423
0.529
Yes
Yes
Yes

359
0.572
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.004*
(0.002)

(3)

Observations
Adjusted R2
Failed Bank Controls
Quarter Fixed-Effects
Failed Bank state Fixed-Effects

424
0.539
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.083**
(0.032)

(2)

0.001*
(0.001)
423
0.575
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.017***
(0.005)

(1)

P50 CRE Distance of Local Potential Acquirers

High COD

Publicly Traded

% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers & CRE Overlap

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers & CRE Overlap

% Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers

Panel A: OLS Regressions

418
0.550
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.001*
(0.001)

-0.034**
(0.015)

-0.016***
(0.004)

(8)

418
0.556
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.001*
(0.001)

-0.033**
(0.015)

-0.071***
(0.034)

(9)

Panel A of Table 8 reports the results of OLS regressions. The dependent variable Cost is the cost borne by the FDIC in the resolution process of each failed bank as a percentage of the total
assets of the failed bank at assumption. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers is the median Tier1 capital ratio in the set of local potential acquirers of the failed bank. Local
potential acquirers are potential acquirers whose branch network overlaps in at least one zip code with the branch network of the failed bank. % Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers
is defined as the percentage of local potential acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratio is above the median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential acquirers. P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local
Potential Acquirers & CRE Overlap is defined as the median Tier1 capital ratio in the set of local potential acquirers that are also within the first quartile of loan portfolio closeness according to
the CRE distance metric. Loan portfolio quartiles are constructed based on the entire sample. % Well-Capitalized Local Potential Acquirers & CRE Overlap is defined as the percentage of local
potential acquirers whose Tier 1 capital ratio is above the median Tier 1 capital ratio across local potential acquirers and are also within the first quartile of loan portfolio closeness according to
the CRE distance metric.Publicly Traded is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the failed bank was registered with the SEC in the previous quarter. High COD is an indicator
variable that takes the value one if COD is above the median COD.P50 CRE Distance of Local Potential Acquirers is the median of the absolute difference between the share of CRE loans in
the loan portfolio of the failed bank and the share of CRE loans in the group of local potential acquirers. Other failed bank controls include Size, Liquidity Ratio, % CRE Loans, % C&I Loans,
NPL Ratio, OREO Ratio, Unused Commitment Ratio, and Tier1 Capital Ratio. Panel B of Table 8 repeats the analyses in specifications (1) and (2) of Panel A using instrumented values of Tier1
capital ratio to construct the local capitalization variables. The columns of panel B present the results for different sub-samples used in the computation of the instrumental variable (described
in the table). Panel C of Table 8 introduces additional controls for the terms of the winning bid. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is Cost, and in columns 3 and 4 is Asset Discount
which is defined as the discount on assets bought by the acquirer minus the premium offered by the acquirer for the deposits of the failed bank (both as a % of the assets of the failed bank at the
time of closure). Bid characteristics include All Bank & All Deposits which is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the deal was for all loans and deposits of the failed bank, No
Loans & All Deposits which is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the deal was for no loans and all deposits of the failed bank, No Loans & Insured Deposits which is defined as
an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the deal was for no loans and only the insured deposits of the failed bank, Loss Share Agreement which is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one if the transaction includes a loss share agreement between the FDIC and the winning bidder, and Loss Share % (First Tranche) that represents the loss share percentage assumed
by the regulator in the first tranche of the loss share agreement. We also include Number of Bids which captures the number of bids in each P&A transaction. Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the failed bank’s state headquarters.

Table 8: Costs of Resolution

Table 8: Costs of Resolution (contd.)
Panel B: Regressions using Instrumented Local Capitalization Variables
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Cost
P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Bidders

-0.008***
(0.003)

% Well-Capitalized Local Bidders

Observations
Adjusted R2
Excluded Sample
Target Controls
Quarter fixed effects?
Failed Bank state fixed-effects?

-0.007**
(0.003)

-0.007***
(0.002)

-0.052**
(0.022)

-0.060**
(0.024)

420
420
0.540
0.533
Failed Bank MSA
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.062**
(0.028)

420
420
0.537
0.535
Failed Bank MSA & Adjoining MSAs
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel C: OLS Regressions controlling for Bid Characteristics
(1)

(2)
Cost

P50 Tier 1 Capital Ratio of Local Bidders

-0.007*
(0.004)

% Well-Capitalized Local Bidders

-0.070***
(0.020)

Observations
Adjusted R2
Target Controls
Bid Characteristics
Quarter fixed effects?
Failed Bank state fixed-effects?

422
0.296
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

42

422
0.305
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

(3)
(4)
Asset Discount
-0.009***
(0.003)
-0.067**
(0.026)
420
0.589
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

420
0.590
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

415
415
0.544
0.541
Failed Bank State
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Figure 1: Number of Bank Failures over Time

1995

2000

2005
Year

2010

2015

series includes the failed banks whose resolution process was a P&A transaction or a deposit payoffs but does not include open bank assistances. The time series document the spike in
bank failures that occured since 2008 after a relatively calm period from 1994 until 2007.

Figure 1 plots the time series of bank failures (irrespective of resolution method) during the period 1994–2013. Data is provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The time

200
Number of Bank Failures
50
100
150
0

43

Figure 2: Kernel Density of FDIC Resolution Costs

8

10
Log (.) in $ mill

Assets in $ mill (log)

12

14

16
Cost in $ mill (log)

Figure 2a: Density of Resolution Cost in $ mill (log)

18
0

.2

.4
Resolution Cost as % Total Assets

.6

Figure 2b: Density of Resolution Cost (as a % of Assets)

.8

Figure 2a represents the epanechnikov kernel density of the total resolution costs (red dashed line) incurred by the FDIC in the resolution processes of failed banks since 2007. The solid
blue line represents the kernel density of the total assets (in millions of dollars) of the failed banks in the quarter immediately preceding their failure. Figure 2b represents the kernel
density of cost of resolution as a percentage of total assets of the failed banks at the time of resolution. The sample covers bank failures from 2007 until the end of 2013.

.4

.3

.2

.1

0

4
3
2
1
0

44

Figure 3: Bank Sales and Distance

[0,196]

[461,533]

[785,852]
Distance Bins (Full Sample)

[1167,1282]

Figure 3a: % Winners by Distance (All Distances)

[2151,]

% Winning Acquirers

% Winning Acquirers

[0,21]

[66,78]

[118,127]
Distance Bins

[159,167]

Figure 3b: % Winners by Distance (0-200 miles)

[194,200]

Figure 3 plots the share of failed banks (as a % of total failed banks during the sample period) that were assumed by potential acquirers in each of 20 distance bins. Figure 3a plots the
share of acquisitions by distance percentile bin. Each percentile bin is defined by assigning 5% of all potential acquirers to 20 distance bins based on the average distance between their
branch network and the branch network of each failed bank. The first bin in Figure 3a shows that approximately 65% of the failed banks are sold to potential acquirers whose branch
networks are on average less than 196 miles from the branch network of the failed bank. Figure 3b represents the share of acquisitions by distance bin in the subset of potential acquirers
within a 200 mile average branch network distance from the failed bank. Each distance bin is defined by assigning 5% of all potential acquirers within 200 miles of the failed bank to 20
distance bins based on the average distance of their branch network to that of the failed bank. The first bin in Figure 3b indicates that approximately 12.5% of the failed banks are sold
to potential acquirers whose branch networks are on average less than 21 miles from the branch network of the failed bank

.6

.4

.2

0

.15
.1
.05
0

45

% Winning Acquirers

.35

[10.8,22.1]
[22.1,34.5]
[34.5,49.6]
Absolute Difference CRE Loan Share

Figure 4a: % Winners by Absolute Difference Loan Portfolio (CRE Loans)

[>49.6]

.3

.25

[0,10.8]

.05

0

.1

.15

.2

.3

.35
[0,6]

[6,12.6]
[12.6,21.1]
[21.1,35.6]
Absolute Difference Residential Loan Share

Figure 4b: % Winners by Absolute Difference Loan Portfolio (Residential Loans)

[>35.6]

Figure 4 plots the share of failed banks (as a % of total failed banks during the sample period) that were assumed by potential acquirers in each portfolio distance quintile. Figure 4a
plots the percentage of failed banks sold to potential acquirers in each quintile of absolute difference in the share of CRE loans between the failed bank and the potential acquirers. The
first quintile bin in Figure 4a indicates that 33% of the failed banks are sold to potential acquirers whose CRE loan share is within 10.8 percentage points of the CRE loan share of the
failed bank. Figure 4b plots the percentage of failed banks sold to potential acquirers in each quintile of absolute difference in the share of residential loans between the failed bank and
the potential acquirers. The first quintile bin in Figure 4b indicates that approximately 29% of the failed banks are sold to potential acquirers whose Residential loan share is within 6%
of the residential loan share of the failed bank.

Figure 4: Bank Sales and Asset Specificity - Lending Composition

% Winning Acquirers

.25
.2
.15
.1
.05
0

46

Figure 5: Ability to Pay - Capitalization of Local Potential Acquirers and Similar Portfolio Potential Acquirers and Asset Allocation

5

4

Tier 1 Capital Ratio Quintiles

3

2

Figure 5a: % Winning Acquirers by Capitalization Ratio in Local Area

1

% Winning Acquirers

.35

5

4

Tier 1 Capital Ratio Quintiles

3

2

Figure 5b: % Winning Acquirers by Capitalization Ratio with close CRE portfolio overlap

1

Figures 5a and 5b represent the share of failed banks acquired by local potential acquirers and by potential acquirers with similar loan portfolios in each Tier 1 Capital ratio quintile. In
Figure 5a potential acquirer is defined as a local potential acquirer if its branch network overlaps with that of the failed bank in at least one zip code area. In Figure 5b potential
acquirers with similar loan composition are defined as those potential acquirers whose absolute difference in the share of CRE loans is within the first quartile of that measure, with
quartiles constructed based on entire sample.

% Winning Acquirers

.3

.25

.2

.15

.1

.05

.35
.3
.25
.2
.15
.1
.05

47

Figure 6: Resolution Costs and Capitalizaiton of Local Potential Acquirers

1

3

4

Percentage of Local Well-Capitalized Potential Acquirers

2

Figure 6a: Resolution Cost (% Assets) by Local Capitalization Rank

5

Resolution Cost (% Assets)

Resolution Cost (% Assets)

1

3

4

Median Tier1 Capital Ratio of Local Potential Acquirers

2

Figure 6b: Resolution Cost (% Assets) by Local Capitalization Rank

5

Figure 6 represents the average resolution cost (as a percentage of the failed banks’ assets) for each quintile bin based on capitalization of local potential acquirers. A potential acquirer is
defined as a local potential acquirer if its branch network overlaps with that of the failed bank in at least one zip code area. Quintile bins in figure 6a are based on the percentage of local
potential acquirers holding an above median level of Tier 1 capital ratio . In figure 6b quintile bins are based on the median Tier 1 capital ratio of local potential acquirers. Both figures
suggest that failed banks whose local potential acquirers are not well capitalized are more costly to resolve.

.32

.28

.24

.2

.32
.28
.24
.2

48

% Winning Acquirers

.8

.6

.4

[0,147]

[411,480]

[736,802]
Distance Bins (Full Sample)

[1107,1223]

Figure A1a: % Winners by Distance (All Distances)

[2009,]

.2

0

.2

.3

.4
[0,3]

[37,52]

[100,111]
Distance Bins

[150,159]

Figure A1b: % Winners by Distance (0-200 mile)

[192,200]

Figure A.1 plots the share of failed banks (as a % of total failed banks during the sample period) that were assumed by potential acquirers in each of 20 distance bins. Figure A.1a plots
the share of acquisitions by distance percentile bin, in which each percentile bin is defined by assigning all potential acquirers to 20 distance bins based on the minimum distance between
their branch network and the branch network of each failed bank. The first bin in Figure A.1a shows that approximately 80% of the failed banks are sold to potential acquirers that have
at least one branch within 147 miles from a branch in the branch network of the failed bank. Figure A.1b represents the share of acquisitions by distance bin in the subset of potential
acquirers within a 200 mile minimum branch network distance from the failed bank. Each distance bin is defined by assigning each potential acquirer within 200 miles minimum distance
of the failed bank to 20 distance bins. The first bin in Figure A.1b indicates that approximately 33% of the failed banks are sold to potential acquirers with at least one branch within 3
miles from a branch in the branch network of the failed bank

Figure A.1: Bank Sales and Minimum Distance

% Winning Acquirers

.1
0

49

