NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL PREREQUISITES FOR A VIABLE
MANAGED EXCHANGE RATE REGIME:
A NON-TECHNICAL
ECLECTIC INTRODUCTION

Willem Buiter

Working Paper No. 2041

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2041
October 1986

Fiscal Prerequisites for a Viable Managed Exchange Rate Regime:
A Non-Technical Eclectic Introduction

ABSTRACT

The paper first reviews the budget identities of the fiscal and monetary
authorities and the solvency constraint or present value budget-constraint of
the consolidated public sector, for closed and open economies. It then
discusses the new conventional wisdom concerning the fiscal roots of inflation
and the budgetary prerequisites for generating and stopping hyperinflation. The
popular rational expectations "Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic" model of
Sargent and Wallace has ambiguous inflation implications from an increase in the
fundamental deficit and is incapable of generating hyperinflatior,. The only
runaway, explosive or unstable behavior it can exhibit is "hyperdeflation"! In
the open economy, the need to maintain a managed exchange rate regime does not
impose any constraint on the growth rate of domestic credit, arising through the
government's need to remain solvent. Obstfeld's proposition to the contrary is
due to the omission of government bonds and borrowing.
There is not yet any "deep structural" theory justifying the (exogenous)
lower bounds on the stock of foreign exchange reserves characteristic of the
collapsing exchange rate literature. Absent such a theory of "international
liquidity," one cannot model satisfactorily a foreign exchange crisis that is
not at the same time a government solvency crisis. Given such a lower bound,
the existence or absence of a pecuniary opportunity cost to holding reserves is
shown to condition the fiscal and financial actions consistent with prolonged
survival of the managed exchange rate regime.

Willem H. Buiter
Economics Department
Yale University
37 Hilihouse Avenue

New Haven, CT 06520

1

1. Introduction
It has long been recognized that monetary, fiscal and financial

policy cannot be determined independently. Like most insights in
economics, this one is rediscovered, repackaged and re—emphasized

periodically. Unfortunately, our subject is not one in which progress
in monotonic. Rather, half—truths gain acceptance and popularity, wax,
peak and wane in cyclical fashion, in order to be forgotten and

displaced by new half—truths until the next turn of the wheel. While
these cycles take place agiinst a steadily rising trend as regards
technical and mathematical sophistication and achievement, there appears
to be, at any rate in the fields of macroeconomics and international

finance, no such positive trend at the conceptual level, or as regards
new ideas and insights about the way the economy works.
As a graduate student and beginning assistant professor, I

witnessed, and in a minor way contributed to, one of these periodic
revivals of the notion that there is one less degree of freedom in

monetary, fiscal and financial policy than an innocent bystander might

assume. Ott and Ott (1965), Dates (1966), Christ (1967, 1968), Silber
(1970), Blinder and Solow (1973), Tobin and Buiter (1976), Branson
(1976) and many others all added what was rather misleadingly called the

government budget constraint (or worse: the government budget
restraint) to the familiar static closed or open IS—LM models. In what
follows I sh?ll refer to this "government uses and sources of funds
statement' by the descriptively more accurate name of government or

public sector budget identity. The constraint on public sector fiscal
and financial choices will be reviewed below.

The plan of the paper is as follows. The remainder of this Section

2

reviews the open economy public sector budget identity and characterizes
the public sector's intertemporal budget constraint or solvency

constraint. Section 2 reviews the fiscal determinants of long—run
inflation in the closed economy and points out some problems associated
with the casual application of a popular model of Sargent and Wallace to

the analysis of hyperinflations. Section 3 returns to the open economy
and establishes, contrary to what has been asserted by Obstfeld, that

the need to maintain a managed exchange rate regime does not impose an
upper limit on the growth rate of domestic credit, if there is no
exogenously given lower bound on the stock of foreign reserves.

If the

regime is viable (i.e. if the government is solvent) for any rate of

domestic credit expansion (however low), then it is viable for all rates

of domestic credit expansion (however high). Section 4 reviews the
collapsing exchange rate literature for the case where there is an
exogenously given lower bound on the level of reserves.

Consider the following set of accounts for the monetary authority
(or Central Bank) and fiscal authority (or Treasury) of an open economy.

The nation's foreign exchange reserves are assumed to be held by the

Central Bank. Equation (1) is the monetary authority's budget identity;
equation (2) the fiscal authority's budget identity:

(I) S_eiR*_iD eR'D+M

(2).

P1

is

p(G+K)i(B+D)TSP'K04D
•the nominal stock of base money (or high—powered money) which is

non—interest—bearing.

B is the stock of government interest—bearing

3

debt held outside the Central Bank. For simplicity only one kind of
debt with a fixed nominal market value in domestic currency and a

variable nominal interest rate i is considered. D is the stock of
government debt held by the monetary authority, i.e. the stock of
•domestic credit. The change in D, D is domestic credit expansion (dce),

the monetary target so dear to the IMF. R* is the stock of foreign
exchange reserves (denominated in foreign currency), i the interest
rate on reserves and e the spot foreign exchange rate.

S is the

payments made by the Central Bank to the fiscal authority. 6 is the
volume of government consumption spending, K the public capital stock, I
taxes net of transfers (excluding payments by the Central Bank to the
fiscal authority) and
sector capital stock.

the real cash rate of return on the public
(This need bear no relation whatsoever to the

social rate return on the public sector capital stock). To keep life
simple, p is the general price level, the price of government
consumption and the cost of a iini.t of public sector capital.

The (often implicit) assumption that the Central Bank pays to the
Treasury the entire amount it earns on its portfolio of domestic and
foreign assets (net of the costs of running the show, ignored here),
yields the familiar identity that

(3) _j+e*
•

Contrary to what is generally asserted, (3) cannot be derived by
differentiating both sides of the standard Central Bank balance sheet
reproduced below.

4

Standard (incomplete) Central Bank Balance Sheet.

Liabilities

Assets

II

eR

Clearly, differentiating both assets and liabilities yields

S
.
S*
*'
H = D + eR + R e

The last term, capital gains (when positive) or losses (when
negative) on the stock of foreign exchange reserves due to changes in

the exchange rate, has to be got rid of. This is accomplished by adding
the missing entry, Central Bank net worth, W, to the liability side of

the balance sheet. With the further assumption that capital gains and
losses (here only due to exchange rate changes, but in more realistic

.dels also associated with changes in the market value of long—dated
dorestic government debt) are absorbed into net worth (W

R*e), i.e.

are not monetied equation (3) emerges triumphant.
Adding (1) and (2) together yields the consolidated public sector
budget identity (4)

(4)

With a bit of rearranging, the public sector budget identity (4)

5

can be written as the differential equation in B — pX —

equation (5). r
p

eR*.given

denotes the rate of inflation and
e

in

the rate of

exchange rate depreciation.

(B-pK-eR)

(5) -_

i(B_pK_eR*) —

[T+M_P6—(i—(+n-))pK _(i_(i+€))eR*]

Solving (5) forward in time and imposing the terminal condition given in
(6), finally gives us a government budget constraint. Equation (7)
represents the government's intertemporal or present value budget
constraint or its solvency constraint.

(See Buiter (1983a, b) and

Buiter (1985a)).

(6) Urn [B(v) -

p(v)K(v)

-

e(v)R*(v)}

03

r

(7)

exp[_J i(u)du}

CO

i(u)du ds +

T(s)

J
t

exp[—J'
t

i
J fl(s) exp{—J'
t i(u)dujds
t

? B(t) —p(t)K(t) —

e(t)R*(t)

CO

+

r
j pIs)
t

1

6(s) exP{_J'

t i(u)dujds

03

+

(1

J [its — (c(s) + n(s)

p(s)K(s) exp[—J' i(u)du ds

t

+

J [is - Ci(s) + €(s))]

t

e(s)R*(s) exp[_5 i(u)du]ds.

For simplicity I'll assume in most of what follows, that (6) and (7)
hold as strict equalities.

Equation (6) states that the present value of the governments net
I

non—monetary tangible liabilities should ultimately be non-negative.

If (6) is violated, the public sector never repays its debts; instead it
plays a Ponzi game by borrowing more in order to service its already
outstanding debt.

If (6) is satisfied, the growth rate of the nominal

value of the government's debt ultimately is less than the nominal

interest rate. Equivalent statements are that the growth rate of the
real value of the public debt ultimately is less than the real interest
rate r

i—i7 or that the growth rate of the public debt—domestic

product ratio ultimately is less than r—n, where n is the trend growth

rate of real domestic output. If (6) holds, then ultimately the
comprehensive primary (non—interest) government deficit (the second term

on the.right—hand—side of (5)), must become a surplus. While the
validity of (6) is not uncontroversial (why should it be required to
hold e.g. if the growth rate of real output systematically exceeds the
real interest rate?), I'll assume it to be satisfied in what follows.

Note that even if (6) holds, net public debt and interest on the public

1

It can easily be shown using integration by parts that (6) could be

replaced by (6') urn [pi(v)+B(v)_p(v)x(v)_e(v)R*(v)] exp(-j' i(u)du)

03

rtm
provided the term J M(s) exp[—j' i(u)du ds in (7) is replaced by
t

t

03

r

J
t

i(s)M(s)

exP{—J' i(u)du ds—tl(t).
t

(See Buiter (1983 a, b)).

7

debt can grow without bound, even relative to domestic output (if the
growth rate of net nominal debt, while ultimately less than i (to
satisfy (6)) exceeds n +

r) This

can occur because the growing

government interest bill represents growing interest income to the

private sector.and therefore a growing tax base for the government. If
lump sum (non—distortionary) taxes can be raised one—for—one with the
increase in debt service, we could, as pointed out by flcCallum (1984)

and Obstfeld (1986) have an exploding, but sustainable public debt—GDP
ratio. Both the distortion,ary nature of real world taxes and the
existence of political and administrative constraints on the ability
indefinitely to raise taxes one—for—one with pre—tax income, suggest
that the case of the sustainable explosive net public debt—6DP ratio is
an example of economics strictly for econooists only.

In what follows

it will often be safe to restrict the analysis to the case of a net

publicdebt—GDP ratio that is bounded from above.

Let us review briefly the items in the governments solvency
constraint (7).

It

states that the present discounted value of future

explicit taxes net of transfers I plus the present discounted value of
future money issues or seigniorage M should be sufficient to cover the
outstanding net tangible non—monetary liabilities of the government
(B—pK—eR')

plus the present discounted value of future government

consumption spending p6.

In addition, current and future tax and

seigniorage should cover any future drain (gain)
due

on (to) the Exchequer

to the portunity cost of government borrowing i exceeding (falling

short of) the cash flow rate of

return generated by public sector

a

capital, +n,

and / or due to the opportunity cost of government

borrowing exceeding (falling shDrt Df) the pecuniary rate of return on

international reserves, I+E. Note e.g. that if i =

'+n,

the existing

stock of public sector capital is entered "at cost" in the public sector
balance sheet as an asset, and future public sector capital formation is

not a charge on the government's solvency: unlike public consumption,
it. finances itself in the long run. Also note that in the case of an

ideal gold standard, i = 0 and

0.

By holding a "barren" asset with

a zero nominal rate of return the government, presumably in order to
maintain its international liquidity, weakens its solvency if the
nominal interest rate on its debt i is positive, as I shall assume

henceforth. Borrowing to defend the exchange rate (increasing B and eR*
by equal amounts) will then require either a reduction in the present
discounted value of the government.'s consumption program, an increase in

the present value of future taxes net of transfers or an increase in the
present value of future seigniorage in order to maintain solvency (see
Buiter (l9B6a)).

2.

The Fiscal Roots of Inflation in A Closed Economy

Somewhere in the early 1980's the "New Classical" macroeconomics,
led by Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace, rediscovered the importance of

the government solvency constraint for monetary theory. It is possible
to date this quite precisely, because Sargent's well—known textbook,

Macroeconomic Theory (Sargent (1979)) still contains a section titled
'In Defense of Keynesian Analyses That "Ignore" the Government's Budget
Constraint" (Sargent (1979, pp 107—ill)), while the first of the papers

9

analysing the fiscal origins of inflation (both hyper— and moderate)

appeared in 1981 and 1982 (see Sargent and Wallace (1981,1984), Sargent

(1982), and Sargent (1983)). Ironically, the New Classical rediscovery
of the government budget identity virtually coincided with the New
Cambridge rediscovery of the same identity by Godley and Cripps (1983).

The essence of Sargent and Wallaces argument (Sargent and Wallace
(1984)), is very simple. Throwing out foreign exchange reserves for the
moment, the publ2c debt—GDP ratio, b, and the public sector capital
stock —

GOP

ratio, k, are kept constant.

In the case of public debt,

this may reflect the fact that the debt burden has reached its upper
limit, because of economic or political limits on the government's

ability to tax or for other reasons. Nominal debt issues, B, are
therefore just sufficient to offset the decline in the debt—GDP ratio
that would otherwise occur because of inflation or GOP growth (B =

(n+n-)B).

Similarly, K = nK.

For simplicity we consider only the case

wtere the share of exhaustive public spending in SOP, g, and the share
of taxes net of transfers in GOP, 'r, are constant. This permits us to
obtain the following expression for the proportional rate of growth of

the nominal money stock, 4u
Pt

(8) g v[g_T

+

(r-)k

+

(r_n)(b_k)j

v denotes the income velocity of circulation of money, v
real output.

where V is

10

The expression in square brackets on the right hand side of (8) is
a public sector deficit measure, but not the standard public sector
financial deficit (as a proportion of GDP) that is collected by the

national income and flow a-f funds statisticians. First the conventional
deficit is Ucorrectedui for the effects of inflation on the debt—6DP

ratio and for the effects of real growth on the debt—6DP and public

sector capital—BDP ratio. The interest component is therefore not
i(b—k), as it would be in the conventional accounts, but (r—n) (b—k).

Second, the primary (or non—interest) deficit in (B) only includes part

of public sector exhaustive spending. Public sector capital formation
is excluded and only consumption spending is included. (Transfers,
subsidies, etc. are of course negative entries in -r).

Finally,

allowance is made for any difference between the governments
opportunity cost of borrowing and the cash rate of return it obtains
from the public sector capital stock (this cash return could of course

be negative). Thus the deficit that, given velocity, governs the
long—run or eventual r-ate of growth of the high—powered money stock is
the, inflation—and—real—growth-corrected, return—on—public sector

capital—adjusted—government current account (or consumption account)
deficit.

(See Buiter

Given velocity, an increase in this "uinierlying" deficit will raise
monetary growth and thus, sooner or later, inflation, since 77
-

by

is

given

11

(9)

tT

In the long run, velocity settles down. Assuming that real growth
in the long run is independent of the rate of inflation, the long—run
rate of inflation varies one—for—one with the rate of growth of money.
Specifically, Sargent and Wallace (1984) focus on policies that raise

the debt burden b. Provided the interest rate exceeds the growth rate
of output and barring a reduction in the primary consumption deficit &

g—T+(r—)k an increase in the debt burden b will raise inflation.
Reductions in monetary growth without changes in the primary deficit
will force the authorities to borrow more to satisfy the budget

identity. The need to service the debt will eventually, after the debt
burden settles down at a higher level than it would have reached without
the earlier reduction in money growth, compel an eventual rate of

monetary growth rate which is higher than it would otherwise have been.
Thus, with constant velocity, lower money growth (and thus lower
inflation) now without a reduction in the primary consumption deficit,
leans higher money growth and higher inflation in the future.

If velocity is endogenous, an even less friendly outcome may occur.
A standard assumption is that velocity is an increasing function of the
nominal interest rate, e.g.

(10)

—

Y2(r+n')

> 0; v 0

12

Sargent and Wallace (1984) show that in a very simple, very
classical model with an exogenous real interest rate and exogenous

output the following may happen: The response to an early reduction in
money growth followed by a later increase in money growth (due to the
higher debt service incurred through the increased borrowing during the
period of lower money growth) may be higher inflation both earlier and

later. The reason is that with endogenous velocity, a freely flexible
price level and rational, forward—looking expectations, the rate of
inflation today is a forward—looking exponentially weighted moving

average of all future rates of money growth, i.e. current inflation is
like a "present discounted value11 of future money growth.

It is

possible that, in this present value calculation, the early lower rates
of money growth are dominated by the later higher rates of money growth,
leading to higher inflation throughout as a result of a decision to
lower money growth in the near term without implementing a "fundamental1
fiscal correction, i.e. a reduction in the primary consumption deficit.

With endogenous velocity, will a permanent increase in the
underlying deficit necessarily be associated with a higher rate of

inflation? Here the model begins to creak a bit.

It is easily checked

that the non—linear model of equations (8), (9) and (10), with r,

n,

,

Ic, b, g and r exogenous can have zero, one or two stationary solutions

for n. When there are two solutions, the low inflation equilibrium is
locally unstable while the high inflation equilibrium is locally stable.

Following th precedent of linear rational expectations models with a
single non—predetermined state variable (velocity or the price level),

Sargent and Wallace (1984) focussed on the locally unstable, low

13

inflation equilibrium. For this equilibrium, a permanent increase in
the underlying deficit does indeed raise inflation.

If the locally

stable high inflation equilibrium had been chosen instead, a permanently
higher fundamental deficit would, in the long run, have been associated

with a lower rate of inflation. The analysis of the transitional
dynamics in this case would have suffered from the non—uniqueness

problem that is always present when a non—predetermined variable is

required to converge to a (locally) stable equilibrium: there is a
continuum of initial values of v or p that are consistent with
convergence to the steady state.

The model begins to creak even more loudly when it is used to

analyse hyperinflations. The spirit of this model did indeed motivate
Sargent's well—known study on this subject Sargent (1982) and (1986)).
There is unfortunately no way in this model to generate the kind of

explosive, unstable behavior characteristic of hyperinflations. When.
there are two stationary solutions, the only explosive behavior is with
reference to (and away from) the locally unstable low inflation

equilibrium. However, this unstable behavior represents an implosidn

rather than an explosion. The model generates a steadily growing rate
of deflation.

Successively larger values of the underlying deficit will move the
economy from the range characterized by two stationary equilibria,

through the rangewith one stationary equilibrium into the range with no
stationary equilibrium. Here there is again plenty of unstable behavior
but it too takes the form of 11hyperdeflations" rather than of

hyperinflaticns. One attempt to save the model for the analysis of

14

hyperinflations is to restrict the analysis to the range of underlying
deficits for which there are two stationary equilibria and to call a
hyperinflation the transition from the low inflation stationary

equilibrium to the high inflation stationary equilibrium. This,
however, is silly. Both stationary equilibria are just that:
well—behaved long—run equilibria with constant, finite rates of

inflation. There is nothing 'runaway" or explosive about the transition

from the low to the high inflation steady state. In fact the move from
the low inflation equilibrium to te high inflation equilibrium involves
initially an acce'erating rate of inflation (r rises) but ultimately a
decelerating rate of inflation (r' falls) with

smoothly apprDaching

zero as the economy eases into the high inflation steady state.
the transition from

to

in Figure 1).

'7

+

0

Figure 1

(See

15

To describe the traverse from

to

as a hyperinflation is

describing a mild summer breeze as a hurricane.

akin

to

(See also Buiter

(1985b).

Where does this leave us? An equation like (8) provides a useful
benchmark for evaluating the long—term money growth consequences of a

given fiscal—financial package. Apart from specifying the
fiscal—financial benchmarks (g, r, k and b), we must be able to
determine velocity, v, the real interest rate r and the :ash rate of

return on public sector capital ,

in

order to calculate ,i.

The obvious

conclusion in a constant—velocity framework, that a higher underlying
deficit implies a higher eventual rate of growth of money, becomes
ambiguous even in the simple rational—expectations, flexible price
level, exogenous output version of the endoçenous velocity model.

Unlike the adaptive expectations (Cagan (1956)) version of this model,
the Sargent and Wallace (1984) rational expectations version cannot

generate hyperinflations. Next we extend these insights to the case of
an open economy with a managed exchange.rate.

3.

What Constrains Domestic Credit Expansion Under a Planaged Exchange
Rate?

A •anaged exchange rate regime is any rule for setting the nominal

spot exchange rate. In what follows I restrict the analysis to
open—loop rules, and withing this class of rules to those involving a
constant proportional rate of depreciation or appreciation of the

no.inal spot exchange rate. Post of the results will apply unchanged to

16

more general closed—loop or feedback rules for determining the exchange
rate.

I assume there to be a unified spot exchange market and no

capital controls or other foreign exchange restrictions. Unless
otherwise indicated, there is perfect capital mobility and perfect

substitutability between foreign bonds and domestic bonds. Uncovered

interest parity CUIP) therefore holds. If i denotes the nominal
interest rate on riskless fDreign bonds, then

(11)

i =

+

2

I ignore direct currency substitution. The formal analysis goes
through even with direct currency substitution, as long as it is less
than perfect.. With a managed exchange rate, the stock of foreign
exchange reserves adjusts passively to reconcile the private sector's
demand for money and the stock of domestic credit chosen by the monetary

authorities. Money' demand equals money supply at each instant. When
the authorities decide no longer to supply the foreign exchange demanded
at the prevailing exchange rate, the managed exchange rate regime

collapses. Many variants exist on what takes its place.
I shall deal only with he simplest case of a free float of

indefinite duration. A few of the possible alternatives are:

2

a

Here, as elsewhere, rational expectations are assumed. In the not
explicitly stochastic formal analysis summarized here, actual and
expected depreciation therefore coincide. Uncertainty is considered
explicitly in many of the papers on the subject, e.g. Flood and Garber
(1984), Buiter (1986a, b), Grilli (1986) etc.

17

temporary float followed by a new managed exchange rate; a discrete
devaluation (or "maxi—devaluation") followed by the adoption of another
exchange rate management rule; the imposition of foreign exchange
controls and/or a two—tier foreign exchange market etc.

What limitations does the need to maintain a managed exchange rate
regime put on the domestic credit expansion (dce) policies that can be

pursued by the authorities? First consider the case considered by

Obstfeld (1986a) where i
opportunity

= i = i—€ and

there is therefore no financial

cost to the government of holding foreign exchange reserves.

In this case, the only reason why the government could be prevented from

running down one of its financial assets
negative value is

that

to an arbitrarily large

that its overall financial position

is insolvent.

If

happens, the government runs out of credit everywhere, i.e. it

encounters a limitation on it.s ability to borrow in any form. Barring
insolvency, if reserves are required, the government can borrow them

abroad. An infinite credit line is no problem in such a world. There
is no reason, in orther words, why reserves cannot become an arbitrarily

large negative number.. Alternatively, one could visualize the
authorities as acquiring an infinite stock of reserves at the inception
of the managed exchange rate regime, financed by issuing an infinite
amount of debt with no net effect on public sector net worth and

solvency. To see this, consider equations (6) and (7). Assume given
paths of taxes—net—of—transfers i(s), public consumption spending G(s)

and public sector capital formation K(s) (and thus K(s). The interest
rate ifs) is given by (11) and the exogenously given path of the nominal

exchange rate. For simplicity, let

and real output V be exogenous and

ia

let

the domestic price level be given by the law of one price, i.e.

(12)

p =

p*e

is the exogenous world price level. The analysis can be extended to
incorporate non—traded goods, endogenous terms of trade and sluggish
price adjustment.

The answer to the question "what limit- on dce policies are imposed

by the need to maintain a managed exchange rate is: unone whatsoever.
Of course the real value of seigniorage that can be extracted by the
monetary authorities may be a function of the path of the nominal

exchange rate (i.e. specifically of the (expected) proportional rate of
depreciation o
choice

the

exchange rate),

but this has nothing to do with the

of dce -for a given path of the exchange rate. Consider the

budget identity in equation (5)

again.

With the assumptions made so

far, everything on the right—hand—side of that equation is determined.
(Note from equation (10) that with r and E constant and with foreign
inflation denoted TT*,

seigniorage

is given by 11 =

(n+€+rr)M).

With the

path of K also given, the fiscal program, and the growth in the demand
for money fully determine the behavior of

the governments non—monetary

financial liabilities, B—eR'. Government solvency requires, from
equation (6) (and ignoring public sector capital) that B—eR' grows
ultimately at a proportional rate less thaD the nominal interest rate.

The behavior of BeR' is quite independent .3f the path of domestic
credit expansion, which only determines the composition of the given
change in B—eR' between changes in B and changes in -eR'. Specifically,

19

higher dce will, since eR*

N—D, lead to lower

and lower B, with

B_CR* unchanged: the authorities run down foreign exchange reserves
more rapidly but borrow less.

Specifically, and in contradiction to

the analysis of Obstfeld (1986a, pp. 9—12), domestic credit can grow at
a proportional rate in excess of the nominal interest rate; this will of
course lead to reserve losses, possibly at a proportional rate in excess

of the nominal interest rate. What matters for solvency, however, is
the ultimate proportional growth rate of B_eR*. If this is less than
the nominal interest rate for any rate of dce it will be less than the

i

nominal interest rate for all rates of dce, however high, because

solvency when i =

is independent of the dce policy. By not

considering government borrowing, (other than by running down foreign
exchange reserves), the asymptotic constraint on the growth rate of

B_eR* becomes a constraint on._eR* in Obstfid's analysis.
words, with

0

,

In other

changes in dce are ipso facto changes in the

public sector deficit. With seigniorage independent of dce under a
managed exchangea rate regime, changes in dce are also ipso facto

changes in the rate at which reserves are ru' down. With B

0

,

the

consequences for solvency of a change in the public sector deficit are
erroneously attributed to the change in dce.

i

On the right hand side of equation (7), the last term (which
involves R*) will vanish when

=

=

i€.

Apart from this last term,

enters only with B as B_eR*. This indicates that any stock—shift
open market sale or purchase of government debt will, since it leaves
B_eR* unchanged, leave the solvency of the government's fiscal—f.inancial
program unaffected.

20

It could of course happen that equation (6) is violated for the
given fiscal program (i(s), 6(s), K(s)) and for the path of seigniorage
(M(s)) generated by the exchange rate management rule chosen by the

authorities. Given the exchange rate rule, the government then is
insolvent for any dce rate. Depending on the nature of the money demand
function, i.e. on the way in which seigniorage varies with the chosen
exchange rate path (or with the exchange rate path generated when the
exchange rate is left to float freely) a different exchange rate rule
(or a free or dirty float) aay restore solvency to the government even

without changes in the paths of current and future 1, 6 or K. The money
demand function given in equation (10) e.g. has real seigniorage varying.

with the nomin.31 interest rate. All this, however, doesnt change the
proposition that if reserves carry the same interest rate as government
debt, the solvenc.y of a given managed exchange rate regime is not

contingent on the growth rate of domestic credit.

Now consider the case where reserves earn less than government

debt. For simolicity consider the case where i =

0, as would be

the case with an ideal gold standard, and i > 0. From equation (7) it

is clear that setting oneself up with a larger stock of reserves (let

alone an infinitely large stock) now hurts solvency. A stock—shift open
market sale of government debt (equal increases in B and eR) will now,
for a given path of dce, raise the value of the last term on the

right—hand—side of equation (7). Since a non—interest—bearing asset is
acquired by issuing an interest—bearing liability, solvency is impaired.
On the other hand, given any initial stocks of debt, capital and
reserves, and given future trajectories for 1, 6 and K, higher rates of

21

domestic credit expansion will improve solvency, by permitting the
government to run down non—interest—bearing foreign exchange reserves

rather than issue interest—bearing debt. When i = 0, equations (6) and
(7) can be replaced by:

Iv

f

(6')

urn

B(v)—p(v)K(v)

V—CD

0

expj—J' i(u)du

.

1

and

Co
1s

(7') j

i(s)

S

Co

exP[_J' i(u)du ds +

t

t

j D(s) exp[—J't

i(u)du ds

t

B(t) —

p(t)K(t)

Co

r

+ j p(s)

G(s)ex{—J' i(u)du ds
t

t

-

ri

Co

4.

J
t

{i(s)—((s)

+

nis))

P(s)K(s)exP[—$ i(u)du ds
t

Equations (6') and (7') and the budget identity

-(B—pK)

i(B—pK) — Ei—pG—(i—(+n-))pK] —

D

make it apparent that government solvency 3gain doesn't put any upper

limits on dcc rates whatsoever. Quite the contrary, by choosing a
sufficiently high rate of dce, otherwise insolvent fiscal—financial

plans can be made solvent. Why should large negative reserve holdings
matter, when the government's balance sheet is strengthened by

substituting reserve financing for borrDwing? Cet.par. higher dcc makes
it easier for debt (B) to grow (ultimately) at a rate less than i and

22

thus to satisfy (6').

The upshot is that the government budget identity and solvency
constraint literature really hasn't taught us anything about the need
for international reserves, the reasons for foreign exchange rate crises

i

and the fiscal and dce prerequisites for a viable managed exchange rate

regime. When

=

=

i—E, one would not expect to see an exchange

rate crisis that isn't also a debt crisis. A selling attack on the
currency should be accompanied by the government's interest—bearing debt
(even when this is denominated in terms of foreign currency,
index—linked or whatnot> selling at a discount relative to its nominal

parity. Here an exchange rate crisis is a purely fiscal phenomenon.

When i = 0, and more generally when i < i =

i€

borrowing worsens

future deficit5 while running down reserves doesn't, and the reasons for
foreign exchan;e crises that aren't also solvency crises are even less
apparent.

A satisfactory theory of foreign exchange crises in spite of

solvency requires two ingredients, both missing thus far. First, a
reason for the existence of a specific class of financial or real claims
required in international exchange and distinct from general credit.

Second, a reason given why these 'required' reserves cannot be borrowed

instantaneously. Deeper theory is needed here than is offered by the
ad—hoc and question—begging open economy cash—in—advance model, to
provide acceptable microeconomic foundations of the alleged unique
transactions role of certain reserve assets and of the alleged inferior
liquidity characteristics.of-other financial or real claims, (some of
which may be liabilities of the same agent that issue the reserves).

Reserve assets with these two features will indeed provide a rationale

23

for the existence of a lower bound on the stock of reserves at any

instant. Limits on the government's ability to tax will set a finite

i

upper bound on the government's net—interest—bearing debt—output ratio,

but this involves an upper limit on B_eR* when i =

and an upper

limit on B wheo i = 0, and never a lower limit on R*.
Given such a limit, it becomes possible to generate scenarios in
which there could be a run on the currency without a default risk
discount DII the public debt.

Advanced industrial countries like the Netherlands, which are
tightly integrated into a sophisticated system of international
'financial markets do, however, seem to be poorly characterized by a

model in which significant penalties are attached to holding inadequate
quantities of a limited class of international reserve assets or in
wh•ich there are non—trivial d.elaysin the process through which the

Centrar Bank can raise readily spendable resources. Indeed the very
meaning of 'international reserves becomes fuzzy for such countries, as
the official balance sheet contains both highly liquid,
market—rates—of—interest—bearing—assets and highly liquid,

•arket—rates—of—interest—bearing—Jjabjljties and as unused lines of
credit, swap arrangements etc. are available to back the Bank's resolve
to defend the parity.

(See Dooley (1986) and Buiter (l986c)). For such

a country a foreign exchange crisis is neither more nor less than a
fiscal or saJvency crisis, which doesn't, however, make it any easier to
solve.

The final section reviews some of the results derived in models

wherean ad—hoc exogenous lower bound on R', which without loss of
generality I choose to be zero, is assumed to exist.

24

4. Running Out of Reserves
Consider the case of a small open economy which manages the
exchange rate (i.e. fixes

at some constant level) as long as the stock

of international reserves is positive, but adopts a free float once
reserves fall below zero.

A quick check on the .viability of the managed exchange rate regime

involves the comparison of the eventual rate of growth of the money
say, and the rate of growth of money demand

stock from equation (B),
A

under the managed rate,
+

+

+

n —

—, where, from (10) v = 0 if r

A
*
is constant. If p exceeds ,u the reserve threshold will be

crossed eventually, and the regime will collapse.

It is, however, possible to be more precise about the nature
(including the magnitude) and the timing of a collapse.

It is easiest

to think of thi5 in the conte.xt ofa "structurally weak" currency i.e.
one fort which dce systematically exceeds money demand growth (though

both may be skochastic). An eventual collapse is therefore certain.
In the case of structurally weak currency, the (endogenous)

expected proportional rate of currency depreciation after the collapse
will typically be higher than the exogenous proportional rate of

depreciation of the managed exchange rate. With UIP this means that the
nominal interest rate increases at the moment the managed exchange rate

regime collapses. If the demand for money is a declining function of
the nominal rate of interest, there will be a stock—shift reduction in
the demand for money at the moment the managed exchange rate regime

collapses. Biven dce, this stock—shift reduction in money demand is
reflected in a stock—shift reduction in the stock of reserves to the

25

critical threshold level. This final stock—shift purchase by the
private sector of the monetary authoritys remaining foreign exchange
reserves has been called a uspeculative attack." Even though the
exogenous shocks to money demand and dce may be small, the final
depletion of the official reserves includes an endogenous component
(reflecting the increase in the nominal interest rate and the interest
sensitivity of money demand) which may be large relative to the final

exogenous shocks that triggered the attack.. The top panel of Figure 2
illustrates this for the case of a continuous time model where the

instantaneous exogenous shocks are infintesmal relative to the
outstanding stock of reserves. ENcept at the moment the attack occurs,
at t1, the stock of reserves declines in a continuous fashion. (See
Krugman (1979)5 Flood and Garbei- (1984), Obstfeld (1984), Buiter

(1986a), Grilli (1986), Garber and Grilli (1986), Connolly and Taylor
(1984)).

*
e R

elR* =

t0

t

1

Figure 2

iJl = - 4l2pViM

t

26

A convenient device for calculating the timing (or in stochastic
models the probability density function of the timing) of a collapse is
the "shadow floating exchange rate," e.

The shadow floating exchange

rate at time t is the floating exchange rate that would prevail at time
t if the managed exchange rate regime were to collapse at that instant.

If the dce process does not change if and when the managed exchange rate
system collapses, the managed regime is viable as long as the shadow
exchange rate is below the managed rate but. collapses the first time the

shadow floating rate exceeds the managed rate. The lower panel in
Figure 2 illustrates this for the case of a fixed exchange rate, e.

The reason is that private speculators would, if e > e, buy up the
remaining foreign exchange reserves of the authorities and force an

abandonment of the managed rate. The floating rate that would result
would be

> e, thus giving the speculators handsome excess returns on

their purchase cc the foreign exchange reserves. The "efficient
markets" requirement that there can be no anticipated excess returns
locates the date of the collapse at the first crossing of e by ; from

below. Note the strong parallels with the literature on the collapse of
price stabilization schemes for commodities, through buffer stocks etc.
The collapsing exchange rate regime literature is indeed a (recognized)
offspring of this older literature (see especially Salant and Henderson
(1978) and Salant (1983)>.

There is an important caveat here, as was pointed out by Obstfeld
in an elegant paper (Obstfeld (1986b)), which applied a chain of

reasoning similar to that used by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) in their

27

analysis of "commercial bank runs."

If the nature of the dcc process

varies according as to whether there is a managed exchange rate or a
freely floating exchange rate in effect, there may be multiple

equilibria and "bootstrap" or rational and self—fulfilling balance of

payments crises. Consider the case where in the absence of an attack,
the fixed exchange rate regime is indefinitely viable.

In the absence

of a speculative attack, e.g., the dcc process and the growth of money
demand are such that the stock of reserves follows a stationary (or

stable) Firstorder autoregressive process with random shocks that have
bounded support, i.e.

(13)

=

4

u,

faI < 1, u < Ut

Given this specification,

<

ii

will always be above

1—a)' and below

(assuming it started off between these two values).

If the

reserve threshold is below u(l—o)', there can be no unatural collapse
of the fixed exchange rate, i.e. no collapse without a speculative

attack. Could a speculative attack ever be rational under these

circumstances? Consider the case where, if the fixed exchange rate
regime were to collapse, the authorities would change their dcc policy
from the restrained one which generates (13) to a wildly expansionary
one which would generate a very much higher expected rate of exchange
depreciation and a very much higher nominal interest rate than under the
fixed rate.

It is now possible, as Ubstfeld Cl986b) shows, that if

private agents expect a run to take place in a period, it will be

28

profitable for them to participate in it, because the shadow exchange
rate in that period exceeds the fixed exchange rate.

If they dont

expect a run, they will refrain from buying up the authorities'

remaining reserves, and this decision too will be validated because

without a run reserves stay above their minimum threshold level. The
events that trigger the belief that a run will occur can be totally

extraneous. Since what permits such self—rationalizing attacks is the
expectations—validating dce behavior of the' authorities in the event of

an attacks policy makers can avoid them by abandoning their policy of
responding to collapses in that manner.

In Buiter (1986a) dce is broken down into its components: the

primary deficit, interest payments and government lending. Borrowing to
defend the exchange rate, i.e. holding constant the primary deficit and
engaging in a once—off stock—shift open market sale, will, if reserves
earn an interest rate below the rate on government debt, lower the
likelihood of an early collapse (by raising the level of the stock of

reserves) but increase the likelihood of a collapse in the longer run
(by raising the rate at which reserves are being run down).

If there is

no financial oppOrtunity cost, as pointed out before, an open market
sale will lower the likelihood of a collapse for all future periods.

Finally, n Buiter (l9B6b), which develops an approach initiated in
Grilli (1986), the collapsing managed exchange rate regime literature is
put in a (very simple) two—country setting, where speculative selling

attacks against either currency can forcethe system off the managed
standard. Wher holding reserves involves a pecuniary opportunity cost,

29

dce management in both countries is required to avoid crossing reserve

thresholds and management of the primary deficits is required to avoid
the possibility of reserve stabilization leading to public debt

destabilization. In a stochastic environment even the policy
combination of 1) no sterilization of reserve gains or losses and 2)

continuously balanced budgets, may not be capable of safeguarding both
the managed exchange rate system and fiscal solvency.
It should not come as a surprise that there is nothing automatic
about the viability of managed exchange rate systems, even one as

rarified as an idealized gold standard. When survival of the exchange
rate system is defined in terms of reserve thresholds and solvency in
terms of a debt burden threshold, it is to be expected that dce and
primary deficit policies that are consisten'. with survival should "feed

back" from these stocks or stock—flow ratios. Open—loop dce and fiscal
policies in a stochastic environment are bound to spell disaster.

5.

Conclusion.

In a recent paper, Helpman and Razin (1986) make the following apt
observation.

"It is now understood that exchange rates cannot be managed without
the pursuit of other policies which make the entire package
internally consistent. ... Governments or central banks can only

temporarily target exchange rates without giving due attention to

other policies. However, eventually they have to choose or are
forced to choose measures which validate ex—post the feasibility of

30

their exchange rate policy. These measures will typically be
anticipated by economic agents during the initial periods of
exchange rate management, thereby generating immediate pressure in

various markets. Hence, the success of exchange rate management
policy depends to a large extent on other policies, commitments to

future policies, and their effects on expectations." (Helpman and
Razin (1986), p. 1)

This paper has tried to make concrete the points made by Helpman

and Razin in the above quote and it underwrites completely their
general argument. The specific propositions that emerge do, however,
contradict or qualify a certain amount of recent conventional wisdom.

One such qualification applies to the effect of larger public sector

deficitson the rate of inflation when velocity is endogenous. A rather
basic flaw in some popular models of hyperinflation also stands out.

The meaning and relevance of reserve thresholds in a world with solvent

governments than can borrow at home and abroad is still unclear. A
recent proposition that the government solvency constraint implies a
limit on dce growth if a managed exchange rate regime is to survive
appears incorrect.

One encouraging (or surprising?) fact is that managed exchange rate
regimes have been in existence for long periods of time, including the

present, in spite of this absence of a satisfactory "deep theory." The
analogy with driving a car comes to mind:

I can get it to work although

I havent a clue why or how it works. The difference is that in the
case of cars there are (I presume) those who truly do know and

understand. As regards managed exchange rate regimes 1m not so sure.

31

References

Blinder, A. S. and R. M. Solow (1973).

"Does Fiscal Policy Matter?"

Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 2, No. 4, Nov. 1973, pp. 319—37.

Branson, W. H. (1976). "The Dual Roles of the Government Budget
Constraint and the Balance—of—Payments," Quarterly Journal of

Econmics, 10, August.

W. H. Buiter (1983a).

"Measurement of the Public Sector Deficit and Its

Implications for Policy Evaluation and Design." International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers, June 1983.

W. H. Buiter (l983b).

"The Theory of Optimum Deficits and Debt," in

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Conference Series No. 27, The

Economics of Large Government Deficits, October, pp. 4—69.

W. H. Buiter (1984).

"Comment on 1. J. Sargent and N. Wallace: Some

Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic," in B. Griffith and 6. E. Wood,
eds., Monetarism in the U.K., pp. 42—60.

W. H. Buiter (l985a).

UA

Guide to Public Sector Debt and Deficits,"

Economic Policy, Nov. 1985, pp. 14—79.

W. H. Buiter (1985b). "A Fiscal Theory of Hyperdeflations? Some
Surprising Monetarist Arithmetic." NBER Technical Working paper
No. 52, Nov.; revised Sept. 1986; forthcoming in Oxford Economic
Papers, 1987.

32

W. H. Buiter (l986a). "Borrowing to Defend the Exchange Rate and the

Timing and Magnitude of Speculative Attacks." NBER Working Paper
No. 1844, Feb. 1986.

W. H. Buiter (l9B6b). "A 'Gold Standard' Isn't Viable Unless Supported
by Sufficiently Flexible Monetary and Fiscal Policy." NBER Working
Paper No. 1903, April 1986.

W. H. Buiter (1986c).

"Comment", in N. Posner ed. Problems of

International Money, 1972—85, IMF—ODI, pp. 109—112.

P. Cagan (195â).

"The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in P1.

Friedman ed., Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, University
of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Christ, C. F. (1967).

"A Short—Run Aggregate—Demand Model of the

Interdependence and Effects of Monetary and Fiscal Policies with

Keynesian and Classical Interest Elasticities." AER Papers &
Proceedings, 57, No. 2, May, pp. 434—43.

(1968). "A Simple Macroeconomic Model With a Government
Budget Restraint," Journal of Political Economy, 76, No. 1, Jan.
1968, pp. 53—67.

Connolly, N. B. and D. Taylor (1984).

"The Exact Timing of the Collapse

of an Exchange Rate Regime and its Impact on the Relative Price of
Traded Goods, Journal of Money Credit and Banking, May 1984, pp.
194—207.

Diamond, P. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983). "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance
and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, pp.
401—419.

fl. P. Dooley (1986). "The Role of Reserves in the International

Monetary System," in N. Posner ed. Problems of International Money,
1972—85, INF—ODI, pp. 97—109.

Flood, R. p. and P. 11. Barber. (1984). "Collapsing Exchange Rate

Regimes: Some Linear Examples," Journal of International
Economics.

6arber, P. and V. Grilli (1986). "The Belmont—Morgan Syndicate as an
Optimal Investment Banking Contract," European Economic Review, 30,
no. 3, June, pp. 649—677.

6odley, W. and F. Cripps (1983). Macroeconomics, Fontana Paperbacks.

6rilli, V. (1986).

"Buying and Selling Attacks on Fixed Exchange Rate

Systems," Journal of International Economics, forthcoming..

34

E. Helpman and A. Razin (1986). "Exchange Rate Management;
Intertemporal Tradeoffs." Unpublished, August.

Krugman, Paul, "A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,' Journal of Money
Credit and Banking, August 1979, pp. 311—325.

B. T. McCallum (1984). "Are Bond—financed Deficits Inflationary? A
Ricardian Ahalysis." Journal of Political Economy, 92, pp. 123—35.

Oates, W. E. (1966).

"Bi.tdget Balance and Equilibrium Income.' Journal

of Finance, 21, No. 3, Sept.

Obstfeld, M.(l984).. "Balance of Payments Crises and Devaluation,"
Journal of

Money Credit and Banking, May 1984, pp. 208—217.

M. Obstfeld (l986a). "Speculative Attack and the External Constraint in
a Maximizing Model of the Balance of Payments," Canadian Journal of
Economics, 19, no.. 1, Feb. pp. 1—22.

M. Obstfeld (1986b). "Rational and Self—Fulfilling Balance—of—Payments
Crises." American Economic Review, 76, no. 1, March, pp. 72—81.

Ott, D. 3. and A. F. Ott (1965). "Budget Balance and Equilibrium
Income," Journal of Finance, Vol. 20, No. 1, tlarch 1965, pp. 71—77.

35

1. J. Sargent (1979). Macroeconomic Theory, Academic Press.

T. 3. Sargent (1982).

"The Ends. of Four Big Inflations," in R. E. Hall

ed. Inflation: Causes and Effects, University of Chicago Press,
pp. 41—97:

1. J. Sargent (1983).

"Stopping Moderate Inflation: The methods of

Poincare and Thatcher,' in R. Dornbusch and M. H. Simonsen eds.
Inflation, Debt and Indexation, MIT Press, pp. 54—96.

T. J. Sargent (1986). "Rational Expectations and Inflation," Harper &
Row, New York.

1.. J. Sargent and N. Wallace -(1984). Some Unpleasant Monetarist
A,:ithmetic,n in B. 6riffith and 8. E. Wood, eds. flonetarism in the
U.K., pp. 15—41.

Silber, W. L. (1970). .Fiscal Policy in LM/IS Analysis: A Correction."
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking," Vol. 2, No. 4, Nov., pp.
461—72.

1. Tobin and W. H. Buiter (1976). LongRun Effects of Fiscal and
Ilonetar', Policy on Aggregate Demand, in J. Stein ed. Monetarism,
North Holland.

The World Bank does not accept responsibility for the views expressed
herein which are those of the author(s) and should not be attributed to the
World Bank or to its affiliated organizations. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions are the results of research supported by the Bank; they do not
necessarily represent official policy of the Bank. The designations employed,
the presentation of material, and any maps used in this document are solely for
the convenience of the reader and do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of the World Bank of its affiliates concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city, area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries, or national affiliation.

