                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE DYNAMICS OF HOUSING PRICES

                                         Sheridan Titman
                                            Ko Wang
                                            Jing Yang

                                       Working Paper 20418
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w20418


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2014




We acknowledge the helpful comments from Su Han Chan, Sing Tien Foo, David Frame, Richard
Gil, Christopher Parsons and seminar participants at Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Social Sciences, Colorado State University, Johns Hopkins University, Massey University, Shanghai
University of Finance and Economics, 2009 AREUEA/AsRES Joint Meeting and 2010 GCREC Annual
Meeting. We thank Jiajin Chen, Yalan Feng and Mariya Letdin for their research assistance on this
paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Sheridan Titman, Ko Wang, and Jing Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Dynamics of Housing Prices
Sheridan Titman, Ko Wang, and Jing Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 20418
August 2014
JEL No. R21,R31

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze the prices of owner-occupied housing in 97 metropolitan areas between 1980 and 2011.
Our tests indicate that price changes exhibit positive serial correlation at the one year intervals, with
subsequent reversals of price changes over longer intervals. Consistent with our simple model, regional
differences in observed price patterns reflect differences in the serial correlation of the demand shocks
as well as the elasticity of supply responses.


Sheridan Titman                                     Jing Yang
Finance Department                                  Department of Finance
McCombs School of Business                          California State University
University of Texas at Austin                       Fullerton, CA 92831
Austin, TX 78712-1179                               jyang@fullerton.edu
and NBER
titman@mail.utexas.edu

Ko Wang
Carey Business School
Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, MD 21218
ko.wang@jhu.edu
1. Introduction

           The price process of real assets, in particular real estate, is of interest to financial

economists for a number of reasons. For example, since real estate is often used as collateral for

loans that are used for other types of corporate investments, changes in real estate prices can affect

the level of investment expenditures more generally. This relation between real estate prices and

corporate investment choices is examined in Gan (2007), who reports that between 1994 and 1998

Japanese manufacturing firms experienced a 0.8% decline in their investment rates for every 10%

decrease in land value. In a more recent study of U.S. firms over the 1993-2007 time period,

Chaney, Sraer and Thesmar (2012) find that a 20% decline in real estate prices reduces the

aggregate investment of public firms by 3%. More recent papers examine how housing prices

influence entrepreneurs, who use their houses as collateral to start new businesses.1 Finally, as the

2008 financial crisis illustrates, since real estate represents a large fraction of the overall capital in

the economy, financial institutions are particularly vulnerable to the changes in the value of real

estate.2


           In this paper, we empirically examine the price process of residential real estate. In contrast

to financial securities, whose prices tend to approximate a random walk, our research suggests that

housing price changes are positively correlated over yearly intervals, with partial reversals of price

changes over longer horizons.3 As we show, these serial correlations are related to a variety of

city characteristics that relate to the persistence in the housing demand growth and the elasticity

of the supply of new housing.


           To motivate our empirical tests, we present a reduced form four-date model that illustrates

the economic forces that influence the price process. The model includes a number of features,


                                                                                                        1
which we believe approximate reality.        The first feature is that demand growth within a

metropolitan area is positively serially correlated. The idea is that a city can build on its past

success. For example, a positive shock to a large manufacturing industry within a city leads to an

immediate increase in demand for housing from the workers hired directly in the manufacturing

sector, and then a subsequent increase in demand from workers (e.g. teachers and restaurant

workers) who provide services to individuals in the manufacturing sector. The second feature is

that construction takes time, which means that the supply of housing responds to changes in price

with a lag. In addition, because tearing down houses only makes sense in extreme situations, there

is likely to be an asymmetry in the reaction to positive and negative shocks.

       Finally, we assume that there are frictions in the real asset markets that limit the ability of

investors to arbitrage away the short-term predictability of prices. In the case of owner occupied

housing there are transaction costs associated with buying and selling and the cost of renting out a

home that one owns but does not occupy. To capture these costs we assume that housing is

constrained to be owner occupied, and that buyers and sellers are myopic. Specifically, they do

not buy more housing today in anticipation of a price increase in the future. A plausible rationale

for this assumption, which has been explored in prior research,4 is that homeowners tend to be

financially constrained. Although the extreme form of this last assumption is not needed to

generate serially correlated prices, it considerably simplifies the model and results in simple closed

form solutions for prices in all periods.5

       Within this setting a positive demand shock triggers an immediate price response, as well

as a subsequent response on the next date that is generated because demand is expected to continue

to grow. The adjustment on the second date depends on the supply response. Because it takes time

to build, this price response results in additional supply in both the second and third periods. As



                                                                                                    2
we show, price changes in this simple setting tend to be positively correlated between the first and

second periods, but negatively correlated between the first and third periods. The magnitudes of

these serial correlations depend on the persistence of the demand shocks and the elasticity of the

supply response on the second and third dates.


        Using quarterly U.S. metropolitan-level housing market data that covers 97 MSAs from

1980 to 2011 we empirically explore the implications of our model. Our sample is divided into a

pre- (before 2007) and post- (after 2007) crisis periods. The post-crisis period is of interest because

it allows us to explore the implications of negative economic shocks (prior to the crisis there were

very few negative yearly price changes). However, the volume of transactions significantly

decrease in a number of housing markets in the post-2007 period, so these observations may be

less reliable.


        Consistent with the model implications, housing prices are positively serially correlated

over yearly intervals. We also document evidence of a longer-term reversal, which is also

consistent with the model. However, the magnitude of the reversal is actually stronger in the post-

2007 period. This last observation is inconsistent with our model, because we do not expect

significant supply responses subsequent to falling housing prices, suggesting that there may have

been some over-reaction during the crisis period.


        The observed serial correlations tend to differ across MSAs, which is the focus of most of

our analysis. In particular, at least prior to the crisis, proxies for demand persistence and supply

rigidities in different MSAs partially explain the observed differences in housing price dynamics

across MSAs. Specifically, we find that larger cities, whose demand shocks tend to exhibit

stronger positive short-run serial correlation, tend to exhibit stronger positive short-run serial


                                                                                                     3
correlations in property appreciation rates. In addition, cities that put constraints on the initiation

and completion of development projects, i.e., those with stringent regulatory constraints and high

population densities, tend to exhibit stronger positive short-run serial correlations and more

negative long-run serial correlations in property appreciation rates.


        In addition to the previously cited research on the interaction of real estate prices and real

investment choices, our research is related to a number of papers in the housing literature. Topel

and Rosen (1988) provide the seminal analysis of the effect of demand shocks on housing

construction. In addition to their empirical work, that shows that construction reacts to prices with

a lag, they provide a fully rational model with forward looking builders who respond to demand

shocks with a lag because of adjustment costs. Although Topel and Rosen provide a much more

detailed analysis of the implications of adjustment costs, they do not explore how these costs

influence the time series of price appreciation rates, which is our central focus. Case and Shiller

(1988, 1989), however, do consider the time series pattern of housing prices, and were the first to

show that housing prices exhibit positive serial correlation over yearly intervals. They attribute the

serial correlation to investors’ “irrational expectations” about price growth persistence. A more

recent paper by Piazzesi and Schneider (2009) provide survey data taken during the housing boom

in the 2000’s that suggests that homeowners tend to irrationally extrapolate from past price trends

and provide a theoretical model that indicates that because of an absence of short-selling, a small

number of optimistic individuals can have a large effect on prices. In contrast, the homeowners in

our model are myopic but are not necessarily irrational, and in addition to the observed positive

serial correlation at yearly intervals, our model generates price changes that are partially reversed

in the future.6




                                                                                                     4
Capozza, Hendershott and Mack (2004) also examine how the characteristics of urban areas

influence serial correlation. While they do not provide a model, they estimate a price process that

assumes that in addition to serially correlated price changes, prices in each metropolitan area revert

towards a long-run equilibrium level. Nneji, Brooks, and Ward (2013) examine whether deviations

of real estate prices from their fundamentals can be caused by two types of bubbles: intrinsic

bubbles and rational speculative bubbles. Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008) and Saiz (2010)

consider geographical features of metropolitan areas that affect the elasticity of housing supply

and examine how these features influence housing prices. We also consider geography and supply

elasticity; however, in contrast to Glaeser, Gyourko and Saiz (2008) and Saiz (2010), our focus is

more on shorter term supply rigidities and its effect on shorter term price patterns, rather than on

the longer term effects of geography on prices.

         More recently, in work that is contemporaneous with ours, Glaeser, Gyourko, Morales and

Nathanson (2011) develop and calibrate a model of price movements in the housing market. In

contrast to our model, they model the production choice of builders as well as the location choice

of homeowners. However, the structure that they put on the choices of homeowners (they each

buy one housing unit) makes the model and its implications very similar to our simple reduced

form model.7 Moreover, they do not focus on cross city differences, which is the focus of our

paper.


         Finally, this research is tangentially related to research that examines the return patterns of

common stocks. In particular, Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) document a pattern of momentum

over 3 to 12 month intervals and reversals over longer intervals and Hong, Lim and Stein (1999)

attributes these patterns to slow moving information. We would expect that slowly moving

information is more relevant for real estate than for the stock market, and that it should be


                                                                                                      5
particularly relevant in smaller urban areas with less active real estate markets. However, we find

that the shorter term momentum is actually stronger in larger cities, suggesting that the higher

serial correlation in demand shocks, which is a feature of our model, may be more important for

real estate price patterns than slow moving information, which is not a feature of our model.


       The next section presents our model and derives testable hypotheses. Section 3 describes

our empirical study methods, data gathering procedure and summary statistics of the data used.

We test our model implications in sections 4 and 5. Section 6 contains our conclusions.


2. Model and Hypotheses

This section presents a four-date model that provides conditions under which property appreciation

rates can exhibit positive and negative serial correlations. In this simple reduced-form model, the

buyers and sellers, either because of their limited rationality or because of credit constraints, are

myopic. In other words, their buying and selling choices are not influenced by the expectations of

future price changes, but based only on their current consumption needs. Consequently, the price

is determined by current supply and demand conditions.


       We specify the demand function for housing as


                                                         ,                                       (1)


where at date (      0, 1, 2, or 3), demand    is positively affected by an exogenous shock, which

is captured by changes in the intercept       of the demand function, and is negatively affected by

the current housing price,    . The slope, , measures the sensitivity of the demand change to the

price change. We assume that demand shocks in two consecutive periods can be expressed as




                                                                                                   6
                                                                  ,                           (2)


where     captures the serial correlation of two consecutive demand shocks and         is a random

error term. We assume that there is positive serial correlation in the demand shock between the

first and the second periods, that is,     0, which is consistent with the time-series properties of

aggregate output reported in the literature.8


        The supply of housing,     , is exogenously determined at t = 0, but will endogenously grow

in later periods depending on the realization of house prices. In our model, the change in the

supply of housing     is determined as a function of the price changes on the previous dates, and is

expressed as


                                          ∑                   ,                                  (3)


where      is a supply rigidity factor, which measures the magnitude of the supply change in

response to the -th period lagged appreciation rate, and     captures the natural growth in supply

(or, the replacement of depreciated properties).9 Correspondingly,       captures the sensitivity of

supply change to changes in housing prices. For simplicity we are assuming that the relation

between supply changes and price changes is linear. However, in our empirical work we will

consider the possibility that supply responds to price increases more than to price decreases.


        The above characterization of the supply function captures the idea that because

construction takes time, supply reacts to price increases with a lag. Specifically, we assume that

there is a partial response in one year and a further response in two years. As we just mentioned,

these supply responses may be different in declining and growing markets and their magnitudes



                                                                                                    7
may also depend on various characteristics of cities that can influence the approval and

development process. A large short-run supply rigidity factor ₁ means that the supply adjusts

slowly to price increases. This will be the case in cities where the regulatory approval process is

slow or in cities with dense populations where the construction process is difficult to control.

However, it should be noted that, depending on the magnitude of the delay, supply will eventually

enter the market at a later date. Given this, a larger short-run supply rigidity factor ₁ should lead

to a smaller long-run supply rigidity factor k₂. To facilitate our later discussions, we define

  as the long-run supply sensitivity factor.


          Applying the market clearing condition to each of the four periods, we derive the

equilibrium prices at the four dates as follows:

      ∗
                 ,                                                                                (4)


     ∗
                     ,                                                                            (5)


      ∗
                                               1                1 ,                               (6)


     ∗
                 1       1           1             1      1         ·


             1                                 ,                                                  (7)


           where         1   , and             .


An examination of the price changes derived from Equations (4) to (7) leads to Proposition 1.




                                                                                                   8
Proposition 1: If housing demand and supply are characterized by Equations (1) to (3), price

changes exhibit the following two patterns:


   [I] The price changes from date 1 to date 2 are positively correlated with the price changes

       from date 0 to date 1 if the short-run supply rigidity factor ( ₁) and the short-run serial

       correlation in the demand shock (           0) satisfy the condition that                      .

       Furthermore, the magnitude of the one–period serial correlation of price changes is

       increasing in the serial correlation of demand shocks       and the supply rigidity ₁.


   [II] The price changes from date 2 to date 3 will be negatively correlated with the price changes
                                  ∗       ∗
       from date 0 to date 1 if       ∗       <   , where     measures the sensitivity of the current

       appreciation rate to last period’s appreciation rate. Furthermore, the magnitude of the

       negative correlation between the appreciate rate in the current period and the appreciation

       rate two periods earlier is increasing in the long-run supply sensitivity factor           .


Proof. See Appendix A.


       Proposition 1 illustrates that under fairly reasonable conditions, real estate price changes

are likely to exhibit positive serial correlation over relatively short intervals. However, price

changes partially reverse in the long run. This pattern arises because of the assumed persistence

in the demand shocks combined with supply responses that take time. For example, prices may

initially increase with a positive shock to demand, continue to increase as the demand shock

persists, and then subsequently decrease as new supply comes on line. As our simple model

illustrates, the magnitude of these price patterns are determined by the speed and strength of the

supply response, which is likely to differ across cities. In addition, the price patterns are likely to

                                                                                                      9
be related to the overall state of the market, given that supply is likely to be more sensitive to the

magnitude of price increases than decreases.


3. Empirical Tests and Sample Description

This section discusses our empirical tests and describes the characteristics of our sample. The first

subsection describes our empirical tests. The second subsection details our data and the selection

of proxy variables. The last subsection describes the characteristics of the Metropolitan Statistical

Areas (MSAs) we use in our sample.


3.1. Empirical Tests


We run regressions using panel data to estimate the persistence of property appreciation rates and

the degree to which that persistence is affected by serial correlations in demand and/or supply

rigidity factors. These regressions include the property appreciation rate of each MSA as the

dependent variable, a proxy for a contemporaneous demand shock, lagged appreciation rates,

proxies for the serial correlation of demand shocks and supply rigidities, and the interactions of

these proxies with past appreciation rates. The regressions take the following form:


                 ,   ∅        1   ,            2   ,       3       ,            ,           ,        ,



                                      ,    ,           ,           ,        ,           ,                         (8)


where j is the MSA index, t is the year index,         is the annual appreciation rate at year (we use

overlapping year-on-year price changes calculated at each quarter ,                             is the   year lagged

annual appreciation rate, with            1, 2 or 3.   œ       ,       or           represents characteristics that

proxy for the serial correlation of demand shocks or supply rigidity,                               is the interaction



                                                                                                                   10
between the proxy variable and the         th lagged term of the appreciation rate,      is the annual

growth rate of a fundamental economic variable at year , which represents a contemporaneous

demand shock, and        is the error term. ∅ is the constant.


        The coefficients of the 3 lagged appreciated rates,          (where       1,2,3), tell us if the

property appreciation rate of the current period is related to past appreciation rates. The coefficients

of the three interaction variables      (where       1,2,3) tell us if proxies for demand and supply

characteristics affect the magnitude of the serial correlations in the property appreciation rates.


        We use the Fama-MacBeth procedure (Fama and MacBeth (1973)) to estimate the

coefficients of the panel regression and adjust the standard errors using the Newey-West method

(Newey and West (1987)) modified for the use in a panel data set. (Petersen (2009) provides a

detailed discussion on the trade-offs among different methods used for panel data regressions.)


3.2. Data and proxy variables


        We start with the quarterly property appreciation rates for 381 U.S. Metropolitan Statistical

Areas (based on 2004 MSA definitions). However, because of data limitations, we delete MSAs

with short data series, leaving us with 97 MSAs covering all 50 states in the U.S.A over the sample

period between 1980 Q1 to 2011 Q4. Data on the appreciation rates were provided by FHFA

(Federal Housing Finance Agency, formerly known as the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise

Oversight, or OFHEO). The FHFA quarterly housing price index is calculated using price changes

on individual properties from repeat sales or refinancing on the same single-family houses whose

mortgages have been purchased or securitized by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.10 Although the

sample of houses is limited, this is probably the most widely used housing price index because of

its broad coverage of MSAs and long time periods.11

                                                                                                      11
        It should be noted that in contrast to financial market prices, there is a problem of stale

housing prices. There are a couple of reasons why this may be the case. The most direct reason

is that buyers and sellers tend to agree on a price prior to when the sale actually closes. In addition,

after listing their houses, sellers may be slow to adjust the price of their houses to reflect new

information. Each of these reasons is likely to generate some positive serial correlation in observed

price indexes. However, given the typical time span between when offers are accepted and when

the sale closes, and the very minor costs associated with adjusting prices to reflect new

information, it is unlikely that these mechanical effects will induce serial correlation over intervals

that go beyond a quarter. If this is indeed the case, the serial correlation that is generated from

stale prices is eliminated in regressions that skip a quarter between the measurements of the

appreciation rates used as dependent variables and the lagged appreciation rates included as

independent variables. Specifically, we estimate regressions where the dependent variable is the

appreciation rate measured from quarter t to t+4 and the appreciate rates used as the independent

variables are measured from quarter t-5 to quarter t-1, from quarter t-9 to quarter t-5, and from

quarter t-13 to quarter t-9, respectively.


        In addition to the housing price series, we need proxies for the serial correlation of the

demand shock and supply rigidity for each MSA, and other control variables that might be related

to the property appreciation rate of MSAs. Specifically, we use the employment growth rate and

the population growth rate, provided by Moody's Economy.com, as proxies for the growth in

housing demand. The growth rate of the housing supply for each MSA is measured as the ratio of

the number of new single-family housing starts to the total number of households, which we obtain

from the Bureau of Census.




                                                                                                     12
       We use two measures to represent the short-run supply rigidity of MSAs. The first is the

Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI, and here after “regulation index”)

used in Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) to capture the intensity of local growth control

policies.12 A high index value means that the MSA has zoning regulations or project approval

practices that constrain new residential developments. The second proxy for the short-run supply

rigidity is population density, since it tends to be more difficult to develop a project in a denser

area. This is true because finding suitable land, obtaining building permits and preparing the site

for development are more difficult and time consuming in a denser area. We measure an MSA’s

density as its population divided by the square miles of land area, where the land area size is

reported in the 2000 Census Survey (by the Bureau of Census). As in Saiz (2010) we adjust the

area for the amount of water in the MSA, however, we do not try to come up with a proxy for

unbuildable land.


       As an indication of the validity of the above supply rigidity measures we estimate the

relation between supply rigidity and price levels. In theory, prices should be higher when the

option to build additional housing units is more limited. Indeed, in unreported regressions we

show that prices in cities that are denser or more restricted tend to be higher. It should also be

noted that unreported regressions that use the median housing price level in a city as a proxy for

supply rigidity generate similar results as the other two measures of supply rigidity. In particular,

cities with higher housing prices exhibit greater serial correlation at yearly intervals.


       Finally, we use the growth rate of the gross metropolitan product (GMP, obtained from the

Bureau of Economic Analysis) to control for contemporaneous demand shocks.13




                                                                                                  13
3.3. Sample description


Before proceeding, it is interesting to get a broad picture of the characteristics of regions that

realized the highest price appreciation and population growth over our sample period. To do so,

we sort our data of 97 MSAs and report the top-10 MSAs in terms of housing appreciation and

population growth for each of the following periods: 1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000-2006, and

2007-2011. As reported in Exhibit 1, for the most part, the MSAs that experienced the highest

price appreciation were in relatively dense urban areas with relatively good weather. The evidence

in Exhibit 1 also reveals that most of the cities that experienced the fastest population growth were

in areas with relatively good weather and relatively low densities. The evidence of an interaction

between good weather and density as determinants of population growth and price increases is

broadly consistent with the existence of a demand shock over this time period, associated with a

change in preferences for good weather, as discussed in studies by Rappaport (2007) and others,

and the effect of supply rigidities associated with higher density on both prices and population. In

other words, speaking very broadly, the interaction between supply rigidities and demand shocks,

which is central to our model, seems to have some bite.


                                       Insert Exhibit 1 Here


       We next examine how the time series patterns in appreciation rates and housing supply

growth are associated with our two measures of supply rigidities. We do this by looking at four

different periods with different levels of demand growth. For each period, we stratify areas into

three supply-rigidity-level groups (high, medium and low) based on our two short-run supply-

rigidity proxies: population density and the regulation index,14 and report each MSA's housing




                                                                                                  14
appreciation rate (the FHFA HPI index change) and its growth in housing supply (new single-

family housing starts divided by the number of households).


                                       Insert Exhibit 2 Here


       Exhibit 2 reports each subsample’s mean for each variable. When interpreting these

numbers, it should be noted that in the 1983 to 1989 period and the 2000 to 2006 period there was

substantial appreciation in housing prices, and in these periods, the more constrained MSAs

(denser and more regulated) tended to appreciate more. In the 1990s, when appreciation rates were

relatively low, and the post-2006 period, when prices fell, the cross-MSA relation between

constraints and appreciation rates is pretty weak. It should also be noted that our density measure

is a good predictor of both MSA population and price growth rates; denser areas experienced

greater price increases and less population increase. However, the relation between the regulation

index and the growth rates are pretty weak, suggesting that the regulations may slow down growth,

but may not have a long run effect.


4. Assumption Validation and Empirical Results

As described earlier, our model assumes that the housing demand shock, as shown in Equation (2),

is serially correlated, and the growth in housing supply is a function of past property appreciation

rates, as shown in Equation (3). As we will show in this section, these patterns are indeed consistent

with our data.


4.1. Serial correlation of demand shocks


We estimate the serial correlation of demand shocks in two ways. We first estimate a series of

cross-sectional regressions of demand changes (i.e., employment and population growth) on their


                                                                                                   15
lagged values (up to three lags), and use the Fama-MacBeth procedure with the Newey-West

adjustment to estimate standard errors.        These estimates implicitly assume that the serial

correlation is equal across cities. We then directly estimate serial correlation with time-series

regressions for each city to gauge the degree to which these serial correlations differ.


                                         Insert Exhibit 3 Here


       The Fama-MacBeth regressions, reported in Exhibit 3, provide evidence of positive serial

correlation in both demand shock proxies. For both employment and population growth, the first

lagged term is positive and extremely significant, with the pattern more prominent before 2007

than after 2007. The second lagged term is significant for employment growth before 2007, but is

not significant for population growth.


       We next explore the cross-sectional patterns of the time-series correlation of the housing

demand growth rate at the MSA level. Based on the preceding results, which shows that most of

the serial correlation is captured by the first lag, we estimate the serial correlation over one year

intervals for each of the 97 MSAs in our sample. In unreported regressions we find that in the full

sample period, the serial correlation of employment growth is significantly positive in 91% of the

MSAs and the serial correlation of population growth is significantly positive in 99% of the MSAs.

       We also examine cross-sectional differences in serial correlations. Our analysis of these

differences is partly motivated by concerns about the endogeniety of these demand shock proxies.

In particular, it might be the case that the growth in employment and population is constrained by

the ability of an MSA to absorb new residents. If this is the case, then we might expect growth

rates to be less persistent in cities that are denser and have more supply rigidities. In fact, we find




                                                                                                    16
that growth persistence is stronger in cities with greater population density and more regulation,

which is inconsistent with the idea that rigidities mitigate persistence.


       It is possible that the reason why growth is more persistent in denser cities is that denser

cities tend to be larger, and the growth in the demand for housing may be more persistent in larger

cities. As we mentioned in the introduction, persistence in demand shocks can arise if innovations

in one sector of a city spill over and create success in other sectors.15 In addition, as discussed in

Lamont and Stein (1999), an increase in real estate prices in a given city reduces the borrowing

constraints of existing homeowners, thereby increasing their demand for housing. Moreover, as

discussed by Chaney, Sraer and Thesmar (2012), increases in real estate prices can also reduce the

financial constraints of the businesses in a city, increasing their investment expenditures, which

might in turn positively influence the demand for housing.


       It is likely that the above mentioned spillovers between various industry sectors and those

between the real estate sector and industry are more important in larger cities. If this is indeed the

case, we should expect to see more serial correlation in the factors that drive demand in larger

cities. To test this we examine the relation between the magnitude of a city’s GMP and the

persistence of their demand growth rates. To do this, we estimate the following regression using

the Fama-MacBeth procedure with the Newey-West adjustment:


               ,               ,            ,             ,                   ,



                           ,                ,                 ,                                  (11)


where j is the MSA index, t is the quarter index,   ,   is the annual demand growth rate at year for

MSA j and is the serially overlapping year-on-year growth rate calculated for each quarter,       ,




                                                                                                      17
is the i-year lagged annual demand growth rate,          is a GMP size,     ,      is the interaction

between the i-year lagged demand growth rate and the GMP size,            is a constant and     is the

error term.


                                         Insert Exhibit 4 Here


        Exhibit 4 reports the results. Panel A uses the employment growth rate as the proxy for the

demand growth and Panel B uses the population growth rate as the proxy for demand growth. In

both cases we find that demand growth rates tend to be very persistent. When employment growth

is used as the demand proxy we find that both the one year and the two year lagged growth rate

explains the current growth rate. When population growth is used as the demand proxy the first

lag is very significant, but the second lag is not reliably different than zero. In both cases, the

estimated interaction terms indicate that persistence is stronger in larger cities, when the growth

rate is lagged by one year, but the coefficient of the interaction of size with the second year lag is

negative, but smaller and less significant. These patterns hold in the entire sample period and the

pre-2007 period. In the post-2007 period, the results are consistent, but because of the short sample

period the coefficients tend to be statistically less significant.


4.2. Supply responses to price changes


        We now turn our attention to the assumed link between housing supply growth rates and

lagged property appreciation rates. Specifically, we regress housing supply growth rates (new

housing start/number of households) on three lagged values of the property appreciation rate. We

do this by running cross-sectional regressions in each quarter of the housing supply growth rate

over the past four quarters on the appreciation rate in previous years. Again, we report the mean



                                                                                                   18
of the coefficient estimates and their standard errors using the Fama-MacBeth procedure with

Newey-West standard errors.


                                             Insert Exhibit 5 Here


       The estimates of this regression are reported in Exhibit 5. These regression estimates

indicate that before the 2007 crisis, supply responds significantly to the appreciation rate in the

previous year, but the appreciation rate at a longer lag does not have a material effect on supply.

Consistent with the lower supply elasticity during downturns we find evidence of a weaker supply

response in the post 2007 period. However, given the shorter post-2007 sample period we have

very little power to detect differences between the pre- and post-crisis periods.


       To understand cross city differences in supply responses we consider the two measures of

supply rigidity that we described in Section 3.2, the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory

Index (WRURI) and population density. We hypothesize that MSAs with more regulation or

greater density will have a lower response to past price changes. To test this hypothesis, we

estimate the following regression of the supply growth rate on past price changes, the rigidity

measure, and their interaction terms:


                  ,                  ,             ,               ,                  ,



                                 ,                     ,               ,                                 (12)


where j is the MSA index, t is the quarter index,          ,   is the annual supply growth rate at year (here

we use serially overlapping year-on-year growth rate calculated at each quarter ,            ,   is the i-year

lagged annual property appreciation rate,          is the proxy for supply rigidity (either the regulatory

index or the population density),        ,        is the interaction between the i-year lagged property

                                                                                                           19
appreciation rate and the proxy for the supply rigidity,      is a constant and      is the error term.

Again, we use the Fama-MacBeth procedure with the Newey-West adjustment to estimate the

regression.


                                        Insert Exhibit 6 Here


       Exhibit 6 reports the results, with Panel A reporting estimates using the population density

as the proxy for supply rigidities and Panel B reporting estimates using the regulatory index to

measure rigidities. As we expect, in the pre-2007 period, the regression estimates indicate that

MSAs tend to add more housing supply in cities with weaker supply rigidities.16 Moreover, for

both proxies, the coefficients of the interaction variables indicate that supply responds more to

past price changes in MSAs with less supply rigidity, suggesting that our supply rigidity measure

are indeed good proxies for supply elasticities. Finally, it should be noted that the results are quite

weak after 2007, which is consistent with very weak supply elasticities during downturns.


5. Housing Price Patterns

As we show in Proposition 1, under certain conditions, property appreciation rates are positively

serially correlated over relatively short intervals, followed by a partial reversal. Those conditions,

i.e., serially correlated demand growth and rigid supply, were examined in the last section. In this

section we directly examine the time series pattern of housing appreciation rates.


       Exhibit 7 reports regressions of the annual appreciation rates on lagged annual appreciation

rates (with and without additional control variables) for our panel data of 97 MSAs, using the

Fama-MacBeth procedure with the Newey-West adjustment. Panel A reports the result when only

the lagged terms are used. Panel B reports the results when we include an additional control


                                                                                                    20
variable for the change in the gross metro product. These Panels are further divided into Columns

I and II, which estimate regressions both with and without a gap between the measurement

intervals used for the dependent and independent variables. In Column I there is no gap between

the measurement intervals used for the dependent and independent variables. In Column II there

is a one quarter gap between the measurement of the appreciation rates used in the dependent and

independent variables to correct for serially correlations that may be generated because of stale

prices.


          In each of the regressions we find that the property appreciation rate is reliably positively

correlated with the price change in the previous year but is negatively correlated with the price

change 3 years earlier. As we show in the table, the sum of the three lagged coefficients is

significantly positive, which indicates that the lagged price change is only partially reversed. The

one year serial correlation is only slightly weaker after 2007 and evidence of a reversal in the

subsequent years is even stronger in the post-2007 period.


          Given the short sample period, we are hesitant to draw strong conclusions from the post-

2007 sample period. However, the strong evidence of reversals in a time period with weak supply

responses is of interest since it is inconsistent with our model. One possible explanation is that

although price declines do not lead to a significant decline in the actual housing stock, because of

either debt overhang or loss aversion (as discussed in Genesove and Mayer (2001)), a price decline

can temporarily reduce the available supply of housing that are on the market, which can have the

same effect on housing prices as a reduction in the actual housing stock.


                                         Insert Exhibit 7 Here




                                                                                                    21
       We now explore the determinants of cross-city differences in these price movement

patterns. Specifically, we explore the implications of our model, which suggests that price change

patterns are influenced by the degree of demand persistence and supply rigidities. To start the

analyses, we run the regression in Equation (8) for the same panel data of 97 MSAs we used for

the regression reported in Panel B of Exhibit 7, except that we now add proxies for demand

persistence and supply rigidities and interactions of these proxies with the three lagged property

appreciation rates. Specifically, we use “GMPsize”, the natural logarithm of Gross Metropolitan

Product, as a proxy for the serial correlation of the demand shock. We also use “popuden”, the

population density, and “regindx”, the regulation index, as proxies for supply rigidity.


       Exhibit 8, which reports these regressions, contains two columns that include independent

variables that are not lagged (Column I), and independent variables that are lagged by one quarter

(Column II), and three different Panels. Panel A in Exhibit 8 reports the results using GMP size

as a proxy for the demand serial correlation and Panel B and C report the results using population

density and regulation index as proxies for supply rigidity.


                                       Insert Exhibit 8 Here


       In all three panels, for the full sample and the before-2007 subsample, the coefficients of

the terms that interact the proxy variable and the 1-year lagged appreciation rate are positive,

indicating that an MSA with stronger short-run serial correlation in the growth rate of demand

(proxied by GMP size) or with a higher level of supply rigidity (proxied by either population

density or regulation index) exhibit greater positive first order serial correlation in property

appreciation rates. These coefficients are statistically significant in the regressions reported in

Column I, but are a bit lower in magnitude in the regressions reported in Column II, and are not


                                                                                                22
significantly different than zero in regressions with the interactions involving GMP size and

density. In the after-2007 sample, none of the proxy variables affects the 1-year serial correlation

in appreciation rates.


        The evidence suggests that although larger and denser cities exhibit stronger first order

serial correlation, the subsequent reversal effect is not reliably related to either size or density.

However, this is not the case when we measure rigidity with the regulation index. The more

regulated markets do exhibit greater first order serial correlation, but the effect of regulation on

appreciation rate persistence is reversed after one year, suggesting that the regulation does not

have a permanent effect.


6.   Conclusions

There are a number of applications in corporate finance that require assumptions about the price

process of a real asset. For example, to value a financial asset, like a debt instrument, whose value

is contingent on the value of real assets, (e.g., project debt that is collateralized by a power plant),

one needs to make assumptions about the process generating the value of the underlying asset.

This is also the case when we consider real options with values that are contingent on the values

of other real assets, e.g., the option to expand a manufacturing facility.


        In most cases, we apply the type of analysis that is used to value derivatives on financial

assets and assume that prices of the underlying real asset can be approximated by a random walk.

However, as we illustrate with our simple reduced form model, price changes of real assets can

exhibit positive serial correlation over relatively short intervals and may exhibit negative serial

correlation over longer intervals. The key assumptions that generate these results are serial

correlation of demand shocks and supply rigidities, and financial frictions that tend to make

                                                                                                     23
investors myopic. These assumptions, which we think apply to a wide range of real asset markets,

clearly apply to the U.S. housing market. Indeed, as our empirical tests confirm, housing price

changes in most cities exhibit positive serial correlation over yearly intervals and subsequent

reversals. Moreover, as our model suggests, there can be significant differences in the serial

correlation of housing price changes in cities with different characteristics as well as at different

stages of the housing market cycle.


       Our analysis is directly applicable to the valuation of mortgages and other contracts that

are contingent on the value of owner occupied housing. A question, which we will leave to future

research, is the extent to which our analysis can be applied to the price process of real assets that

are held in the corporate sector.




                                                                                                  24
References

Adelino, M., A. Schoar and F. Severino, House Prices, Collateral and Self-Employment, Duke

   University Working Paper, 2013.

Bailey, M. J., R. F. Muth and H. O. Nourse, A Regression Method for Real Estate Price Index

   Construction, Journal of American Statistical Association, 1963, 58, 933-942.

Beracha, Eli and M. Babajide Wintoki, Forecasting Residential Real Estate Price Changes from

   Online Search Activity, Journal of Real Estate Research, 2013, 35, 283-312.

Campbell, S., M. Davis, J. Gallin and R. Martin, What Moves Housing Markets: A Variance

   Decomposition of the Rent-Price Ratio, Journal of Urban Economics, 2009, 66, 90-102.

Capozza, D., P. H. Hendershott and C. Mack, An Anatomy of Price Dynamics in Illiquid Markets:

   Analysis and Evidence from Local Housing Markets, Real Estate Economics, 2004, 32, 1-32.

Case, K. and R. Shiller, Prices of Single-Family Homes Since 1970: New Indexes for Four Cities,

   New England Economic Review, 1987, 46-56.

Case, K. and R. Shiller, The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and Post Boom Markets, New

   England Economic Review, 1988, 29-46.

Case, K. and R. Shiller, The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes, American

   Economic Review, 1989, 79, 125-37.

Calhoun, C. A., FHFA House Price Indexes: HPI Technical Description, Office of Federal

   Housing Enterprise Oversight Working paper, 1996.

Chaney, T., D. Sraer and D. Thesmar, The Collateral Channel: How Real Estate Shocks Affect

   Corporate Investment, American Economic Review, 2012, 102, 2381-2409.

Cheng, I., S. Raina and W. Xiong, Wall Street and the Housing Bubble, University of Michigan

   Working Paper, 2013.


                                                                                            25
Cochrane, J. H., How Big Is the Random Walk in GNP? Journal of Political Economy, 1988, 96,

   893-920.

Corradin, S. and A. Popov, House Prices, Household Leverage, and Entrepreneurship, European

   Central Bank Working Paper, 2012.

Fama, E. and J. MacBeth, Risk, Return and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests, Journal of Political

   Economy, 1973, 81, 607-636.

Gan, J., Collateral, Debt Capacity, and Corporate Investment: Evidence from a Natural

   Experiment, Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 85, 709-734.

Genesove, D. and C. Mayer, Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence from the Housing

   Market, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116, 1233-1260.

Glaeser, E. L., J. Gyourko, E. Morales and C. Nathanson, Housing Dynamics, University of

   Pennsylvania Working Paper, 2011.

Glaeser, E. L., J. Gyourko, and A. Saiz, Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles, Journal of Urban

   Economics, 2008, 64, 198-217.

Gorton, G., The Subprime Panic, European Financial Management, 2009a, 15, 10-46.

Gorton, G., Information, Liquidity, and the (Ongoing) Panic of 2007, American Economic

   Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2009b, 99, 567-572.

Green, R. K., S. Malpezzi and S. K. Mayo, Metropolitan-Specific Estimates of the Price Elasticity

   of Supply of Housing, and Their Sources, American Economic Review, 2005, 95, 334-339.

Gyourko, J., A. Saiz and A. Summers, A New Measure of the Local Regulatory Environment for

   Housing Markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index, Urban Studies, 2008,

   45, 693-729.




                                                                                              26
Lamont, O. and J. C. Stein, Leverage and House-price Dynamics in U.S. Cities, Rand Journal of

   Economics, 1999, 30, 498-514.

Mayer, C. J. and C. T. Somerville, Residential Construction: Using the Urban Growth Model to

   Estimate Housing Supply, Journal of Urban Economics, 2000, 48, 85-109.

Nelson, C. R. and C. I. Plosser, Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic and Time Series,

   Journal of Monetary Economics, 1982, 10, 139-162.

Newey, W. and K. West, A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroscedastic and Autocorrelation

   Consistent Covariance Matrix, Econometrica, 1987, 55, 703-708.

Nneji, Ogonna, Chris Brooks, and Charles Ward, Intrinsic and Rational Speculative Bubbles in

   the U.S. Housing Market: 1960–2011, Journal of Real Estate Research, 2013, 35, 122-151.

Ortalo-Magné , F. and S. Rady, On the Contribution of Income Shocks and Credit Constraints,

   Review of Economic Studies, 2006, 73, 459-485.

Petersen, M. A., Estimating Standard Errors in Finance Panel Data Sets: Comparing Approaches,

   Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 22, 435-480.

Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider, Momentum Traders in the Housing Market: Survey Evidence and

   a Search Model, American Economic Review: papers & Proceedings, 2009, 99, 406-411.

Quigley, J. M., Urban Diversity and Economic Growth, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1998,

   12, 127-138.

Rappaport, J., Moving to Nice Weather, Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2007, 37, 375-

   398.

Saiz, A., The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010,

   125, 1253-1296.




                                                                                             27
Topel, R. and S. Rosen, Housing Investment in the United States, Journal of Political Economy,

   1988, 96, 718-740

Wang, S., S. H. Chan and B. Xu, The Estimation and Determinants of the Price Elasticity of

   Housing Supply: Evidence from China, Journal of Real Estate Research, 2012, 34, 311-344.

Wheaton, W., Real Estate “Cycles”: Some Fundamentals, Real Estate Economics, 1999, 27, 209-

   230.




Acknowledgement

       We acknowledge the helpful comments from Su Han Chan, Sing Tien Foo, David Frame,

Richard Gil, Christopher Parsons and seminar participants at Chinese Academy of Sciences,

Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Colorado State University, Johns Hopkins University,

Massey University, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, 2009 AREUEA/AsRES Joint

Meeting and 2010 GCREC Annual Meeting. We thank Jiajin Chen, Yalan Feng and Mariya Letdin

for their research assistance on this paper.




                                                                                           28
Appendix A

Proof for Proposition 1:



          Given that                            and         is exogenously determined, the market clearing

                                           ∗                                         ∗
condition guarantees that                            . This means that                        . To simplify the model

                                                     ∗
presentation, we define            1                     and restrict            ∈ 0,1 to ensure that the initial demand

                               1       is non-negative. In addition, we define the demand shock change

rate at time    as                 , that is,                  1                . Finally, we ignore the zero-mean error

term in Equation (2) by assuming                    0. To simply the model presentation, we do not consider

the natural growth rate in supply (that is, the replacement of depreciated properties) by assuming

     0.



          Combining equations (1), (2) and (3) and applying the market clearing condition to the

four-date model framework, we derive


                                                ∗
                           ,                                                ;                                       (13)

                                                ∗
                       ,                                                ;                                           (14)

                           ,           1

                ∗
                                                                   1                         1 ;                    (15)


                       ,               1


                                                                                                                     29
                         ∗
                                        1               1                   1                   1              1          ∙


                    1                                                       .                                                     (16)


To explore the time-series properties of property appreciation rate, the change rate of the

equilibrium price is written as a weighted average of historical appreciation rates plus an error

term, or

                         ∗       ∗                          ∗       ∗
                             ∗          ∑                       ∗                   ,                                            (17)


where      measures the sensitivity of current appreciation rate to the -th period lagged appreciation

rate.   is a zero-mean error term.


        It is important to note that the significance level and the sign of                                  in Equation (17) can be

used to judge the serial correlation patterns in the price dynamics. In the four-date framework, we
                                                                                            ∗           ∗
assume that the market is in a stable condition at time 0 so that                                           . Equation (17) can be re-

written as

                         ∗       ∗          ∗       ∗
                             ∗                  ∗                   and                                                          (18)


                         ∗       ∗          ∗       ∗                   ∗       ∗
                             ∗                  ∗                           ∗           .                                        (19)


        Ignoring the error terms ε₂ and ε₃ and substituting the equilibrium prices expressed in

Equations (13), (14), (15) and (16) into Equations (18) and (19), the two serial correlation

coefficients,    and     , can be expressed as


                                     0 when                                                         ,                            (20)


                                                                                                                                   30
            ∗       ∗                          ∗           ∗
                ∗              0        when       ∗                ,                         (21)




This means that, with the conditions specified in Equations (20) and (21), the appreciation rate of

current period is positively correlated with the appreciation rate in the previous period, but is

negatively correlated with the appreciation rate two periods ago. The comparative static analyses

on    and           generate


                        0,                                                                    (22)


                         0,                                                                   (23)


            ∙                      (given              ,        )




                                   0.                                                         (24)


■Q.E.D.




                                                                                                31
                                                                     EXHIBIT 1
                                  MSA Ranking Based on Property Appreciation Rate and Population Growth Rate by Period

                                                                                    Year 2000                                                                                     Year 2000
                                             Annualized                             population                                             Annualized                             population
                                               housing       Average     Average      density                                               housing        Average     Average      density
                                             appreciation   population    GMP       (per square                                            appreciation   population    GMP       (per square
         MSA name                State           rate         (000)      (mil. $)      mile)              MSA name                State        rate         (000)      (mil. $)      mile)
 Top 10 MSAs by property appreciation rate                                                        Top 10 MSAs by population growth rate
 [1980-1989]                                                                                      [1980-1989]
                                                                                                  Riverside-San Bernardino-
 Nassau-Suffolk                       NY        14.30%         2620.00      43.50      2300.00    Ontario                             CA      5.16%          1930.00     22.90            119
 Boston-Quincy                       MA         13.00%         1700.00      40.90      1030.00    Las Vegas-Paradise                 NV       4.68%           568.00     10.10           39.7
 Springfield                         MA         12.00%          652.00       9.69       805.00    Orlando-Kissimmee                   FL      4.25%           987.00     17.20         471.00
 New York-White Plains-Wayne          NY        11.90%       10300.00      239.00         8160    Austin-Round Rock                   TX      3.77%           725.00     12.20         296.00
 New Haven-Milford                    CT        11.10%          782.00      14.80         1260    Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale             AZ      3.49%          1910.00     32.10         223.00
 Providence-New Bedford-Fall
 River                                RI        10.60%         1460.00      21.50         1040    San Luis Obispo-Paso Robles         CA      3.46%           184.00      2.75          74.70
 Newark-Union                         NJ        10.60%         1980.00      41.40      1290.00    Fort Worth-Arlington                TX      3.20%          1190.00     19.10            584
                                                                                                  Sacramento--Arden-Arcade--
 San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara       CA        10.50%         1430.00      33.60      1300.00    Roseville                           CA      3.07%          1250.00     22.00            399
 San Francisco-San Mateo-
 Redwood City                         CA        10.40%         1550.00      45.70      1700.00    Raleigh-Cary                        NC      3.03%           462.00      6.64         341.00
 San Luis Obispo-Paso Robles          CA        10.30%          184.00       2.75         74.70   Bakersfield                         CA      3.01%           468.00      8.32           81.3
 Sample Median                                   4.32%          831.00      14.80       444.00    Sample Median                               1.06%           831.00     14.80         444.00
 [1990-1999]                                                                                      [1990-1999]
 Salt Lake City                       UT         8.01%          876.58     25.51        824.70    Las Vegas-Paradise                 NV       6.43%          1026.97     30.26           39.7
 Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton         OR         7.80%         1734.23     49.61        381.50    Austin-Round Rock                   TX      3.95%          1021.26     29.51         295.90
 Denver-Aurora                        CO         7.35%         1913.10     62.13        560.90    Raleigh-Cary                        NC      3.91%           659.74     17.28          340.5
 Salem                                OR         7.09%          314.06       6.24       180.40    Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale             AZ      3.82%          2701.69     73.92         223.10
 Austin-Round Rock                    TX         5.87%         1021.26     29.51        295.90    Boise City-Nampa                    ID      3.82%           388.68      9.48          262.9
 Colorado Springs                     CO         5.78%          474.04     11.49        243.10    Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta     GA       3.29%          3600.44    116.21          671.5
 Tacoma                              WA          5.36%          643.91     14.06        417.40    Orlando-Kissimmee                   FL      2.98%          1424.02     41.43          471.1
 Davenport-Moline-Rock Island         IA         5.25%          373.94     10.15        210.20    Reno-Sparks                        NV       2.92%           297.66     10.06           53.5
 Boise City-Nampa                     ID         5.24%          388.68       9.48       262.90    Dallas-Plano-Irving                 TX      2.78%          2987.23    104.19         568.90
 Ann Arbor                            MI         5.18%          299.21     10.90        285.30    Colorado Springs                    CO      2.76%           474.04     11.49         243.10
 Sample Median                                   3.28%         1023.96     29.51        444.00    Sample Median                               1.25%          1023.96     29.51         444.00
 [2000-2006]                                                                                      [2000-2006]
 Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall            FL        16.33%         2346.10     85.28       1157.90    Las Vegas-Paradise                 NV       4.50%          1609.76     66.40           39.7
 Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario     CA        16.02%         3641.90    102.57        119.40    Raleigh-Cary                        NC      3.64%           895.30     35.85          340.5
 Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-
 Deerfield Beach                      FL        15.93%         1704.44     60.60       1346.50    Boise City-Nampa                    ID      3.42%           519.20     18.15          262.9
 Merced                               CA        15.76%          231.11       5.67       109.20    Orlando-Kissimmee                   FL      3.30%          1839.19     76.77         471.10
 Los Angeles-Long Beach-
 Glendale                             CA        15.65%         9710.72    424.90       2344.20    Austin-Round Rock                   TX      3.26%          1393.28     56.08         295.90
                                                                                                  Riverside-San Bernardino-
 Bakersfield                          CA        15.63%          720.97     24.90           81.3   Ontario                             CA      3.23%          3641.90    102.57         119.40
 Fresno                               CA        15.34%          845.06     30.04        113.90    Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale             AZ      3.01%          3581.80    140.69          223.1
 Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine             CA        14.71%         2914.20    160.05       3605.60    Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord          NC      2.94%          1454.02     70.21            444
 Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-
 Goleta                               CA        14.06%          405.12     17.58        145.90    Bakersfield                         CA      2.73%           720.97     24.90          81.30
 Washington-Arlington-
 Alexandria                           DC        14.01%         3967.59    220.34        756.30    Reno-Sparks                        NV       2.66%           377.02     17.48           53.5
 Sample Median                                   7.33%         1137.27     48.32        444.00    Sample Median                               1.00%         1137.27      48.32         444.00
 [2007-2011]                                                                                      [2007-2011]
 Kennewick-Pasco-Richland            WA          1.63%          244.82     10.88          65.10   Raleigh-Cary                        NC      3.26%          1113.92     52.91          340.5
 Austin-Round Rock                    TX         1.26%         1695.17     79.57        295.90    Austin-Round Rock                   TX      3.12%         1695.17      79.57         295.90
 Buffalo-Niagara Falls                NY         1.23%         1134.57     62.51        746.60    Kennewick-Pasco-Richland           WA       2.85%           244.82     10.88           65.1
 Pittsburgh                           PA        1.22%          2354.07    113.38        509.90    New Orleans-Metairie-Kenner         LA      2.36%         1145.83      59.63         393.50
 Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown           TX         1.11%         5864.39    343.68        705.70    Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord          NC      2.31%          1741.16     90.88            444
 Rochester                            NY         0.87%         1055.07     58.21        320.60    San Antonio                         TX      2.28%          2108.85     83.47          478.7
 Davenport-Moline-Rock Island         IA         0.64%          377.55     18.06        210.20    Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown          TX      2.18%         5864.39     343.68          705.7
 Oklahoma City                        OK         0.52%         1236.28     53.42        255.10    Fort Worth-Arlington                TX      2.15%          2117.08     89.34          583.5
 Beaumont-Port Arthur                 TX         0.51%          386.07     21.84        178.80    Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale             AZ      2.10%          4190.09    184.69         223.10
 Syracuse                             NY         0.43%          660.10     36.56        237.50    Dallas-Plano-Irving                 TX      2.00%         4198.27     232.12         568.90
 Sample Median                                  -3.43%         1134.57     59.81        444.00    Sample Median                               1.01%          1134.57     59.81         444.00

This table lists the top 10 MSAs in our sample that have the highest property appreciation rate (measured by the FHFA HPI growth rate) or population growth rate during the
1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000 -2006 and 2007-2011 periods. For each period, we calculate the annualized growth rate of FHFA HPI index and population growth rate. We sort
the 97 MSAs based on these two criteria and report the top 10 in each category for each of the four periods. The table also reports the average population, average GMP, and
the year 2000 population density (offered by the Census) of each of these MSAs during the period.




                                                                                                                                                                                                32
                                                               EXHIBIT 2

                   Property Appreciation Rates and Housing Supply Categorized by Period and by Supply Rigidity

                                                                                         Annualized Appreciation   Annualized housing start/
                                                              Level of Supply Rigidity            Rate               household number
[1] 1983-1989: grouping based on 1983 Q1 population density                                       Mean                      Mean
                                                                       Low                     0.031                   0.082
                                                                      Medium                   0.040                   0.081
                                                                       High                    0.086                   0.056
                                                                     High-Low                  0.055***               -0.025***
[2] 1990-1999: grouping based on 1990 Q1 population density
                                                                       Low                     0.048                    0.091
                                                                      Medium                   0.052                    0.084
                                                                       High                    0.029                    0.051
                                                                     High-Low                 -0.019***                -0.040***
[3] 2000-2006: grouping based on 2000 Q1 population density
                                                                       Low                     0.079                    0.072
                                                                      Medium                   0.060                    0.066
                                                                       High                    0.098                    0.041
                                                                     High-Low                  0.018**                 -0.031***
[4] 2007-2011: grouping based on 2007 Q1 population density
                                                                       Low                    -0.037                    0.021
                                                                      Medium                  -0.022                    0.023
                                                                       High                   -0.030                    0.013
                                                                     High-Low                  0.007                   -0.008***
[5] 1983-2011: grouping based on 1983 Q1 population density
                                                                       Low                     0.030                    0.066
                                                                      Medium                   0.033                    0.062
                                                                       High                    0.045                    0.040
                                                                     High-Low                  0.015*                  -0.026**
[6] 1983-1989: grouping based on WRLURI regulation index
                                                                       Low                     0.040                   0.063
                                                                      Medium                   0.049                   0.078
                                                                       High                    0.069                   0.077
                                                                     High-Low                  0.030***                0.013*
[7] 1990-1999: grouping based on WRLURI regulation index
                                                                       Low                     0.046                    0.075
                                                                      Medium                   0.048                    0.080
                                                                       High                    0.036                    0.070
                                                                     High-Low                 -0.010*                  -0.005
[8] 2000-2006: grouping based on WRLURI regulation index
                                                                       Low                     0.056                    0.057
                                                                      Medium                   0.081                    0.062
                                                                       High                    0.099                    0.059
                                                                     High-Low                  0.043***                 0.002
[9] 2007-2011: grouping based on WRLURI regulation index
                                                                       Low                    -0.015                    0.021
                                                                      Medium                  -0.035                    0.019
                                                                       High                   -0.039                    0.018
                                                                     High-Low                 -0.024***                -0.003
[10] 1983-2011: grouping based on WRLURI regulation
i d                                                                    Low                     0.032                    0.053
                                                                      Medium                   0.035                    0.059
                                                                       High                    0.041                    0.055
                                                                     High-Low                  0.009                    0.002

This table displays property appreciation rates and the housing supply of areas categorized by measures of supply rigidity for the 1983-1989,
1990-1999, 2000-2006, 2007-2011, and 1983-2011 periods. For each period, we stratify MSAs into three groups based on the level of supply
rigidity (high, medium and low) proxied by population density at the beginning of the period or by the WRLURI regulation index. Population
density is the ratio of population and the 2000 land area and WRLURI regulation index is the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index
estimated by Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008). For the difference between the “high” and “low” subsamples, ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                       33
                                              EXHIBIT 3
                           Serial Correlations in Demand Growth Rates

  Panel A: The demand growth rate is measured by the employment change rate
  Variable                                                Employment
                                         Full Sample       Before 2007      After 2007
Intercept                                  0.005*           0.008***        -0.006
Employment(-1)                             0.468***         0.485***         0.384**
Employment(-2)                             0.105***         0.111***         0.079
Employment(-3)                             0.011            0.033           -0.094
Number of observations                     11252             9312            1940

[Joint test]
Employment(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                    0.584***           0.629***           0.370***
Employment(-2)+(-3)                         0.116***           0.144***          -0.014

Panel B: The demand growth rate is measured by the population change rate
Variable                                                   Population
                                        Full Sample       Before 2007          After 2007
Intercept                                0.001**            0.001              0.002**
Population(-1)                           0.836***           0.868***           0.682***
Population(-2)                           0.065              0.061              0.085
Population(-3)                           0.021              0.021              0.019
Number of observations                   11252               9312              1940

[Joint test]
Population(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                   0.922***          0.950***           0.786***
Population(-2)+(-3)                        0.086             0.082              0.104

This table shows the serial correlations in demand growth rates. The dependent variable is the
employment growth rate (denoted as “Employment”) or the population growth rate (denoted as
“Population”). The independent variables are the 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged terms of the
dependent variable. Joint tests report the significance levels of combined selected lagged terms.
Results are estimated from Fama-MacBeth regressions with Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and
* indicate significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10% level, respectively




                                                                                                    34
                                    EXHIBIT 4
    The Effects of MSA Size on the Serial Correlation of Demand Growth Rates

Panel A: Demand growth rate proxied by employment growth rate
Variable                                             Employment
                                     Full Sample     Before 2007               After 2007
Intercept                               0.013***        0.017***               -0.008
Employment(-1)                          0.150***        0.163**                 0.084
Employment(-2)                          0.265***        0.244***                0.361
Employment(-3)                         -0.064          -0.073                  -0.023
GMPsize                                -0.002***       -0.003***                0.001
GMPsize * Employment(-1)                0.104***        0.108***                0.084*
GMPsize * Employment(-2)               -0.055**        -0.051**                -0.074
GMPsize * Employment(-3)                0.026           0.036                  -0.019
Number of observations                 11252             9312                   1940

[Joint test]
Employment(-1)+(-2)                   0.414***                0.408***           0.445
Employment(-1)+(-2)+(-3)              0.350***                0.335***           0.422**
Employment(-2)+(-3)                   0.201***                0.172**            0.339
GMPsize * (Employment(-1)+(-2))       0.049*                  0.057*             0.010
GMPsize * (Employment(-1)+(-2)+(-3)) 0.075***                 0.093***          -0.009
GMPsize * (Employment(-2)+(-3))      -0.029                  -0.015             -0.093

Panel B: Demand growth rate proxied by population growth rate
Variable                                               Population
                                      Full Sample      Before 2007             After 2007
Intercept                               0.002***          0.002**               0.002*
Population(-1)                          0.580***          0.604***              0.465**
Population(-2)                          0.162             0.154                 0.203
Population(-3)                          0.105             0.109                 0.086
GMPsize                                 0.000**           0.000**               0.000
GMPsize * Population(-1)                0.088***          0.092**               0.065*
GMPsize * Population(-2)               -0.049            -0.052                -0.036
GMPsize * Population(-3)               -0.014            -0.013                -0.019
Number of observations                 11252               9312                 1940

[Joint test]
Population(-1)+(-2)                        0.742***           0.758***           0.668**
Population(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                   0.847***           0.867***           0.754***
Population(-2)+(-3)                        0.267**            0.263**            0.289**
GMPsize * (Population(-1)+(-2))            0.039              0.040              0.029
GMPsize * (Population(-1)+(-2)+(-3))       0.025**            0.027***           0.010
GMPsize * (Population(-2)+(-3))           -0.063*            -0.065             -0.055

This table examines the relation between MSA size and the magnitude of serial correlation in the
demand growth rate. Demand is measured as the employment growth rate (denoted as
“Employment”) or the population growth rate (denoted as “Population”). The independent
variables include the 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged terms of the dependent variable, and their
interactions with GMPsize. GMPsize is the MSA size measured using the panel data of the natural
logarithm of GMP (Gross Metropolitan Product). Joint tests report the significance levels of
combined selected lagged terms. Results are estimated from Fama-MacBeth regressions with
Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10%
level, respectively.




                                                                                                    35
                                             EXHIBIT 5
The Effect of Past Property Appreciation Rates on the Growth Rate of Housing Supply

 Variable                                                    Supply growth rate
                                             Full Sample       Before 2007          After 2007
 Intercept                                    15.615***          17.445***            6.833***
 Return(-1)                                   25.638***          27.302***           17.654
 Return(-2)                                    2.485              1.876               5.409
 Return(-3)                                    8.201              9.190               3.454
 Number of observations                       11252               9312                1940

 [Joint test]
 Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                         36.324***          38.367***           26.517***
 Return(-2)+(-3)                              10.685             11.065              8.863

This table reports the effects of 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged property appreciation rates of the
current supply growth rate. The dependent variable is the supply growth rate, proxied by the ratio
of new single-family housing starts to the number of households. The property appreciation rate is
measured by the FHFA HPI growth rate and is denoted as “Return”. Joint tests report the
significance levels of combined selected lagged terms. Results are estimated from Fama-MacBeth
regressions with Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1% level, 5%
level and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                        36
                                         EXHIBIT 6
           The Effects of Population Density or Regulation Index on the Supply Growth Rate

   Panel A: Supply rigidity proxied by population density factor popuden”
    Variable                                               Supply growth rate
                                           Full Sample        Before 2007         After 2007
   Intercept                                 16.121***           17.994***           7.130***
   Return(-1)                                51.967***           57.561***         25.120*
   Return(-2)                                  1.751               1.586             2.540
   Return(-3)                                12.631              12.862            11.526
   Popuden                                    -1.565***           -1.854***         -0.179
   Popuden * Return(-1)                     -45.372***          -53.974***          -4.082
   Popuden * Return(-2)                        7.773               9.674            -1.350
   Popuden * Return(-3)                        2.253               5.227          -12.024
   Number of observations                     11252                 9312             1940

   [Joint test]
   Return(-1)+(-2)                            53.718***          59.147***          27.659**
   Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                       66.349***          72.008***          39.185***
   Return(-2)+(-3)                            14.382             14.448             14.065
   Popuden * (Return(-1)+(-2))               -37.598**          -44.299**            -5.432
   Popuden * (Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3))          -35.345**          -39.072**          -17.456
   Popuden * (Return(-2)+(-3))                10.026             14.901            -13.374

   Panel B : Supply rigidity proxied by regulation index “regindx”
   Variable                                                 Supply growth rate
                                            Full Sample        Before 2007        After 2007
   Intercept                                   15.822***         17.671***          6.946***
   Return(-1)                                  26.440**          28.596**         16.094
   Return(-2)                                   2.540             1.848             5.863
   Return(-3)                                   5.821             6.114             4.416
   Regindx                                      2.430***          2.676***          1.250***
   Regindx * Return(-1)                      -13.061*           -17.384**           7.691*
   Regindx * Return(-2)                         5.503             7.075            -2.042
   Regindx * Return(-3)                         5.496             7.718            -5.169
   Number of observations                    11252                 9312             1940

   [Joint test]
   Return(-1)+(-2)                           28.980***          30.444**           21.957**
   Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                      34.801***          36.557**           26.373***
   Return(-2)+(-3)                            8.361             7.961              10.279
   Regindx * (Return(-1)+(-2))               -7.558             -10.309              5.650
   Regindx * (Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3))          -2.062             -2.591               0.481
   Regindx * (Return(-2)+(-3))               10.999             14.793              -7.211

This table examines the relation between population density and the supply response to price changes. The dependent
variable is the supply growth rate, proxied by the ratio of new single-family housing starts to the number of
households. The property appreciation rate is measured by the FHFA HPI growth rate (denoted as “Return”).
“Popuden” is the population density dummy, which is 1 if the population density (matched to the 2000 land area) of
the MSA is at or higher than the median of the 97 MSAs in the sample in each year. “Regindx" is the Wharton
Residential Land Use Regulatory Index estimated by Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008). The independent variables
include the 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged terms of the property appreciation rate (Return), and their interactions
with the proxies for supply rigidity. Joint tests report the significance levels of combined selected lagged terms.
Results are estimated from Fama-MacBeth regressions with Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10% level, respectively.

                                                                                                                37
                                                                                       EXHIBIT 7
                                                                    Serial Correlations in Property Appreciation Rate


 Panel A: without control variables
 Variable                                                  [I] Return                                Variable                                                 [II] Return
                                       Full Sample         Before 2007       After 2007                                                 Full Sample          Before 2007      After 2007
 Intercept                              0.015***             0.018***         0.002                  Intercept                           0.018***               0.021***      0.005
 Return(-1)                             0.816***             0.831***         0.748***               Return(-1s)                         0.780***               0.812***      0.623***
 Return(-2)                             -0.065              -0.029           -0.239**                Return(-2s)                         -0.061                -0.024         -0.239**
 Return(-3)                             -0.128***           -0.132***        -0.110**                Return(-3s)                         -0.170***             -0.171***      -0.165***
 Number of observations                 11252                 9312            1940                   Number of observations              11252                   9312          1940

 [Joint test]                                                                                        [Joint test]
 Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                    0.624***             0.671***        0.400***               Return(-1s)+(-2s)+(-3s)             0.548***              0.617***        0.219*
 Return(-2)+(-3)                         -0.193***           -0.160***       -0.348**                Return(-2s)+(-3s)                   -0.232***            -0.196***        -0.404***


 Panel B: with the concurrent gross metro product growth rate as a control variable
 Variable                                                 [I] Return                                 Variable                                                 [II] Return
                                     Full Sample         Before 2007       After 2007                                                   Full Sample          Before 2007      After 2007
 Intercept                             -0.001               0.000           -0.006                   Intercept                            0.000                 0.001         -0.005
 Return(-1)                             0.766***            0.775***         0.721***                Return(-1s)                          0.721***              0.748***       0.590***
 Return(-2)                            -0.053              -0.016           -0.232                   Return(-2s)                         -0.043                -0.005         -0.229**
 Return(-3)                            -0.106***           -0.105***        -0.109**                 Return(-3s)                         -0.146***             -0.143***      -0.157***
 Gross metro product                    0.264***            0.275***         0.212***                Gross metro product                  0.309***              0.319***       0.262**
 Number of observations                11252                 9312            1940                    Number of observations              11252                   9312          1940

 [Joint test]                                                                                        [Joint test]
 Return(-1)+(-2)+(-3)                     0.607***            0.654***        0.380***               Return(-1s)+(-2s)+(-3s)              0.532***             0.600***         0.204*
 Return(-2)+(-3)                         -0.159***           -0.121**        -0.341**                Return(-2s)+(-3s)                   -0.189***            -0.148***        -0.386***

This table reports the serial correlations of property appreciation rates. The property appreciation rate is measured by the FHFA HPI growth rate and is denoted as “Return”. In a type [I]
regression, the independent variables include 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged property appreciation rates. In a type [II] regression, the independent variables include 1-year, 2-year and 3-year
lagged property appreciation rates that are further lagged by 1 quarter (therefore, the independent variables are essentially the 5-quarter, 9-quarter and 13-quarter lagged property appreciation
rates). The concurrent gross metropolitan product growth rate is denoted as “Gross metro product”. Joint tests report the significance levels of combined selected lagged terms. Results are
estimated from Fama-MacBeth regressions with Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                              38
                                                                                    EXHIBIT 8
                                                      Factors Affecting the Serial Correlations in Property Appreciation Rates

Panel A: The effect of GMP size “GMPsize”
Variable                                                 [I] Return                           Variable                                       [II] Return
                                    Full Sample          Before 2007    After 2007                                           Full Sample      Before 2007   After 2007
Intercept                            -0.001                 0.000       -0.006                Intercept                       -0.004           -0.003       -0.008
Return(-1)                            0.641***              0.625***     0.717***             Return(-1s)                      0.693***         0.679***     0.760***
Return(-2)                            0.012                 0.004        0.052                Return(-2s)                     -0.058           -0.040       -0.140
Return(-3)                           -0.173**             -0.152        -0.274**              Return(-3s)                     -0.195**         -0.189**     -0.223
GMPsize                               0.000                 0.000        0.000                GMPsize                          0.001            0.001        0.001
GMPsize * Return(-1)                  0.052*                0.062*       0.004                GMPsize * Return(-1s)            0.025            0.038       -0.037
GMPsize * Return(-2)                 -0.028                -0.018       -0.075                GMPsize * Return(-2s)           -0.007           -0.002       -0.030
GMPsize * Return(-3)                  0.017                 0.012        0.042                GMPsize * Return(-3s)            0.012            0.011        0.020
Gross metro product                   0.263***              0.276***     0.200***             Gross metro product              0.303***         0.316***     0.243***
Number of observations               11252                   9312        1940                 Number of observations          11252             9312         1940

[Joint test]                                                                                  [Joint test]
Return(-2)+(-3)                      -0.161                -0.148        -0.222               Return(-2s)+(-3s)                  -0.252**     -0.229**      -0.363
GMPsize*(Return(-2)+(-3))            -0.010                -0.006        -0.033               GMPsize*(Return(-2s)+(-3s))         0.006        0.009        -0.011


Panel B: The effect of population density “popuden”
Variable                                                  [I] Return                          Variable                                       [II] Return
                                    Full Sample           Before 2007   After 2007                                           Full Sample     Before 2007    After 2007
Intercept                            -0.002                -0.001       -0.006                Intercept                       -0.002           -0.002       -0.004
Return(-1)                            0.716***              0.713***     0.732***             Return(-1s)                      0.702***         0.723***     0.603***
Return(-2)                           -0.056                -0.025       -0.203*               Return(-2s)                     -0.054           -0.026       -0.189*
Return(-3)                           -0.095***             -0.087**     -0.133**              Return(-3s)                     -0.142***        -0.129***    -0.206***
Popuden                               0.000                 0.001       -0.003                Popuden                          0.002            0.004       -0.004*
Popuden * Return(-1)                  0.093*                0.121*      -0.040                Popuden * Return(-1s)            0.054            0.075       -0.042
Popuden * Return(-2)                  0.004                 0.022       -0.082                Popuden * Return(-2s)            0.017            0.043       -0.108
Popuden * Return(-3)                 -0.024                -0.039        0.049                Popuden * Return(-3s)           -0.026           -0.053        0.102
Gross metro product                   0.270***              0.282***     0.214***             Gross metro product              0.309***         0.320***     0.257***
Number of observations               11252                  9312         1940                 Number of observations          11252             9312         1940

[Joint test]                                                                                  [Joint test]
Return(-2)+(-3)                       -0.150***            -0.111**      -0.336**             Return(-2s)+(-3s)                  -0.196***    -0.154***     -0.395***
Popuden*(Return(-2)+(-3))            -0.020                -0.017        -0.032               Popuden*(Return(-2)+(-3))          -0.009       -0.009        -0.006


                                                                                                                                                                         39
 Panel C: The effect of regulatory index “regindx”
 Variable                                                  [I] Return                                Variable                                                [II] Return
                                       Full Sample         Before 2007       After 2007                                                 Full Sample          Before 2007      After 2007
 Intercept                               0.000               0.002           -0.006                  Intercept                            0.001                 0.002         -0.005
 Return(-1)                              0.730***            0.730***         0.734***               Return(-1s)                          0.693***              0.709***       0.617***
 Return(-2)                             -0.028               0.013           -0.225**                Return(-2s)                         -0.018                 0.027         -0.233**
 Return(-3)                             -0.094***           -0.093***        -0.104**                Return(-3s)                         -0.136***             -0.134***      -0.146***
 Regindx                                 0.001               0.002           -0.002                  Regindx                              0.002                 0.003         -0.003
 Regindx * Return(-1)                    0.109***            0.121***         0.049                  Regindx * Return(-1s)                0.093***              0.110***       0.016
 Regindx * Return(-2)                   -0.116***           -0.111***        -0.142***               Regindx * Return(-2s)               -0.121***             -0.123***      -0.114**
 Regindx * Return(-3)                    0.011              -0.003            0.077**                Regindx * Return(-3s)                0.021                 0.010          0.073**
 Gross metro product                     0.251***            0.260***         0.210***               Gross metro product                  0.294***              0.302***       0.260***
 Number of observations                 11252                 9312            1940                   Number of observations              11252                   9312          1940

 [Joint test]                                                                                        [Joint test]
 Return(-2)+(-3)                         -0.122**            -0.079          -0.329**                Return(-2s)+(-3s)                   -0.154***            -0.108**         -0.379**
 Regindx * (Return(-2)+(-3))             -0.106***           -0.114***       -0.065                  Regindx * (Return(-2s)+(-3s))       -0.100***            -0.113***        -0.041

This table reports the effect of three factors (gross metropolitan product size, population density, and regulation index) on the serial correlation in property appreciation rates using Equation
(8). The property appreciation rate is measured by the FHFA HPI growth rate and is denoted as “Return”. In a type [I] regression, the independent variables include the 1-year, 2-year and 3-
year lagged property appreciation rates. In a type [II] regression, the independent variables include 1-year, 2-year and 3-year lagged property appreciation rates that are further lagged by 1
quarter (therefore, the independent variables are essentially the 5-quarter, 9-quarter and 13-quarter lagged property appreciation rates). “GMPsize” is the natural logarithm of the GMP level in
each MSA during the quarter. “Popuden” is the population density dummy, which is 1 if the population density (matched to the 2000 land area) of the MSA is at or higher than the median of
the 97 MSAs in the sample in each year. “Regindx” is Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index, estimated by Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008). Gross metro product is a control
variable for property appreciation rate, which is measured as the concurrent growth rate of gross metropolitan product in each MSA. Joint tests report the significance levels of combined
selected lagged terms. Results are estimated from Fama-MacBeth regressions with Newey-West adjustments. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1% level, 5% level and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                                              40
1
    See for example, Corradin and Popov (2012) and Adelino, Schoar and Severino (2013).

2
    Gorton (2009a, 2009b) argues that the fall in housing prices led to the collapse of trust in the credit markets, which

eventually led to the subprime panic in 2008.

3
    See also, Case and Shiller (1989) and Campbell, Davis, Gallin and Martin (2009).

4
    See Stein (1995), Lamont and Stein (1999), and Ortalo-Magné and Rady (2006) for a discussion and evidence that

financial constraints, e.g., down payment requirements, influence owner-occupied housing prices.

5
    The myopia assumption rules out the possibility that someone planning a future move to a booming city buys a

house in advance in anticipation of a price rise. Directly modeling the costs associated with separating housing

investment and consumption choices would considerably complicate our model but would result in similar

implications. However, on the other hand, Beracha and Wintoki (2013) provide evidence that abnormal search

intensity for real estate in a city can help predict the city's future abnormal housing price change. their findings hold

even after they control for momentum in house prices

6
    In related work, Wheaton (1999) develops a model that also incorporates myopic investors and supply lags, to study

the price dynamics in commercial property markets.

7
    Since they also consider positively correlated demand shocks, it is possible to get positive short-term serial

correlation of appreciation rates in their model. However, they argue that a weakness of their calibrated model is its

inability to match the positive serial correlation observed in the data.

8
    It should be noted that Nelson and Plosser (1982) report that the autocorrelations of the annual growth rates of

macroeconomic variables (such as GNP, employment and wages) are significantly positive at 1-year lag and

insignificant over longer horizons. Cochrane (1988) also reports that GNP growth is positively autocorrelated at short

lags and has weak and possibly insignificant negative autocorrelation in the long run.

9
    There is a growing literature that studies the price elasticity of housing supply (see, for example, Mayer and Somerville

(2000), Green, Malpezzi and Mayo (2005), and Wang, Chan and Xu (2012)). These studies report that the change in

the housing supply rates (or levels) is significantly affected by past changes in price.

10
     For a discussion of the repeat sales approach, see Bailey et al. (1963) and Case and Shiller (1987).


                                                                                                                          41
11
     Calhoun (1996) provides a detailed comparison of the trade-offs between using the FHFA price indexes and other

indexes, such as the S&P/Case-Shiller indexes.

12
     We obtain the index from the Wharton Real Estate Research Center

(http://real.wharton.upenn.edu/~gyourko/LandUseSurvey.htm).

13
     The alternative economic indicators that we examine include the business bankruptcy growth rate (obtained from

Moody's Economy.com), the personal bankruptcy growth rate (obtained from Moody's Economy.com) and the per

capita income growth rate (obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis).

14
     Note that for the 1980s, the starting quarter with data is 1983 Q1.

15
     See Quigley (1998) for a discussion of these spillovers and how they might relate to economic growth.

16
     To facilitate the interpretation of the interaction term we represent density with a dummy that is 1 if the population

density (matched to the 2000 land area) of the MSA at a particular quarter is at or higher than the median of the 97

MSAs in this quarter.




                                                                                                                         42
