                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  CONSUMER PRICE SEARCH AND PLATFORM DESIGN IN INTERNET COMMERCE

                                          Michael Dinerstein
                                             Liran Einav
                                           Jonathan Levin
                                           Neel Sundaresan

                                         Working Paper 20415
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20415


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




We appreciate support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the National Science Foundation, the
Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, and the Toulouse Network on Information Technology.
We thank Greg Lewis for helpful comments. Data access for this study was obtained under a contract
between the Stanford authors (Dinerstein, Einav, and Levin) and eBay Research Labs. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w20415.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Michael Dinerstein, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Consumer Price Search and Platform Design in Internet Commerce
Michael Dinerstein, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan
NBER Working Paper No. 20415
August 2014
JEL No. D12,D22,D47,D83,L13,L86

                                            ABSTRACT

Search frictions can explain why the "law of one price" fails in retail markets and why even firms
selling commodity products have pricing power. In online commerce, physical search costs are low,
yet price dispersion is common. We use browsing data from eBay to estimate a model of consumer
search and price competition when retailers offer homogeneous goods. We find that retail margins
are on the order of 10%, and use the model to analyze the design of search rankings. Our model explains
most of the effects of a major re-design of eBay's product search, and allows us to identify conditions
where narrowing consumer choice sets can be pro-competitive. Finally, we examine a subsequent
A/B experiment run by eBay that illustrates the greater difficulties in designing search algorithms
for differentiated products, where price is only one of the relevant product attributes.


Michael Dinerstein                                 Jonathan Levin
Department of Economics                            Stanford University
Stanford University                                Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall                                     579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305                                 Stanford, CA 94305-6072
mdiner@stanford.edu                                and NBER
                                                   jdlevin@stanford.edu
Liran Einav
Stanford University                                Neel Sundaresan
Department of Economics                            eBay Research Labs
579 Serra Mall                                     2065 Hamilton Avenue
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                            San Jose, CA 95125
and NBER                                           nsundaresan@ebay.com
leinav@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Search frictions play an important role in retail markets. They help explain how retailers
maintain positive mark-ups even when they compete to sell identical goods, and why price
dispersion is so ubiquitous. In online commerce, the physical costs of search are much lower
than in traditional o- ine settings. Yet studies of e-commerce routinely have found sub-
stantial price dispersion (Bailey, 1998; Smith and Brynjolfsson, 2001; Baye, Morgan, and
Scholten, 2004; Einav et al., forthcoming). And despite the general view that the internet
has increased retail price competition, we are not aware of a de…nitive study measuring online
mark-ups, or comparing them to current or past o- ine mark-ups.
    Consumers shopping online can use price search engines or compare prices at e-commerce
marketplaces such as eBay or Amazon. For the most part, these platforms want to limit
search frictions and provide consumers with transparent and low prices (Baye and Morgan,
2001). Retailers may have very di¤erent incentives. Many retailers, and certainly those with
no particular cost advantage, would like to di¤erentiate or even “obfuscate” their o¤erings
to limit price competition (Gabaix and Laibson, 2006; Ellison and Ellison, 2009; Ellison
and Wolitzky, 2012). This raises the question of how di¤erent ways of structuring online
search, such as alternative search rankings or displays, a¤ect price competition and consumer
purchasing patterns.
    In this paper, we use a model of consumer search and price competition to estimate
search frictions and online retail margins, and to study the e¤ects of search design. We
estimate the model using browsing data from eBay. A nice feature of internet data is that it
is possible to track exactly what each consumer sees. As a practical matter, consumers often
evaluate only a handful of products, even when there are many competing sellers. With
standard transaction data, incorporating this requires the introduction of a new latent vari-
able, the consumer’s “consideration set”; that is, the set of products the consumer actually
chooses between (e.g. Goeree, 2008). Here, we adopt the consideration set approach, but
use browsing data to recover it.
    We use the model to estimate consumer demand and retail margins, and then to ana-
lyze a large-scale redesign of the search process on eBay. Prior to the redesign, consumers


                                              1
entering a search query were shown individual o¤ers drawn from a larger set of potential
matches, ranked according to a relevance algorithm. The redesign broke consumer search
into two steps: …rst prompting consumers to identify an exact product, then comparing seller
listings of that product head-to-head, ranked (mostly) by price. We discuss in Section 2 how
variations on these two approaches are used by many, if not most, e-commerce platforms.
   To motivate the analysis, we show in Section 3 that across a fairly broad set of consumer
product categories, re-organizing the search process is associated with both a change in pur-
chasing patterns and a fall in the distribution of posted prices. After the change, transaction
prices fell by roughly 5-15% for many products. We also point out that all of these cate-
gories are characterized by a wide degree of price dispersion, and by di¢ culties in accurately
classifying and …ltering relevant products. Despite a very large number of sellers o¤ering
high-volume products, consumers see only a relatively small fraction of o¤ers, and regularly
do not buy from the lowest-price seller. That is, search frictions appear to be prevalent
despite the low physical search costs associated with internet browsing.
   We propose our model of consumer demand and price competition in Section 4, and
estimate it in Section 5 for a speci…c and highly homogeneous product, the Halo Reach video
game. We …nd that even after incorporating limited search, demand is highly price sensitive.
Price elasticities are on the order of -10. We do …nd some degree of consumer preference
across retailers, especially for sellers who are “top-rated,” a characteristic that eBay ‡ags
conspicuously in the search process. We also use the model to decompose the sources of
seller pricing power and the high degree of homogeneous product price dispersion into three
sources: variation in seller costs, perceived seller di¤erentiation, and search frictions.
   We estimate the model using data from before the search redesign. In Section 6, we apply
the model (out-of-sample) to analyze the search redesign. The model can explain, both qual-
itatively and quantitatively, many of the e¤ects of the redesign: a reduction in posted prices,
a shift toward lower-priced purchases, and consequently a reduction in transaction prices.
The redesign had the e¤ect of increasing the set of relevant o¤ers exposed to consumers, and
prioritizing low price o¤ers. We …nd that the latter e¤ect is by far the most important in
terms of increasing price sensitivity and competitive pressure. In fact, we …nd that under the
redesigned selection algorithm that prioritizes low prices, narrowing the number of listings


                                                2
shown to sellers tends to increase, rather than decrease, price competition.
    The …nal section of the paper discusses a randomized A/B experiment that eBay ran
subsequent to the search re-design. The experiment randomized the default search results
presented to consumers. The experiment is not appropriate for testing equilibrium predic-
tions about how sellers adjust prices, as we do in the main part of the paper, but it can
be used to look at consumer purchasing behavior, holding seller behavior …xed. Interest-
ingly, the search design that performed best overall was to start consumers with relevance
results and allow them to browse toward more structured price rankings. We show that the
results can be explained by distinguishing relatively homogenous product categories from
those that include more heterogeneous listings. As one might expect, more structured price
search performed well for the …rst type of products, less well for the latter type.
    Our paper is related to an important literature on search frictions and price competition
that dates back to Stigler (1961). Recent empirical contributions include Hortacsu and
Syverson (2003), Hong and Shum (2006), and Hortacsu et al. (2012). A number of papers
speci…cally have tried to assess price dispersion in online markets (e.g. Bailey, 1998; Smith
and Brynjolfsson, 2001; Baye, Morgan, and Scholten, 2004; Einav et al., forthcoming), to
estimate price elasticities (e.g. Ellison and Ellison, 2009; Einav et al., 2014), or to show
that consumer search may be relatively limited (Malmendier and Lee, 2011). Ellison and
Ellison (2014) propose a model to rationalize price dispersion based on sellers having di¤erent
consumer arrival rates, and use the model to analyze online and o- ine prices for used books.
Their model is natural for thinking about consumer search across di¤erent websites. Fradkin
(2014) and Horton (2014) are two other recent papers that study search design for internet
platforms, in both cases focusing on settings where there is a richer two-sided matching
problem.



2     Search Design in Online Markets
There are at least two dimensions of consumer search in online markets. The …rst is to
guide consumers toward relevant products, either in response to a user query, or through
advertising or product recommendations. The second is to help consumers …nd a retailer


                                              3
o¤ering an attractive price for a product the consumer knows that he wants. For most of this
paper we focus on the latter problem of “price search,”although allowing for the possibility
that consumers may perceive sellers as somewhat di¤erentiated.
   We start in this section by describing how di¤erent online platforms approach the search
problem. Platforms have to identify a relevant set of o¤ers, and present the information to
consumers. Identifying relevant o¤ers is easier when products have well-de…ned SKUs or
catalog numbers. But as we will note below, it is still a di¢ cult problem for platforms that
have tens of thousands of di¤erent listed products. Platforms also take di¤erent approaches
to presenting information. A typical consideration is whether to try to present all the relevant
products in a single ordered list that attempts to prioritize items of highest interest, or try
to classify products into sets of “identical” products, and then order products within each
set based on price or other vertical attributes.
   Figure 1 contrasts the approaches of three prominent e-commerce sites. Each panel shows
the search results that follow a query for “playstation 3.” At the top, Craigslist presents a
list of items that it judges to be relevant, ordered by listing date. The buyer must navigate
what is potentially a long and loosely …ltered list to …nd his ideal match. On the other hand,
because the top listings are recent, the item is more likely to still be available than in lower
listings, which helps to address the fact that Craigslist listings do not necessarily disappear
if the seller stocks out. In the bottom panel, Amazon takes the other extreme. It highlights
a single product model (the 160 GB version) and quotes the lowest price. Buyers can change
the model, or click through to see a list of individual sellers, ordered by price. In the middle
panel, Google Shopping takes a somewhat intermediate approach.
   These approaches to search design illustrate some trade-o¤s. Erring on the side of inclu-
siveness makes it more di¢ cult for a buyer to …nd the lowest price for a speci…c well-de…ned
product. On the other hand, it allows for serendipitous matches, and provides more oppor-
tunities to sellers who may be less professional in categorizing their products. The latter
approach works well for a shopper interested in price comparisons, and would seem to pro-
mote price competition, provided that the platform is able to accurately identify and classify
listings according to the product being o¤ered. At the same time, as Ellison and Ellison
(2009) have highlighted, it may provide sellers with a strong incentive to search for unpro-


                                               4
ductive tactics that avoid head-to-head price competition.
       The redesign of eBay’s search process is interesting because it allows for a comparison
of these approaches, as shown in Figure 2. The top panel shows eBay’s traditional listings
page. It is generated by an algorithm that …rst …lters listings based on query terms, and
then presents the listings according to a ranking order. The default is a relevance ranking
that eBay calls Best Match.1 Users can change the sort order or re…ne their search in various
ways. Unlike some search results on the internet, the Best Match algorithm traditionally
has not been tailored to individual users, nor did it consider price explicitly.2 While it
may seem strange not to use price as an explicit ranking factor, it is less surprising when
one appreciates the di¢ culty of …ltering the set of products. For example, re-sorting the
displayed page on price would have yielded cheap accessories (e.g. cables or replacement
buttons or controllers).
       In 2011, eBay introduced an alternative two-stage search design. A buyer …rst sees the
relevant product models (e.g. a user who searches for “iPhone”sees “Black iPhone 4s 16GB
(AT&T)”and other models). The buyer then clicks on the model to see a product page with
speci…c listings, shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2.3 The product page has a prominent
“Buy Box” that displays the top-rated seller with the lowest posted price (plus shipping).
Then there are two columns of listings, one for auctions and one for posted prices. The
posted price listings are ranked in order of price plus shipping (and the …rst listing may be
cheaper than the Buy Box if the lowest-price seller is not top-rated). The auction listings are
ranked so that the auction ending soonest is on top. We will not focus on auctions, which
represent 33% of the transactions for the products on which we focus.
   1
      When eBay was predominantly an auction platform, it sorted listings in order of their ending time, with
listings set to expire soonest at the top of the page. This ordering is still used for auction results, but eBay
introduced the more multi-dimensional Best Match ordering in 2008.
    2
      At various time, the Best Match algorithm has incorporated price or attempted more tailoring with
respect to individual users, but it did not during the period we study. However, it does incorporate factors
that may be correlated with prices. For instance, if Best Match moved sellers with high conversion rates up
in the search, and these sellers are likely to have low prices, then Best Match results may e¤ectively prioritize
low prices.
    3
      The concept of a product page existed on eBay earlier, but its design was very di¤erent and it was
di¢ cult to …nd, so that only a small minority of users ever viewed it.




                                                       5
3         E¤ect of Platform Change on Search and Prices
To help motivate the model and the analysis below, we start by presenting some statistics
from before and after the search redesign. The new product page was introduced on May
19, 2011.4 However, the traditional listing page remained the default view for buyers. The
new product page became the default presentation of search results for …ve large categories
— cell phones, digital cameras, textbooks, video games, and video game systems — over a
one-week period from June 27, 2011 to July 2, 2011. The traditional Best Match results
were still accessible to buyers, so the best way to view the change is probably to think of
buyers as now having access to two types of search results, and being nudged toward the
product page.
        Table 1 shows statistics for these …ve categories in the period before the product page
was introduced (April 6 to May 18) and the period after the introduction was completed
(August 1 to September 20). We drop the intermediate period during which the product
page was available, but not the default. We also exclude the month of July to allow time for
sellers to respond to the platform redesign. The sample period covers nearly half a year, so
one potential concern is that there may have been changes in the set of products available,
especially in the categories with shorter product life cycles. To deal with this, we restrict
attention to the ten products in each category that were most commonly transacted in the
week before the product page became the default. As an example, a typical product in the
cell phone category is the black, 16GB iPhone 4 for use with AT&T. We also show statistics
for the narrower product category of iPhone 4.
        Several patterns are clear in the data. There are many listings for each product. The
average number of listings ranges from 16 to 41 across the …ve categories. There is also
remarkable variation in prices. The average ratio of the 75th percentile price to the 25th
percentile price is 1.22 in cell phones, 1.32 in digital cameras, and higher in the other cate-
gories. The extreme prices, especially on the high end, are even more dramatic. Consumers
generally do not purchase at the lowest price. In the period before the redesign the average
purchase price often was around the 25-40th percentile of the price distribution. As an ex-
    4
  eBay ran a small pilot in September 2010 and implemented the product page for the GPS, DVD, and
MP3 categories. These categories are not included in our subsequent analyses.


                                                 6
ample, in the digital camera category, consumers pay on average around 18% more than if
they had selected the 10th percentile price.
       The comparison between the two periods is also informative. With one exception (video
game systems), transacted prices fell in every category after the new product page was
introduced. The fall was relatively small in the cell phone and video game categories (2.1%
and 7.7%, respectively), and larger in digital cameras and textbooks (15.7% and 15.9%).
The decrease does not appear to be driven by a general time trend. The qualitative results
remain similar when we control for product-speci…c (linear) time trends. In part, the drop
in transacted prices re‡ects a fall in the posted prices that were being o¤ered. Posted prices
fell in every category (again, with the exception of video game systems), by between 0.9%
and 17.7%.
       Several statistics are suggestive of changes in consumer search. In every category except
one, consumers after the redesign purchased items that were cheaper relative to the current
distribution of prices. The share of purchases from top-rated sellers also increased markedly
for many of the products. Both of these results seem fairly natural. The redesigned search
selects and sorts listings by price, focusing attention on the low-price o¤ers, and the product
page Buy Box especially promotes the low-priced top-rated seller.5
       Figure 3 presents a …nal piece of descriptive evidence, that is also consistent with a change
in consumer search patterns after the redesign. The …gure is constructed using browsing data
for a single product, the video game Halo Reach, which we use to estimate our model below.
The top panel shows the distribution of relevant Halo Reach o¤ers that were displayed to
each consumer following a targeted search, before and after the change in the search design.
The size of the consumer “consideration set”increased sharply. The second panel shows the
distribution of the total number of clicks made in a browsing session, for consumers who
ended up purchasing. After the search redesign, consumers generally clicked fewer times on
their way to a purchase, consistent with a more streamlined process.
       These results provide a descriptive and qualitative sense of the overall e¤ects of the
platform change. After the change, transaction prices fell for many products. This appears
   5
    As mentioned, we focus on the August-September “After” period, because it seemed plausible that the
e¤ect of the change on seller’s pricing may take some time to play out. The July results are generally inter-
mediate, with most of the change in TRS transactions, and price percentile changes occurring immediately.


                                                     7
to a have resulted from both a change in purchasing patterns and a fall in the distribution
of posted prices. In the next section we develop and estimate a more complete model of
the underlying economic primitives. The model allows us to explain the degree of price
dispersion and the purchasing patterns in the data, and separate the demand and pricing
incentive e¤ects of the platform change, as well as to evaluate alternative platform changes
not present in the data.



4     Model
In this section, we describe a model of consumer search and price competition. Below,
we estimate the model’s parameters using data from a single product market. We use the
estimates to quantify search frictions, the importance of retailer and listing heterogeneity,
the size of retailer margins, and the way that the platform re-design a¤ected these quantities.
    The model’s ingredients are fairly standard. Each potential buyer considers a speci…c
and limited set of products. He or she then chooses the most preferred. This is modeled as
a traditional discrete choice problem. Sellers set prices in a Nash Equilibrium, taking into
account buyer demand. The role of the platform is to shape consumer search. Rather than
considering all available products, consumers consider the ones suggested by the platform.
We take advantage of detailed browsing histories to explicitly collect data on each buyer’s
consideration set. In this context, search rankings a¤ect the set of considered products, and
hence consumer choices, and indirectly, the incentives for price competition.


4.1    Consumer Demand

We consider a market in which, at a given point in time, there are a large number of di¤erent
sellers o¤ering a given product. In our current speci…cation, we allow sellers to vary only
by their price p and by whether they are top-rated seller (denoted T RS). We attribute any
additional di¤erentiation to a logit error. We assume that consumer i’s utility from seller j
is given by
                        uij =   0   +   1 pj   +   2 T RSj   +   3 pj T RSj   + "ij ;      (1)



                                                     8
where   ij   is distributed Type I extreme value and is independent of the seller’s price and
T RS status.
   The main distinction of the model comes in analyzing the consideration set. The consid-
eration set is denoted by Ji , such that Ji   J , where J is the set of all available o¤erings on
the platform. We assume that the outside good, good 0, which represents either not buying
the product or buying it via another sales channel or by auction, is also part of the consid-
eration set. It has utility ui0 = "i0 , where "i0 is also an independent Type I extreme value
random variable. Consumers choose the utility-maximizing option in their consideration set.
   To estimate the demand parameters, we rely on our browsing data to identify the consid-
eration sets of a large sample of buyers, and their resulting choices. Speci…cally, we assume
the consideration set includes all the listings on the page seen by the consumer following
his last search query. This is usually the listings page prior to the platform re-design, and
the product page afterwards. With an observable consideration set for each buyer, demand
estimation is straightforward using the familiar multinomial logit choice probabilities.


4.2     Consideration Sets

In order to analyze pricing decisions, and make “out-of-sample”predictions, we also develop
a simple econometric model of how consideration sets are formed. To do this, we assume that
consumer i observes the o¤ers of Li sellers, where Li is random. We estimate its distribution
directly from the data, that is, by measuring the frequency with which observed consideration
sets include a given number of relevant listings. We assume that Li is independent of any
particular buyer characteristics, or the distribution of prices.
   Which sellers make it into the consideration set? Prior to the re-design, we noted that
price did not factor directly into search ranking, but that after the re-design, it played a
predominant role. In practice, the complexity of the search ranking and …ltering algorithms,
which must be general enough to work for every possible search query and product, as
well as factors such as which server provides the results, adds less purposeful (and perhaps
unintentional) elements to what results are shown.
   To capture this, we adopt a stochastic model of how sellers are selected onto the displayed
page. Speci…cally, we assume that products are sampled from the set of available products

                                                9
Jt , such that each product j 2 Jt is associated with a sampling weight of

                                                        pj     mink2Jt (pk )
                                 wj = exp                                        ;                       (2)
                                                             stdk2Jt (pk )

and consumer i’s consideration set is then constructed by sampling Li products from Ji ,
without replacement. This implies that the consideration set is drawn from a Wallenius’
non-central hypergeometric distribution. We assume that prior to the platform change o¤ers
enter the consideration set independent of their price, so                     = 0. For the period after the
platform change when the product page became available, we expect                         > 0 so that lower
price items are disproportionately selected into the consideration set. Below we estimate
using the browsing data that records the listings that appeared on pages buyers actually
visited.


4.3      Pricing Behavior

We model seller pricing using a standard Nash Equilibrium assumption. Each seller sets its
price to solve
                                         max(pj              cj )Dj (pj ):                               (3)
                                            pj


Here Dj (pj ) is the probability a given buyer at period t selects j’s product, given the set
of o¤erings J . From a seller’s perspective, Dj (pj ) depends on how consumers form their
consideration sets, as well as the choices they make given their options. Using the logit
choice probabilities, we have:

                     X            exp ( 0 +      1 pj   +     2 T RSj
                                                               + 3 pj T RSj )
      Dj (pj ) =                 P                                                 Pr (JjJ ) :           (4)
                   J: j2J J
                              1 + k2J exp (      0 + 1 pk + 2 T RSk + 3 pk T RSk )



   Another important consideration here is the set (J ) of competing items that the seller
has in mind when it sets its price. We assume that the seller optimizes against the set of
competing items and prices that are available on eBay during the approximately one month
(either “before” or “after”) period considered. One argument for this assumption is that
in principle sellers can change their price at any time for no cost, so that current listings
are the most relevant. Of course, in practice sellers do not change prices that often, so one

                                                         10
could reasonably consider price-setting decisions that take into account the (stochastic) set
of competing products over the entire lifetime of the listing. This is beyond the scope of the
current paper; see Backus and Lewis (2012) and Knoep‡e (in progress) for related work.
   To understand the seller’s pricing incentives, it is useful to write Dj (pj ) = Aj (pj ) Qj (pj ),
where Aj is the probability that the listing enters the consideration set given pj and J , and
Qj is the probability that the consumer purchases item j conditional on being in the listing
set. With this notation, the optimal price pj satis…es:

                                                     1                        1
                                 pj          1                    1
                                    =   1+               =    1+                  ;                   (5)
                                 cj          D                   A+     Q


where       D,   A,    Q   are respective price elasticities. When          > 0, reducing price increases
demand in two ways: by making it more likely that the seller ends up in the consideration
set (   A   < 0) and by making it more likely that the consumer picks the seller, conditional
on the seller being in the choice set (          Q   < 0). Increasing       intensi…es the …rst e¤ect. In
addition, increasing          e¤ectively faces each seller with tougher competition conditional on
making it into the consideration set, by reducing the likely prices of the other sellers who
are selected.


4.4         Discussion

The model we have chosen has only a handful of parameters. A main reason is that we
wanted something easy to estimate and potentially “portable”across products, but yet with
enough richness to be interesting. The assumptions we have chosen relate fairly closely to
some of the classic search models in the literature. For example, in Stahl’s (1989) model there
are two types of consumers: consumers who (optimally) sample a single o¤er completely at
random, and consumers who sample all the o¤ers. This corresponds to having L 2 f1; jJ jg
and     = 0. Stahl’s model has no product di¤erentiation and the pricing equilibrium is in
mixed strategies, but it has very intuitive properties. For instance, if more consumers have
L = 1, equilibrium prices are higher. Consideration set sizes have the same e¤ect in our
model with            = 0. The same need not be true with             > 0. For instance, suppose that
sellers have identical cost and none are top-rated. As           ! 1, consideration sets are selected

                                                         11
purely on the basis of price. Then having L = 1 for all consumers creates perfect Bertrand
competition, whereas if L = jJ j we have a symmetric logit demand model with consequent
mark-ups.
        There are several obvious directions in which our model can be extended and we have
explored some of them. One is to allow for more heterogeneity among sellers or consumers.
Including more seller heterogeneity seems unlikely to change the model’s performance very
much. It might be more interesting to distinguish between price-elastic “searchers” and
price-inelastic “convenience” shoppers, as in Stahl (1989) or Ellison (2005). We also have
not focused on search rank. In their study of a price search engine, Ellison and Ellison
(2009) …nd page order, especially …rst position, to be very important, and it is perceived to
be very important in sponsored search advertising. We have estimated versions of our model
that include page order, but decided not to focus on these versions. One reason is that the
e¤ect of page order in our data seems to be far less dramatic than in sponsored search. The
estimates also are much harder to interpret, a signi…cant drawback given the modest increase
in explanatory power.6



5         Empirical Estimates
We now describe the data we use to estimate the model parameters, and the parameter
estimates.


5.1        Estimation Sample

For this part of the paper, we focus on a single, well-de…ned product: the popular Microsoft
Xbox 360 video game, Halo Reach. This video game is one in a series of Halo video games.
It was released in September 2010. Microsoft originally set an o¢ cial list price of $59.99,
which it shortly dropped to $39.99. We chose this speci…c game because a large number of
units transact on eBay, and because it had a relatively stable supply and demand during our
    6
    One reason for this is that, to the extent that rank and price are correlated, it is somewhat challenging
to identify the two terms separately. Another issue is that pages tend to include many “irrelevant” items
(accessories, etc.) as well as auctions, which makes for many complicated modeling decisions in terms of
whether to include absolute rank, or relative rank among “relevant” listings, or some mixture of the two.


                                                     12
observation period of Spring-Summer 2011. The prices of many consumer electronics on the
platform exhibit a time trend, usually starting high and falling quickly over the product life-
cycle. Others have a range of characteristics that vary across listings, complicating demand
and supply estimation.
       The data for the analysis come directly from eBay. They include all listing-level char-
acteristics as well as individual user searches. We can observe every aspect of the search
process, including what the user saw and her actions. We use data from two periods: the
“before” period from April 6 until May 18, 2011, and the “after” period, which we de…ne
to be August 1 until September 20, 2011.7 The search data consist of all visits to the Halo
Reach product page as well as all visits to the standard search results page derived from
query terms that include the words “xbox” (or “x-box”), “halo,” and “reach.” We drop
searches or product page visits that do not result in at least one click on a Halo Reach item.8
This results in 1; 527 visits to the search results page (1; 297 of them in the pre-period) and
3; 950 visits to the product page (190 in the pre-period).9
       As search results often include extraneous results while the product page only shows
items that are listed under “Halo Reach”in eBay’s catalog, we identify listings as the Halo
Reach video game if eBay catalogued them as such. We also visually inspected each listing’s
title to verify that the listing is for just the video game. Illustrating the di¢ culty of precisely
…ltering listings, even after we restrict attention to listings catalogued as Halo Reach, we
found that 12% of listings were not Halo Reach-related, and 33% were not the game itself
(e.g. they were accessories). Items in this second group often seemed to have very low or
high prices, so we dropped all listings with prices below $15 or above $100, in case we failed
to identify them based on listing title alone. We also restrict the analysis to new items, listed
either with a posted price, or as an auction but with a Buy-It-Now price.10
   7
      As before, we drop July 2-31, 2011, when the product page was the default because our descriptive
analysis in Section 3 suggested that price adjustment did not happen immediately and we want to use an
equilibrium model for prediction. The predictive …t is similar for demand if we include July, and a bit worse
for pricing.
    8
      This choice mainly a¤ects the de…nition of the outside option in the demand model. Results are largely
similar when we use alternative de…nitions of the outside option.
    9
      The “product page”in the pre-period was more rudimentary than one introduced on May 19 (see footnote
3), and relatively few people navigated to it.
  10
      According to eBay, “new” items must be unopened and usually still have the manufacturer’s sealing or
original shrink wrap. The auction listings with a Buy-It-Now price have a posted price that is available until


                                                     13
    Finally, as mentioned earlier, sellers are allowed to change a listing’s price even after
it has been listed. When this happens, we always observe whether there has been a price
change, and we observe the price if there was a transaction, or is a user in our search data
clicked on the item, or if it was the …nal posted price of the listing. This leaves a relatively
small number of cases where we have a listing for which we know the price was changed but
do not observe the exact price because the listing was ignored during this period.11


5.2     Descriptive Statistics

Table 2 reports summary statistics for the before and after periods. The numbers of sellers
and listings are slightly lower in the after period, and more of the listings come from top-
rated sellers. These di¤erences, particularly the increase in top-rated seller listings, could
be a consequence of the platform change. In addition, the mean and median list prices both
drop by about $2 in the after period, which is consistent with the earlier results on a broader
set of products in Section 3, and with the hypothesis that competitive pressure increased
after the platform change.
    The bottom panel in Table 2 shows statistics on searches. Consumers saw lower prices
in the after period, and a larger fraction of searches resulted in purchases (13.0% compared
to 10.3%). Recall that in Figure 3, displayed earlier, we already showed that there was a
signi…cant increase in the number of relevant listings consumers saw after a search. We also
showed in Figure 3 that eventual purchasers seem to have had an easier time getting to the
point of sale: eventual purchasers had to click fewer times after the platform change.


5.3     Model Estimates

To estimate the parameters of the model, we use the data on consumer choices and con-
sideration set sizes to estimate the demand parameters, and then impose an assumption of
optimal pricing to back out the implied marginal costs of each seller.
the …rst bid has been made. We only consider these listings during the period prior to the …rst bid.
  11
     For 89% of the listings in the data, the price is never missing. For the remaining 11% the price is missing
during some of the time in which they are active. We use these listings for estimation when their prices are
known, but drop them from the analysis when the price is unknown.




                                                      14
   Estimating the demand parameters is straightforward. As described earlier, we have a
standard logit demand with individual-level data and observed individual-speci…c consid-
eration sets. We estimate the demand parameters using maximum likelihood, restricting
attention only to consumer data from the before period. The results appear in the …rst
column of Table 3. The top-rated seller (TRS) indicator is quite important. It is equivalent
to nearly a $10 price discount (o¤ an average price of less than $40!). Recall that in the
before period, there is no advantage given to TRS sellers that is analogous to the Buy Box
introduced in the search re-design, so this e¤ect is really very large. Price also has a very
large e¤ect. The price elasticity implied by the estimates is about -10. It is even higher
(closer to -13) for TRS sellers. The pro…t margin implied by these estimates is about 10%:
$3.23 for TRS sellers and just over $4 for other sellers.
   The next step is to estimate the consideration set model. We obtain the empirical distri-
bution of Li (the number of items sampled by a consumer) directly from the browsing data,
and separately for the before and after periods (see Figure 3). We also use the browsing
data to estimate the sampling parameter        in equation (2) that determines the extent to
which cheaper listings are more likely to enter the results page. For the before period, we
assumed    = 0. For the after period, we estimate      using maximum likelihood and obtain an
estimate of 0.81 (with a standard error of 0.18). This implies that a ten percent reduction
in the posted price would, on average, make the listing 29% more likely to be part of a
consumer’s consideration set.
   The last step is to estimate seller costs. From the seller’s optimization problem, we have:

                                                  Djt (pj )
                                      cj = pj +    0
                                                            ;                               (6)
                                                  Djt (pj )

where Djt depends on the search process and consumer choices. We use the estimated
demand parameters from the …rst estimation stage, combined with the consideration set
                                      0
model to obtain estimates of Djt and Djt for every seller in the “before” period. Then we
use the …rst order condition above to back out the cost cj that rationalizes each seller’s price
as optimal.
   The implied cost distribution is presented in Figure 4, which also shows the optimal


                                              15
pricing functions for both TRS and non-TRS sellers. We estimate a fair amount of dispersion
in seller costs. The 25th percentile of the cost distribution is just slightly under $30; the 75th
percentile is $40. There are also a considerable number of sellers who post extremely high
prices. Thirteen percent post prices above $50, and …ve percent post prices above $60! To
rationalize these prices, we infer that these most extreme sellers all have costs about $59.12
We discuss the high price sellers in more detail in Section 6.3.



6        Applying the Model
In this section, we use the estimated model to evaluate the search redesign and compare
the model predictions to the data. Then we apply the model to consider various ways of
reducing search frictions and to identify the sources of online price dispersion.


6.1       Changing the Search Design

We use our estimates to assess the introduction of the product page. To do this, we combine
our demand and cost estimates from the before period, with our estimates of the considera-
tion set process from the after period. We use this combined model to calculate equilibrium
prices and expected sales with the post-redesign search process, assuming that consumer
choice behavior and the seller cost distribution remains unchanged. The results from this
exercise are reported in Table 4, and Figures 5 and 6. In particular, Table 4 shows model-
based estimates of optimal seller margins for scenarios where we impose speci…c e¤ects of
the redesign, as well as the full redesign.
       A main e¤ect of the platform change was to make demand more responsive to seller
prices. Figure 5 provides a visual illustration of this change in incentives. It shows the
demand curves from the model, for TRS and non-TRS sellers, for both periods. Demand
became considerably more elastic in the after period, with the largest e¤ect for TRS sellers.
  12
    We also investigated whether the implied cost distribution was sensitive to our assumptions about the
consideration set. Interestingly, it is not. Re-estimating the model under the assumption that consumers
consider the entire set of available items leads to a similar cost distribution. This likely re‡ects the fact that
prior to the platform re-design, the observed consideration sets are quite representative, in terms of listed
prices, of the full set of listings.



                                                       16
The implication is that seller margins should fall. Comparing the top and bottom rows of
Table 4 shows that the median optimal margin fell from $3.23 (or 9% of price) to $2.70 for
TRS sellers, and from $4.06 to $3.23 for non-TRS sellers, implying roughly a twenty percent
fall in pro…t margins.
    Several factors may have contributed to the shift in seller incentives. As we showed in
Figure 3, there was a noticeable increase in the size of consideration sets, and buyers had
a much smaller chance of seeing just a single relevant listing. In addition, price became an
important factor in entering the consideration set. With our estimate of   = 0:81 for the after
period, a ten percent price reduction increases the odds of appearing in the consideration
set from 0.24 to 0.31, providing sellers with a new incentive to reduce prices. Finally, there
was an increase in the number of available listings, which may or may not have been directly
related to the platform change.
    To assess the relative importance of these e¤ects, we start with the model from the before
period and separately impose the increase in listings, the increase in consideration set size,
and the increase in . In each case, we compute the new pricing equilibrium. The middle
rows of Table 4 report the median equilibrium margin for TRS and non-TRS sellers for each
of the three scenarios, and also the predicted buyer purchase rate. Making price a factor
in selecting what listings to display (i.e. increasing ) has by far the largest e¤ect on seller
incentives and purchase rates. The increased size of consideration sets has only a small e¤ect
on equilibrium margins and purchase rates. The same is true for the increase in the number
of sellers.
    These calculations are based on model estimates obtained primarily using the “before”
data. A natural question is whether the model’s predictions for the after period are similar to
the outcomes we actually observe. Figure 6 compares seller prices. It plots the distribution
of prices in the before period (where the model matches the data by construction), and then
both the distribution of prices for the after period predicted by the model, and observed in
the data. The predicted and observed distributions are reasonably close. So at least for seller
prices, the model’s out-of-sample predictions match quite well with what happened. It is
also possible to compare the consumer purchase rates predicted by the model, and those that
we observe after the redesign. These are shown in the bottom rows of Table 3. They also


                                              17
are reasonably close (the model predicts 12.3%, which is a bit less than the 13.0% observed
in the data).


6.2    Search Frictions and Price Dispersion

At the beginning of the paper, we posed the question of why internet prices for homogeneous
goods are so dispersed, despite the seemingly low search costs. Prices in our sample, as in
earlier studies, exhibit a high degree of dispersion. The estimated model provides a way
for us to understand the source of this dispersion, and also the source of seller margins.
In particular, the model o¤ers three ways in which outcomes might di¤er from the sim-
plest homogeneous good Bertrand pricing environment: dispersion in costs; search frictions
that provide market power and perhaps equilibrium price dispersion; and perceived seller
di¤erentiation that supports positive seller margins.
   We analyze these factors in Table 5. The Table compares equilibrium outcomes for
variations of the model that di¤er along two dimensions. Across the columns, we vary the
degree of search frictions. In the …rst and second columns, we consider the before and after
search regimes. In the third column, we assume that all Halo Reach listings on the platform
enter each consumer’s consideration set. Across the two rows, we vary the degree of product
di¤erentiation. The “di¤erentiation” model assumes the estimated logit demand, in which
each seller enjoys some market power. In the “limited di¤erentiation” model, we assume a
nested logit demand structure in which the outside good is one nest and all sellers are part
of a second nest. Speci…cally, the "ij in our logit demand model (1) becomes    ig + (1    ) "ij ,
where all sellers share the same    ig ,   whose distribution depends on    (see Berry, 1994).
The “limited di¤erentiation” model assumes           = 0:2, which reduces the weight on the
seller-speci…c error and make the products much less di¤erentiated than the baseline logit
“di¤erentiation”case, which corresponds to        = 0.
   In all six scenarios, we …x the distribution of seller costs (as shown in Figure 4), and draw
costs for each seller on the platform (assuming 19 sellers, which is the mean from the before
period). Sellers are assumed to set prices knowing the assumptions about consumer search
and choice behavior, but without knowledge of the exact realization of opponents’costs. To
solve for equilibrium prices and mark-ups, we start from the original price distribution and

                                                18
update sellers’ prices one-by-one using their …rst-order conditions with the counterfactual
model and the new price distribution. We continue iterating over sellers until every seller’s
…rst-order condition simultaneously holds.
   The results can be used to understand both the source of seller margins and the sources
of price dispersion. First consider the case with no search costs and limited product di¤er-
entiation (top right). In this scenario, sellers sustain positive margins only because there
is some possibility that they have a strictly lower cost than all competing sellers (as in the
incomplete information Bertrand pricing model of Spulber, 1995). The median mark-up is
less than $1, and the average transaction price is $24. There is considerable dispersion in
posted prices, stemming from the estimated variation in seller costs. However, transacted
prices are much more concentrated.
   As we incorporate search frictions (moving from right to left on the top row), we see that
search frictions lead to substantially increased mark-ups, and somewhat higher transaction
prices and price dispersion. Seller di¤erentiation, however, is an even more potent force for
pricing power and (transaction) price dispersion. For any assumption about search frictions,
increased seller di¤erentiation leads to higher markups, higher prices and greater price dis-
persion. Moreover, even with no search frictions prices are higher and more dispersed than
in any of the limited di¤erentiation cases. Interestingly, once seller di¤erentiation is present,
the “after” search regime actually leads to more intense price competition, and somewhat
less price dispersion, than is present with no search frictions. The reason, of course, is that
the (limited) consideration set is selected with signi…cant weight on price, whereas given a
choice set, consumers focus on the idiosyncratic match (the "ij ) as well as price.


6.3    Discussion and Extensions

We considered a number of other permutations of the model. In one exercise, we investigated
the importance of obfuscation and the ability of the platform to …lter less relevant listings.
As mentioned earlier, it is common to see eBay search results that do not perfectly match
the item that the potential buyer likely was interested in. For example, a search for iPhone
may show some iPhone covers or chargers, or other accessories. The case is similar with
Halo Reach. We examined the consequences of more perfect …ltering by increasing the size

                                               19
of the consideration sets Li , and recomputing the pricing equilibrium. These results are not
reported, but we found the e¤ects were not large, and in fact prices (and margins) are slightly
higher compared to the “after”search regime. This is because having a larger consideration
set has two e¤ects. One e¤ect is the increase in competition, which pushes sellers to lower
prices. The second e¤ect is that it becomes easier to enter the consideration set, reducing
the incentive to price low as a way to become visible. The latter e¤ect (slightly) dominates.
   We also investigated the extent to which observed price dispersion results from dispersion
in seller margins rather than dispersion in costs. Recall that in traditional search models
such as Stahl (1989), all of the dispersion in prices comes from variation in margins, and
in equilibrium the price elasticity of (residual) demand is determined so that sellers are
indi¤erent across a wide range of prices. An empirical implication of this equilibrium is
that (residual) demand must be (very) log-convex: that is, shaped so that cost increases are
passed through into prices more than one-for-one (Weyl and Fabinger, 2013). We considered
generalizations of our logit demand model that allow for log-convexity, but consistently
obtained estimates consistent with log-concave demand. With this type of curvature, optimal
margins are lower for higher cost sellers (see Figure 4), so that equilibrium price dispersion
is in fact less pronounced than the underlying cost dispersion.
   As a third exercise related to price dispersion, we also explored at some length a puzzling
feature of the data noted above, namely the presence of very high price listings. This
phenomenon is not speci…c to our data. A cursory glance at many e-commerce websites
(eBay, Amazon, etc.) often reveals an upper tail of outrageous prices. Our econometric
model rationalizes high prices by imputing high seller costs, but these high costs alternatively
can be viewed as a puzzle. We found the following calculation illustrative because it separates
the issue from the particular assumptions of our model. Using all the listings in our “before”
data (N=270), we estimated the probability of sale as a function of the listing’s “e¤ective”
posted price (equal to the posted price for non-TRS sellers and adjusted down in dollar terms
using our utility estimates for TRS sellers). We did this ‡exibly using a local polynomial
regression to obtain the demand estimate shown in Figure 7. The Figure shows that listings
priced above $41 — which constitute thirty-…ve percent of the listings — sell with virtually
zero probability. Using the same demand curve one can calculate that any price above $41


                                              20
is dominated by prices between $35 and $41 provided that cost is less than $34.13 So these
sellers, if they are pricing optimally, must have costs above $34. Yet twenty-…ve percent of
the sellers in our data have posted prices below $34, going as low as 18.95, and presumably
even lower costs.
       So even abstracting from our speci…c parametric assumptions, it seems di¢ cult to ratio-
nalize high prices without a great deal of cost dispersion or an alternative behavioral model
for high-price sellers. To explore the latter, we looked for seller characteristics that might be
correlated with setting high prices or equivalently having high imputed costs. The results
are in Table 6. Sellers who have been on the platform for more years are less likely to set
high prices. Several measures that might be viewed as proxies for “professionalism” (being
top-rated, o¤ering free shipping, using posted prices) also are negatively correlated with
high prices. But the relationships are rather noisy, and other measures such as being highly
active as a seller are not predictive. Table 6 does show that high-price sellers also have more
Halo Reach listings, suggesting that these sellers may be experimenting or using high-price
listings to frame buyer expectations. However, we …nd little support for these hypotheses:
the multi-listing high-price sellers typically do not also set low price listings, nor do they
change their prices. Therefore, while we view the high-end prices as puzzling, we lack a
neat behavioral explanation, and view our strategy of imputing high costs as a reasonable
solution for our current purposes.



7        A/B Experiment
There is an interesting epilogue to the search redesign. In the summer of 2012, as we were
working on this paper, eBay ran an A/B experiment in which users were randomly assigned
to be shown either product page or Best Match results in response to a search query (or
more precisely, to search queries for which a product page existed).14 The experiment,
which we were not involved in, was run on 20 percent of the site’s tra¢ c. After being
  13
     Recall that given a demand curve D (p) a price p will dominate a price p0 > p for a seller with cost c so
        pD(p) p0 D (p0 )
long as D(p) D(p0 ) > c.
  14
     The randomization occurred at the level of a user session. A user session ends if the browser is closed
or the user is inactive for at least 30 minutes.



                                                     21
shown initial results, users could browse to the other type of listing. So whereas the initial
redesign introduced the product page and steered users toward it, the experiment tested
whether conditional on both types of results being available, it was better to start users with
relevance results.
       The experimental results are interesting, and perhaps surprising in light of the initial
success of the product page. A starting point is that the experiment did succeed in steering
users toward particular results. For users assigned to the product page default, 3.45% of all
sessions included a product page visit, compared to 1.87% for users with the Best Match
default. A straight comparison of the two user groups, focusing on products for which the
product page was feasible, showed that the Best Match group had a higher purchase rate:
0.280% versus 0.267%, with a t-statistic of 10.75 on the di¤erence. The Best Match group
also had slightly higher average transacted prices: $53.35 versus $52.23, with the di¤erence
being only marginally signi…cant (t-stat of 1.85). Subsequent to the experiment, eBay made
the Best Match results the default view for searchers.15
       To explore why the purchase rate was higher for the Best Match group (despite slightly
higher average prices paid), we collected data on all purchases from the experimental user
sessions, for the period July 25, 2012 to August 30, 2012. We restrict attention to products
with product pages that were visited at least 1,000 times in the experiment, and to …xed
price listings for these products. This leaves 4,250 di¤erent products, and 30,696 di¤erent
listings that had purchases.
       Following our earlier discussion, we conjectured that relevance ranking might have been
particularly e¤ective for di¤erentiated products, where consumers may care about features
other than price. In particular, we selected Halo Reach to study price search precisely because
it was a product with few variants. We therefore construct a proxy for each product’s level
of homogeneity. We use the fact that when a seller posts a new listing, eBay often suggests
a title based on the product code. We take the fraction of product listings with the most
common (i.e. suggested) title as a measure of product homogeneity,16 and group products
  15
      The search design has continued to evolve, but the default search results continue to be a Best Match
relevance ranking, albeit one that it likely to be correlated with price for well-de…ned products (so a > 0
in the language of our model).
   16
      Implicitly the idea we have in mind is that for a more heterogeneous product, say with accessories or
slightly di¤erent speci…cations, the seller would need to modify the title. Sellers might also modify the title


                                                      22
depending on whether their top listing share is in the top quartile (less heterogeneous),
middle half, or bottom quartile (more heterogeneous).
    Table 7 reports statistics based on this cut of the experimental data. The Best Match
treatment looks best for the more heterogeneous products. Of the products with low het-
erogeneity, 62 percent had more purchases under the product page treatment, whereas of
the products with high heterogeneity 59 percent had more purchases under the Best Match
treatment. When we look at the average percentage e¤ect on sales for each group, the Best
Match treatment performed much better for the high heterogeneity products, and even a
bit better (though not signi…cantly so) for the low heterogeneity products. We also looked
at price e¤ects but do not report them as the results were not particularly systematic and
none of the measured e¤ects were signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. The main lesson we take
from these results is that the price search problem we have studied is just one dimension of
the broader platform problem when there are a large variety of products, many of which are
heterogeneous and may involve richer consumer search processes.



8     Conclusion
This paper has explored search frictions in online commerce, and the role of search design
in reducing them. Our analysis has been narrow in the sense that we have focused on price
search and pricing competition for (near-)homogeneous products. The advantage of doing
this is that we were able to develop a parsimonious model of consumer search and equilibrium
price competition that relates to the canonical simultaneous search models studied in the
theory literature. We showed that such a model could help to explain price dispersion, seller
margins and the e¤ects of changes in the search ranking.
    Of course, this approach also has several shortcomings. Many products have varieties
or close substitutes that make price just one of the dimensions along which consumers are
searching. As illustrated in the last section, orienting a platform toward price search may
not work as well for heterogeneous products. Trying to assess how alternative search designs
as a way to create perceived heterogeneity. We also tried constructing a Her…ndahl index based on the listing
shares of di¤erent titles for each product, and obtained similar types of results to what we report below.



                                                     23
work when consumers need to be matched with di¤erent products, and price search and
competition is just one dimension of the problem, is an interesting topic for future research.



References
 Backus, Matthew, and Gregory Lewis (2012). “A Demand System for a Dynamic Auction
     Market with Directed Search.”Mimeo, Harvard University.

 Bailey, Joseph (1998). “Intermediation and Electronic Markets: Aggregation and Pricing
      in Internet Commerce.”Ph.D. Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 Baye, Michael R., and John Morgan (2001). “Information Gatekeepers on the Internet and
     the Competitiveness of Homogeneous Product Markets.” American Economic Review
     91(3), 454-474.

 Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten (2004). “Price Dispersion in the
     Small and the Large: Evidence from an Internet Price Comparison Site.” Journal of
     Industrial Economics 52(4), 463-496.

 Berry, Steven T. (1994). “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Di¤erentiation.”
     RAND Journal of Economics 25(2), 242-262.

 Einav, Liran, Dan Knoep‡e, Jonathan Levin and Neel Sundaresan (2014). “Sales Taxes
     and Internet Commerce.”American Economic Review 114(1), 1-26.

 Einav, Liran, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (forthcoming). “As-
     sessing Sales Strategies in Online Markets Using Matched Listings.” American Eco-
     nomic Journals: Microeconomics, forthcoming.

 Ellison, Glenn (2005). “A Model of Add-On Pricing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      120(2), 585-637.

 Ellison, Glenn, and Sara F. Ellison (2009). “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on
      the Internet.”Econometrica 77(2), 427-452.

 Ellison, Glenn, and Sara F. Ellison (2014). “Match Quality, Search, and the Internet Market
      for Used Books.”MIT Working Paper.

 Ellison, Glenn, and Alexander Wolitzky (2012). “A Search Cost Model of Obfuscation.”
      RAND Journal of Economics 43(3), 417-441.

 Fradkin, Andrey (2014). “Search Frictions and the Design of Online Marketplaces.” Stan-
     ford Working Paper.

 Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson (2006). “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia and
    Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    121(2), 505-540.

                                             24
Goeree, Michelle (2008). “Limited Information and Advertising in the U.S. Personal Com-
    puter Industry.”Econometrica 76(5), 1017-1074.

Hong, Han, and Matthew Shum (2006). “Using Price Distributions to Estimate Search
   Costs.”RAND Journal of Economics 37(3), 257-275.

Hortacsu, Ali, Babur De los Santos, and Matthijs Wildenbeest (2012). “Testing Models of
    Consumer Search using Data on Web Browsing and Purchasing Behavior.” American
    Economic Review 102(6), 2955-2980.

Hortacsu, Ali, and Chad Syverson (2004). “Product Di¤erentiation, Search Costs and
    Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of the S&P 500 Index Funds.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(2), 403-456.

Horton, John (2014). “Misdirected Search E¤ort in a Matching Market: Causes, Conse-
    quences and a Partial Solution.”NYU Working Paper.

Knoep‡e, Dan (in progress). “Price Adjustments by Internet Sellers.” Work in progress,
   Stanford University.

Malmendier, Ulrike, and Young Han Lee (2011). “The Bidder’s Curse.”American Economic
   Review 101(2), 749-787.

Smith, Michael, and Erik Brynjolfsson (2001). “Consumer Decision-Making at an Internet
    Shopbot: Brand Still Matters.”Journal of Industrial Economics 49(4), 541-558.

Spulber, Daniel F. (1995). “Bertrand Competition when Rivals’ Costs are Unknown.”
    Journal of Industrial Economics 43(1), 1-11.

Stahl, Dale (1989). “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search.” American
    Economic Review 79(4), 700-712.

Stigler, George (1961). “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy
     69(3), 213-225.

Weyl, Glen, and Michael Fabinger (2013). “Pass Through as an Economic Tool: Principle
   of Incidence under Imperfect Competition.”Journal of Political Economy 121(3), 528-
   583.




                                         25
Figure 1: Different approaches to platform design




                        Craigslist
   Google Shopping
 Amazon




 Figure shows search results following a query for “playstation 3” on Craigslist (top), Google Shopping (middle), and
 Amazon (bottom).
Figure 2: eBay’s platform re-design




 Figure shows the change in eBay’s presentation of search results. The top panel shows eBay’s Best Match results. The
 bottom panel shows a product page, with listings ordered by sales format and price.
Figure 3: Change in Size of Consideration Set
                     0.25
                                                                                                                         Before

                                                                                                                         After
                      0.2




                     0.15
         Frequency




                      0.1




                     0.05




                       0
                            1   2    3     4     5   6   7   8    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
                                                                 Number of items in consideration set


                      0.5

                     0.45

                      0.4

                     0.35
                                                                                                           Before
                      0.3                                                                                  After
         Frequency




                     0.25

                      0.2

                     0.15

                      0.1

                     0.05

                       0
                                    1-10                  11-50                51-100              101-200              > 200
                                               Number of clicks in browsing session, conditional on eventual purchase

   Figure shows changes in browsing experience between the Before (4/6/11-5/18/11) and After (8/1/11-
   9/20/11) periods. Top panel shows distributions of the size of the consideration set, L - that is, the
   number of relevant items shown on the search results page (the default in the “Before” period) or the
   product page (the default in the “After” period) – for Halo Reach listings. Bottom panel plots the
   distribution of clicks per search session prior to eventual purchase of a relevant (i.e. new, fixed price) Halo
   Reach listing. A click counts if it led to eBay loading a page, and counting starts from the first "Halo Reach"
   search event.
Figure 4: Implied Cost Distribution


       0.06                                                                                                           10

                                                                                                                      9
       0.05
                                                                            Cost Density                              8
                                                                            Cost Density (TRS)
                                                                                                                      7




                                                                                                                           Optimal Markups ($US)
       0.04
                                                                            Optimal Markup (TRS)
                                                                                                                      6
                                                                            Optimal Markup (Non-TRS)
 Density




       0.03                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                      4
       0.02
                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                      2
       0.01
                                                                                                                      1

           0                                                                                                          0
               15            25              35            45           55                 65             75
                                                       Implied Cost ($US)


           Figure shows the distribution of seller costs imputed from the observed prices and the sellers’ first order
           condition. This cost distribution is assumed to remain the same after the platform re-design, and is held
           fixed in the counterfactual exercises. The dashed black line shows the cost distribution of TRS sellers; the
           solid black line is non-TRS sellers. The optimal mark-ups associated with each level of cost, given our
           demand estimates, are presented by the gray lines for TRS and non-TRS.
 Figure 5: Estimated Demand Curves

        $39
                                                                              TRS sellers, Before

                                                                              Non-TRS sellers, Before
        $37
                                                                              TRS sellers, After (predicted)


        $35                                                                   Non-TRS sellers, After (predicted)
Price




        $33




        $31




        $29




        $27
              0       0.01       0.02       0.03      0.04       0.05      0.06       0.07           0.08       0.09        0.1
                                             Probability of being transacted (per search)


              Figure plots demand curves based on our model estimates. The x-axis is the per-search probability of being
              transacted, which is the probability of appearing in the consideration set multiplied by the probability of
              being transacted conditional on being in the consideration set.
   Figure 6: Observed and Predicted Price Distributions

          0.12



           0.1



          0.08
Density




          0.06



          0.04                                                 Before (observed)

                                                               After (observed)

                                                               After (predicted)
          0.02



            0
                 $27             $29               $31               $33               $35               $37               $39
                                                                  List price

                  Figure shows distributions of posted prices from the Before (4/6/11-5/18/11) and After (8/1/11-9/20/11)
                  periods, and the predicted price distribution for the after period based on our estimated model. Note that
                  the model is estimated using only before data (except for the use of the after data to estimate the
                  parameter γ).
Figure 7: Non-Parametric Plot of Listing Demand




     Figure shows the probability of sale for listings in the before period, estimated using a local polynomial
     regression plotted against listing price (adjusted for TRS status, as described in the text). The sample
     size is N=270 listings.
Table 1: Category-Level Effects of The Platform Re-Design

                                                                                  Video
                                                          Digital                 Game     Video
                                           Cell Phones   Cameras     Textbooks   Systems   Games     iPhone 4

    Avg. No. of Active Listings   Before      23.33       40.64        16.27      35.41    38.93       29.49

    75th / 25th Percentile of
      Posted Prices               Before      1.22         1.32        1.61       1.39      1.47       1.28
      Transacted Prices           Before     204.10        1.31        1.25       1.29      1.29      138.44

    Average Price Percentile      Before      40.11       31.85        29.82      17.34    27.82       37.40
    of Bought Items               After       37.79       24.94        20.75      19.72    19.22       33.07
                                  Change      -2.32       -6.90        -9.07      2.38     -8.61       -4.33

    Posted Prices (Mean)          Before     $562.45     $1,418.31    $67.98     $290.00   $48.60    $749.25
                                  After      $462.88     $1,170.81    $63.11     $285.08   $48.14    $567.74
                                  Change     -$99.57     -$247.50     -$4.86      -$4.92   -$0.45    -$181.50

    Transacted Prices (Mean)      Before     $412.30     $1,162.51    $51.03     $222.62   $45.71    $676.72
                                  After      $403.75      $980.06     $42.89     $257.16   $42.17    $554.82
                                  Change      -$8.55     -$182.46     -$8.14     $34.53    -$3.53    -$121.90

    Number of Transactions        Before      1,762        650          482       1,045     3,873      2,605
                                  After       3,594       3,108        3,941      1,666     2,537      4,346
                                  Change      1,832       2,458        3,459       621     -1,336      1,741

    TRS Share of Transactions     Before     43.87%       70.92%      27.39%     43.92%    27.11%     36.62%
                                  After      39.37%       78.93%      45.22%     42.62%    44.42%     40.52%
                                  Change     -4.50%       8.00%       17.83%     -1.31%    17.31%     3.90%


  Table presents statistics at the category level before and after the product page introduction. The Before
  period spans 4/6/11-5/18/11; the After period spans 8/1/11-9/20/11. For each category we choose the 10
  products that appeared most often in search results during the week before July 2, and report statistics based
  on a weighted average across these 10 products. To calculate the price percentiles of bought items: for each
  purchase, we find all the listings that were available at the time of purchase, and use the percentile in this
  distribution.
Table 2: Halo Reach Estimation Sample – Summary Statistics

                                                                                       Before            After
                                                                                      (4/6/11 -        (8/1/11 -
                                                                                      5/18/11)         9/20/11)
Listings Data
      Number of Listings                                                                270              218
      Number of Sellers                                                                 191              152
      % of Sellers with > 1 Listing                                                     20%              22%
      Mean List Price (+Shipping)                                                     $39.73           $37.88
      Median List Price (+Shipping)                                                   $37.00           $35.00
      Standard Deviation of List Price (+Shipping)                                     $9.20            $8.73
      % of Listings from TRS                                                            16%              27%
Search Data
      Number of "Search Results Page" Searches                                         2,757              351
      Number of Product Page Searches                                                      5              923
      Total Number of Searches                                                         2,762            1,274
      Mean Transacted Price (+Shipping)                                               $34.64           $33.46
      Median Transacted Price (+Shipping)                                             $34.99           $34.00
      Standard Deviation of Transacted Price (+Shipping)                               $2.93            $3.22
      Number of Transactions                                                             284              165


The first panel uses listing-level data. The second panel uses search-level data. Listings are considered to be the
correct product if they are listed with the Halo Reach product code and inspection of their title indicates that the
listing is not for an accessory. Prices below $15 and above $100 are discarded. "TRS" refers to top-rated sellers, an
eBay designation that depends on a seller's volume and feedback.
Table 3: Estimation Results

                                                                                          Predicted
                                                                         Before
                                                                                            After
      Platform Parameters
            Average Number of Listings on the Site                         19                26
            Average Number of TRS Listings on the Site                      3                 9
            Prob. of a Single-Item Consideration Set                      0.14              0.05
            Estimated Gamma                                                              0.81 (0.18)
            Median Prob. of Appearing in a Search                                           0.24
            Prob. of Appearing if Lower Price by 10%                                        0.31

      Demand
          Constant                                                    5.58    (0.54)
          Price                                                       -0.25   (0.02)
          Top-Rated Seller (TRS)                                       2.84   (1.34)
          Price*TRS                                                   -0.06   (0.04)

      Implied Price Elasticities
            Average Own-Price Elasticity                                -10.97             -10.79
            Average Own-Price TRS Elasticity (TRS)                      -12.73             -12.61
            Average Own-Price TRS Elasticity (Non-TRS)                  -10.09              -9.88

      Supply
           Median Price - Cost (TRS)                                    $3.23              $2.70
           Median Margin (% of P) (TRS)                                  0.09               0.07
           Median Price - Cost (Non-TRS)                                $4.06              $3.23
           Median Margin (% of P) (Non-TRS)                              0.11               0.09

      Purchase Rates
           Actual                                                         0.103              0.130
           Predicted                                                      0.106              0.123


 Estimates of demand model parameters use data from the “before” period only (estimated standard errors in
 parentheses). The remaining statistics are calculated from these estimates. The implied price elasticities and pricing
 predictions for the “after” period use browsing data from the “after” period as described in the main text. The
 purchase rate is defined as the share of relevant search queries that end up transacting in one of the Halo Reach
 posted price items.
Table 4: Components of the Platform Re-Design

                                      Supply: Median Price Cost Margins                           Purchase Rate
                               TRS ($) Non-TRS ($) TRS (%) Non-TRS (%)                              Predicted
  Implementing the Platform Change
     Before                     $3.23       $4.06         9%          11%                             10.6%
     Larger Consideration Set   $3.23       $4.06         9%          11%                             10.6%
     Increase in Gamma          $2.89       $3.34         8%           9%                             11.9%
     Additional Sellers         $3.23       $4.06         9%          11%                             10.6%
     Predicted After            $2.70       $3.23         7%           9%                             12.3%

 The top and bottom rows report the margins and purchase rate from the estimated model, as shown in Table 3. The
 middle rows break down the effect of the platform change by starting from the before parameters and separately
 increasing consideration sets, increasing price-dependence in the search, and adding additional sellers.
Table 5: The Impact of Search Frictions

                                                            Search Friction     Search Friction      No Friction (all
                                                               - Before             - After          items visible)

                        Median Markup                           $2.80               $1.89                $0.80
    Limited Seller      Mean Markup                             $2.81               $1.94                $1.00
    Differentiation     Mean Transacted Price                   $27.79              $26.95               $24.23
                        Std Deviation of Sale Price             $4.26               $5.09                $3.27

                        Median Markup                           $4.02               $3.31                $4.01
         Seller         Mean Markup                             $4.06               $3.37                $3.99
    Differentiation     Mean Transacted Price                   $30.08              $29.04               $27.95
                        Std Deviation of Sale Price             $5.46               $5.92                $6.60



  The labels "Seller Differentiation" and “Limited Seller Differentiation" refer to whether we include a seller-
  specific logit error. The version with differentiation keeps the error, while the “Limited Differentiation”
  specification assumes a nested logit model in which all “inside goods” are in the same nest and the nested
  logit σ parameter is set to 0.2. Each column refers to a different platform design: the “Before” regime, the
  “After” regime, and a counterfactual regime in which consumers are shown the entire set of (relevant)
  listings available on the platform.
Table 6: Explanation of High Seller Costs

                                                                Univariate Regressions
                                                                 Dep Var: Dummy for
                                                                Seller's Max Cost > $40

                    Top-Rated Seller Dummy                        -0.055          (0.096)
                    Years on eBay (Truncated at 5)                -0.031          (0.043)
                    % Listings Fixed Price                        -0.287          (0.084)
                    % Listings Free Shipping                      -0.189          (0.321)
                    Log(Total Halo Reach Listings)                0.062           (0.024)
                    Log(Total Videogame Listings)                 0.008           (0.011)
                    Log(Total eBay Listings)                      0.006           (0.011)
                    Log(Q Available in All Listings)              0.008           (0.010)
                    Log(Q Sold in All Listings)                   -0.005          (0.012)
                    Log(Num Categories Listing in)                -0.011          (0.027)
                    Any Halo Reach Price Change                   0.030           (0.085)

      Table shows results from univariate regressions where each observation is a seller in the before
      period (N=191) and the dependent variable is an indicator equal to 1 if the seller’s imputed cost from
      the model is above $40 for at least one of his Halo Reach listings. The covariates pertaining to
      characteristics of seller listings are generated using all listings by the seller over 2009-2011.
Table 7: A/B Experiment

                                                             Level of Heterogeneity
                                                                                                       All Products
                                                         Low        Medium         High
     % of Products with Higher Q in Best                 38%           52%         59%                     49%
             Match Treatment                             (4%)         (4%)         (5%)                    (2%)

         Average Effect of Best Match                   0.049            0.107            0.173            0.107
             Treatment on log(Q)                       (0.049)          (0.038)          (0.052)          (0.026)


Table reports statistics from the A/B experiment for products with at least 1,000 product page visits in the experiment.
Level of Heterogeneity is defined using the share of product listings that have the most common (default) title. The
Low/Medium/High categories are determined by the 25th and 75th percentile cutoffs. The average effect of the Best
Match treatment on log(Q) is estimated using a negative binomial regression where the level of observation is product-
treatment group, the dependent variable is quantity sold, and the covariates are product dummies and an indicator for
the Best Match treatment. Products are equally weighted in the regression. Standard errors in parentheses.
