                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK

                                          Abhijit Banerjee
                                       Arun G. Chandrasekhar
                                            Esther Duflo
                                        Matthew O. Jackson

                                        Working Paper 20422
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20422


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




Ben Golub, Michael Dickstein and participants at various seminars/conferences provided helpful comments.
Financial support from the NSF under grants SES-1156182 and SES-1155302, from the AFOSR and
DARPA under grant FA9550-12-1-0411, and from ARO MURI under award No. W911NF-12-1-0509
is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Francisco Munoz for excellent research assistance. We are grateful
to CMF at IFMR, Tanay Balantrapu, Gowri Nagraj, and Manaswini Rao. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gossip: Identifying Central Individuals in a Social Network
Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Esther Duflo, and Matthew O. Jackson
NBER Working Paper No. 20422
August 2014
JEL No. D13,D85,L14,O12,Z13

                                            ABSTRACT

Can we identify the members of a community who are best- placed to diffuse information simply
by asking a random sample of individuals? We show that boundedly-rational individuals can, simply
by tracking sources of gossip, identify those who are most central in a network according to “diffusion
centrality,” which nests other standard centrality measures. Testing this prediction with data from
35 Indian villages, we find that respondents accurately nominate those who are diffusion central (not
just those with many friends). Moreover, these nominees are more central in the network than traditional
village leaders and geographically central individuals.


Abhijit Banerjee                                   Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E17-201A                  Department of Economics, E17-201B
MIT                                                MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue                            77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139                                Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                           and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu                                   eduflo@mit.edu

Arun G. Chandrasekhar                              Matthew O. Jackson
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Stanford University                                Stanford University
579 Serra Mall                                     Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Stanford, CA 94305                                 and CIFAR
and NBER                                           and also external faculty of the Santa Fe Institute
arungc@stanford.edu                                jacksonm@stanford.edu
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                           2

                                   1. Introduction

        “The secret of my influence has always been that it remained
        secret.” – Salvador Dalı́


   Knowing who is influential, or central, in a community, can be important
for the community’s members as well as for businesses and policymakers. In
particular, the extent to which a piece of information diffuses among a popula-
tion often depends on how central the initially informed are within the network
(see Katz and Lazarsfeld (1955); Rogers (1995); Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos
(2003, 2005); Borgatti (2005); Ballester, Calvó-Armengol, and Zenou (2006);
Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2013)). Policymakers and or-
ganizations can thus benefit from targeting the right individuals in efforts to
effectively spread valuable information.
   However, learning who is central in a social network has the potential to be
difficult. For policymakers, collecting detailed network data is costly. Even
for members of the community, knowing the structure of the network beyond
their immediate friends is far from automatic. Do people know how central
other people, outside of their immediate circle, are? In this paper, we answer
this question theoretically and empirically.
   First, we develop a simple model, building upon our previous work (Baner-
jee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson, 2013), to show that individuals in a
network should be able to identify central individuals within their community
without knowing anything about the structure of the network. Our model is
about a process we call gossip, where nodes generate pieces of information
that are then stochastically passed from neighbor to neighbor. We assume
that individuals who hear the gossip are able to keep count of the number of
times each person in the network get mentioned.1 We show that for any lis-
tener in the network, the relative ranking under this count converges over time
to the correct ranking of every node’s ability to send information to the rest

1
 We use the term “gossip” to refer to the spreading of information about particular people.
Our diffusion process is focused on basic information that is not subject to the biases or ma-
nipulations that might accompany some “rumors” (e.g., see Bloch, Demange, and Kranton
(2014)).
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                 3

of the network. The specific measure of a node’s ability to send information
that we use is given by the “diffusion centrality,” introduced in Banerjee et al.
(2013) which answers the question of how widely information from a given
node diffuses in a given number of time periods and for a given random per
period transmission probability. We relate diffusion centrality to other stan-
dard measures of centrality in the literature, proving that it nests three of the
most prominent measures: degree centrality at one extreme (if there is just one
time period of communication), and eigenvector centrality and Katz-Bonacich
centrality at the other extreme (if there are unlimited periods of communica-
tion). For intermediate numbers of periods diffusion centrality takes on a wide
range of other values.
   In other words, by listening and keeping count of how often they hear about
someone, individuals learn the correct ranking of community members from
the point of view of how effectively they can serve as a source of information
to the rest of the community.
   Second, we use a unique dataset to assess whether this holds empirically. We
asked every adult in each of 35 villages to name the person in their village best
suited to initiate the spread of information. We combine their answers (which
we call their “nominations”) with detailed network data that include maps of
a variety of interactions in each of the 35 villages. We show that individuals
nominate highly diffusion/eigenvector central people (on average at the 71st
percentile of centrality). We also show that the nominations are not simply
based on the nominee’s leadership status or geographic position in the village,
but are significantly correlated with diffusion centrality even after conditioning
on these characteristics, and are better predictors of centrality than these
characteristics. This suggests that people understand our questions and are
doing more than simply naming traditional leaders or geographically central
individuals. Furthermore, there is suggestive evidence that they nominate
people who are indeed diffusion central, not only people with many friends.
   In sum, our model shows how individuals can learn who are the most central
people in their network, and our empirical work suggests that individuals have
learned this (although, of course, the data could be consistent with other
models of how people choose individuals to nominate). To our knowledge, this
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                           4

is the first paper to demonstrate that members of communities are able, easily
and accurately, to identify highly central people in their community. It is also
the first to describe a simple process by which people can learn things about
part of their broader network that may intuitively seem outside their ambit.2
This is a result of practical importance, since asking people who is the best
person to spread information is a much cheaper way to collect this information
than collecting data on the entire network.



                  2. A Model of Network Communication

    We consider the following model.

2.1. A Network of Individuals. A society of n individuals are connected
via a possibly directed3 and weighted network, which has an adjacency matrix
g ∈ {0, 1}n×n . Unless otherwise stated, we take the network g to be fixed
and let v (1) be its first (right-hand) eigenvector, corresponding to the largest
eigenvalue λ1 .4 The first eigenvector is nonnegative and real-valued by the
Perron-Frobenius Theorem.
   Throughout, we assume that the network is (strongly) connected in that
there exists a (directed) path from every node to every other node, so that
information originating at any node could potentially make its way eventually
to any other node.5

2.2. Diffusion Centrality. Banerjee et al. (2013) defined a notion of cen-
trality called diffusion centrality, based on random information flow through a
network according to the following process, which is a variation of a standard
diffusion process that underlies many contagion models.6
2
  There are some papers (e.g., Milgram (1967) and Dodds et al. (2003)) that have checked
people’s abilities to use knowledge of their friends’ connections to efficiently route messages
to reach distant people, but those rely on local knowledge.
3When defining g in the directed case, the ij-th entry should indicate that i can tell some-
thing to j. In some networks, this may not be reciprocal.
4v (1) is such that gv (1) = λ v (1) where λ is the largest eigenvalue of g in magnitude.
                              1             1
5
  More generally, everything we say applies to the components of the network.
6
  See Jackson and Yariv (2011) for background and references. A continuous time version of
diffusion centrality appears in Lawyer (2014).
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                              5

   A piece of information is initiated at node i and then broadcast outwards
from that node. In each period, each informed node informs each of its neigh-
bors of the piece of information and the identity of its original source with a
probability p ∈ (0, 1], independently across neighbors and history. The process
operates for T periods, where T is a positive integer.
   There are many reasons to allow T to be finite. For instance, a new piece
of information may only be “news” for a limited time. Because of boredom,
arrival of other news, the topic of conversation may change. By allowing for
a variety of T ’s, diffusion centrality admits important finite-horizon cases, as
well as more extreme cases where agents discuss a topic indefinitely.7
   Diffusion centrality measures how extensively the information spreads as a
function of the initial node. In particular, let
                                                   T
                                                         (pg)t ,
                                                   X
                                  H(g; p, T ) :=
                                                   t=1

be the “hearing matrix.” The ij-th entry of H, H(g; p, T )ij , is the expected
number of times, in the first T periods, that j hears about a piece of informa-
tion originating from i. Diffusion centrality is then defined by
                                                              T
                                                                           !
                                                                       t
                                                              X
                   DC(g; p, T ) := H(g; p, T ) · 1 =                (pg)       · 1.
                                                              t=1

   So, DC(g; p, T )i is the expected total number of times that some piece of
information that originates from i is heard by any of the members of the society
during a T -period time interval.8 Banerjee et al. (2013) showed that diffusion



7Of course this is an approximation and, moreover, different topics may have different T ’s.
The current model and definition already moves beyond the literature, but even richer
models could also be studied.
8 We note two useful normalizations. One is to compare it to what would happen if p = 1
and g were the complete network gc , which produces the maximum possible entry for
each ij subject to any T . Thus, each entry of DC(g; p, T ) could be divided through by
the corresponding entry of DC(gc ; 1, T ). This produces a measure for which every entry
lies between 0 and 1, where 1 corresponds to the maximum possible numbers of expected
paths possible in T periods with full probability weight and full connectedness. Another
normalization is to compare
                          P a given node to the total level for all nodes; that is, to divide all
entries of DC(g; p, T ) by i DC i (g; p, T ). This normalization tracks how relatively diffusive
one node is compared to the average diffusiveness in its society.
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                       6

centrality was a statistically significant predictor of the spread of information
– in that case, about a microfinance program.
   Note that this measure allows people to hear the information multiple times
from the same person and count those times as distinct reports, so that it is
possible for an entry of DC to be more than n. There are several advantages
to defining it in this manner. First, although it is possible via simulations
to calculate a measure that tracks the expected number of informed nodes
and avoids double-counting, this expression is much easier to calculate and
for many parameter values the two measures are roughly proportional to each
other. Second, this version of the measure relates nicely to other standard
measures of centrality in the literature, while a measure that adjusts for mul-
tiple hearing does not. Third, in a world in which multiple hearings lead to
a greater probability of information retention, this count might actually be a
better measure of what people learn.9

2.3. Diffusion Centrality’s Relation to Other Centrality Measures. It
is useful to situate diffusion centrality relative to other prominent measures of
centrality in the literature.
                                                    P
   Let d(g) denote degree centrality (so di (g) = j gij ). Eigenvector centrality
corresponds to v (1) (g): the first eigenvector of g. Also, let KB(g, p) denote
Katz-Bonacich centrality – defined for p < 1/λ1 by:10
                                              ∞
                                                               !
                                                           t
                                              X
                             KB(p, g) :=            (pg)           · 1.
                                              t=1

   It is direct to see that (i) diffusion centrality is proportional to degree cen-
trality at the extreme at which T = 1, and (ii) if p < 1/λ1 , then diffusion
centrality coincides with Katz-Bonacich centrality if we set T = ∞. We now
show that when p > 1/λ1 diffusion centrality approaches eigenvector central-
ity as T approaches ∞, which then completes the picture of the relationship
between diffusion centrality and extreme centrality measures.

9One   could also further enrich the measure by allowing for the forgetting of information,
but with three parameters the measure would start to become unwieldy.
10See (2.7) in Jackson (2008) for additional discussion and background. This was a measure
first discussed by Katz, and corresponds to Bonacich’s definition when both of Bonacich’s
parameters are set to p.
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                              7

   The difference between the extremes of Katz-Bonacich centrality and eigen-
vector centrality depends on whether p is sufficiently small so that limited
diffusion takes place even in the limit of large T , or whether p is sufficiently
large so that the knowledge saturates the network and then it is only relative
amounts of saturation that are being measured.11

Theorem 1.
    (1) Diffusion centrality is proportional to degree when T = 1:

                                  DC (g; p, 1) = pd (g) .

    (2) If p ≥ 1/λ1 , then as T → ∞ diffusion centrality approximates eigen-
        vector centrality:
                                      1                         (1)
                          lim PT             t DC (g; p, T ) = v .
                         T →∞
                                  t=1 (pλ 1 )
    (3) For T = ∞ and p < 1/λ1 , diffusion centrality is Katz-Bonacich cen-
        trality:
                 DC (g; p, ∞) = KB (g, p) ; p < 1/λ1 .

  All proofs appear in the Appendix.
  The result shows that as T is varied, diffusion centrality nests three of the
most prominent and used centrality measures: degree centrality, eigenvector
centrality, and Katz-Bonacich centrality. It thus provides a foundation for
these measures and spans between them.12, 13 Between these extremes, dif-
fusion centrality measures how diffusion process operates for some limited
                                            P           
11Saturation                                   ∞       t
                occurs when the entries of     t=1 (pg)    · 1 diverge (note that in a [strongly]
connected network, if one entry diverges, then all entries diverge). Nonetheless, the limit
vector is still proportional to a well defined limit vector: the first eigenvector.
12This formalizes a result we mention in (Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson,
2013). An independent formalization appears in Benzi and Klymko (2014).
13We also remark on the comparison to another measure: the influence vector that appears
in the DeGroot learning model (see, e.g., Golub and Jackson (2010)). That metric captures
how influential a node is in a process of social learning. It corresponds to the (left-hand)
unit eigenvector of a stochasticized matrix of interactions rather than a raw adjacency
matrix. While it might be tempting to use that metric here as well, we note that it is the
right conceptual object to use in a process of repeated averaging through which individuals
update opinions based on averages of their neighbors’ opinions. It is thus conceptually
different from the diffusion process that we study. One can define a variant of diffusion
centrality that works for finite iterations of DeGroot updating.
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK               8

number of periods. Importantly, as in Banerjee et al. (2013), the behavior in
the intermediate ranges can be more relevant for certain diffusion phenomena.




      3. Relating Diffusion Centrality to Network Gossip

  We now investigate whether and how individuals living in g end up with
knowledge of others’ positions in the network that correlates with diffusion
centrality without knowing anything about the network structure.


3.1. A Gossip Process. Diffusion centrality considers diffusion from the
sender’s perspective. Let us now consider the same stochastic information
diffusion process but from a receiver’s perspective. Over time, each individual
hears information that originates from different sources in the network, and in
turn randomly pass that information on. The society discusses each of these
pieces of information for T periods. The key point is that there are many such
topics of conversation, originating from all of the different individuals in the
society, with each topic being passed along for T periods.
   For instance, Arun may tell Matt that he has a new car. Matt then may
tell Abhijit that “Arun has a new car,” and then Abhijit may tell Esther that
“Arun has a new car.” Arun may also have told Ben that he thinks house
prices will go up and Ben could have told Esther that “Arun thinks that house
prices will go up”. In this model Esther keeps track of the cumulative number
of times that bits of information that originated from Arun reach her and
compares it with the same number for information that originated from other
people. What is crucial therefore is that the news involves the name of the
node of origin – in this case “Arun” – and not what the information is about.
The first piece of news originating from Arun could be about something he has
done (“bought a car”) but the second could just be an opinion (“Arun thinks
house prices will go up”). Esther keeps track of the fact that she has heard
two different pieces of information originating from Arun.
   Recall that
                                            T
                                                  (pg)t ,
                                            X
                            H(g; p, T ) =
                                            t=1
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                        9

is such that the ij-th entry, H(g; p, T )ij , is the expected number of times j
hears a piece of information originating from i.
   We define the network gossip heard by node j to be the j-th column of H,

                             N G(g; p, T )j := H(g; p, T )·j .

Thus, N Gj lists the expected number of times a node j will hear a given
piece of news as a function of the node of origin of the information. So, if
N G(g; p, T )ij is twice as high as N G(g; p, T )kj then j is expected to hear news
twice as often that originated at node i compared to node k, presuming equal
rates of news originating at i and k.
   Note the different perspectives of DC and N G: diffusion centrality tracks
how well information spreads from a given node, while network gossip tracks
relatively how often a given node hears information from (or about) each of
the other nodes.
   To end this sub-section two remarks are in order. First, one could allow
passing probabilities to differ by information type and pairs of nodes.14 Indeed,
in Banerjee et al. (2013) we allowed different nodes to pass information with
different probabilities, and in Banerjee et al. (2014) we allow the probability
of communication to depend on the listener’s network position. Although
one can enrich the model in many ways to capture specifics of information
passing, this simple version captures basic dynamics and relates naturally to
centrality measures. Second, we could allow nodes to differ in how frequently
they generate new information which is then transmitted to its neighbors.
Provided this transmission rate is positively related to nodes’ centralities, the
results that we present below still hold (and, in fact, the speed of convergence
would be increased).

3.2. Identifying Central Individuals. With this measure of gossip in hand,
we show how individuals in a society can estimate who is central simply by
14We   can generalize our setup replacing p with a matrix P. Now define
                                                T
                                                            !
                                                X         t
                               H(g; P, T ) :=      (P ◦ g) .
                                               t=1
Here P can have entries Pij which allow the transmission probabilities to vary by pair. Note
that Pij can depend on characteristics of those involve and encode strategic behavior based
on the economics being modeled.
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                      10

counting how often they hear gossip about others. We first show that, on
average, individuals’ rankings of others according to how much gossip they
hear about the others, given by N Gj , are positively correlated with diffusion
centrality.
Theorem 2. For any (g; p, T ), j cov(DC(g; p, T ), N G(g; p, T )j ) = var(DC).
                                    P

Thus, in any network with differences in diffusion centrality among individu-
als, the average covariance between diffusion centrality and network gossip is
positive.
   It is important to emphasize that although both measures, N Gi and DCi ,
are based on the same sort of information process, they are really two quite
different objects. Diffusion centrality is a gauge of a node’s ability to send
information, while the network gossip measure tracks the reception of infor-
mation by different nodes. Indeed, the reason that Theorem 2 is only stated
for the sum rather than any particular individual j’s network gossip measure is
that for small T it is possible that some nodes have not even heard about other
nodes, and moreover they might be biased towards their local neighborhoods.15
   Next, we show that if individuals exchange gossip over extended periods
of time, every individual in the network is eventually able to perfectly rank
others’ centralities.
Theorem 3. If p ≥ 1/λ1 , then as T → ∞ every individual j’s ranking of oth-
ers under N G(g; p, T )j will be according to the ranking of diffusion centrality,
DC(g; p, T ), and hence according to eigenvector centrality, v (1) .
  The intuition is that individuals hear (exponentially) more often about those
who are more diffusion/eigenvector central, as the number of rounds of com-
munication tends to infinity. As such, in the limit, they assess the rankings
15 One might conjecture that more central nodes would be better “listeners”: for instance,
having more accurate rankings than less central listeners after a small number of periods.
Although this might happen in some networks, and for many comparisons, it is not guar-
anteed. None of the centrality measures considered here ensure that a given node, even the
most central node, is positioned in a way to “listen” uniformly better than all other less
central nodes. Typically, even a most central node might be farther than some less central
node from some other important nodes. This can lead a less central node to hear some
things before even the most central node, and thus to have a clearer ranking
                                                                           P of at least
some of the network before the most central node. Thus, for small T , the     is important
in Theorem 2.
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                11

according to diffusion/eigenvector centrality correctly. The result implies that
with very little computational ability beyond remembering counts and adding
to them, agents come to learn arbitrarily accurately complex measures of oth-
ers’ centralities, even for people with whom they do not associate.
   More sophisticated strategies in which individuals try to infer network topol-
ogy, could accelerate learning. Nonetheless, this result holds even in a minimal
environment wherein individuals do not know the structure of the network and
do not tag anything but the topic of conversation (“Arun has a new car”).
   The restriction to p ≥ 1/λ1 is important. For example, as p tends to 0, then
individuals hear with vanishing frequency about others in the network, and
network distance between people can matter in determining whom they think
is the most important.



                                     4. Data

   To investigate the theory presented above, we examine new data, coupled
with detailed network data gathered from villages in rural Karnataka (India).
The network data consist of network information combined with “gossip” data
for 35 villages.
   To collect the network data (described in more details in (Banerjee, Chan-
drasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson, 2013), and publicly available at http://economics.
mit.edu/faculty/eduflo/social), we surveyed adults regarding with whom
they interact.16 We have data concerning 12 types of interactions for a given
survey respondent: (1) whose houses he or she visits, (2) who visit his or her
house, (3) his or her relatives in the village, (4) non-relatives who socialize with
him or her, (5) who gives him or her medical advice, (6) from whom he or she
borrows money, (7) to whom he or she lends money, (8) from whom he or
she borrows material goods (e.g., kerosene, rice), (9) to whom he or she lends
material goods, (10) from whom he or she gets advice, (11) to whom he or she
gives advice, (12) with whom he or she goes to pray (e.g., at a temple, church
or mosque). Using these data, we construct one network for each village, at

16We have network data from 89.14% of the 16,476 households based on interviews with
65% of all adult individuals aged 18-55.
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                        12

 the household level where a link exists between households if any member of
 any household is linked to any other member of any other household in at
 least one of the 12 ways.17 The resulting objects are undirected, unweighted
 networks at the household level.
    To collect the gossip data, we later asked the adults the following two addi-
 tional questions:
(Loan) If we want to spread information about a new loan product to everyone
       in your village, to whom do you suggest we speak?

(Event) If we want to spread information to everyone in the village about tickets
        to a music event, drama, or fair that we would like to organize in your
        village, to whom should we speak?
                            Table 1. Summary Statistics


                                                     mean                 sd
            households per village                    196               61.70
            household degree                         17.72              (9.81)
            clustering in a household’s neighborhood 0.29               (0.16)
            avg distance between nodes in a village  2.37               (0.33)
            fraction in the giant component           0.98              (0.01)
            is a “leader”                             0.13              (0.34)
            nominated someone for loan                0.48              (0.16)
            nominated someone for event               0.38              (0.16)
            was nominated for loan                   0.05               (0.03)
            was nominated for event                   0.04              (0.02)
            number of nominations received for loan  0.45               (3.91)
            number of nominations received for event 0.34               (3.28)
  Notes: for the variables nominated someone for loan (event) and was nom-
  inated for loan (event) we present the cross-village standard deviation.


   Table 1 provides some summary statistics for our data. The networks are
 sparse: the average number of households in a village is 196 with a standard
 17Individuals can communicate if they interact in any of the 12 ways, so this is the network
 of potential communications, and using this network avoids the selection bias associated
 with data-mining to find the most predictive subnetworks.
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                        13

deviation of 61.7, while the average degree is 17.7 with a standard deviation
of 9.8.
   We see that only 5% of households were named in response to the Loan
question (and 4% for the Event question) with a cross-village standard devia-
tion of 3%. Thus there is a substantial concordance in who is named as a good
initiator of diffusion within a village. In fact, conditional on being nominated,
a household was nominated nine times on average.18 This is perhaps a first
indication that the answers may be meaningful.
   The fact that less than half of the households were willing to name someone,
is itself intriguing. Perhaps people are unwilling to offer an opinion when they
are unsure of the answer19 or possibly were afraid of offending someone, given
that they were asked to name just one person.
   We label as “leaders” self-help group leaders, shopkeepers, teachers, etc.:
13% of households fall into this category. We use the term as it was defined by
the microfinance organization Bharatha Swamukti Samsthe (BSS) as part of
their strategy for identifying people to initiate diffusion for their product. BSS
approached such social leaders because they were a priori likely to be important
in the social learning process and thereby would contribute to more diffusion
of microfinance. In our earlier work, Banerjee et al. (2013), we show that there
is considerable variation in the centrality of these “leaders” in a network sense,
and that this variation predicts the eventual take up of microfinance.



                              5. Empirical Analysis

   Our theoretical results suggest that people can learn others’ diffusion or
eigenvector centralities simply by tracking news they hear through the network.
Thus, they should be able to name central individuals when asked whom to
use as a “seed” for diffusion. If this is the case, such direct questions can easily
be added to standard survey modules to identify central individuals without
obtaining detailed network data.

18We work at the household level, in keeping with Banerjee et al. (2013) who used households
as network nodes; a household receives a nomination if any of its members are nominated.
19See Alatas et al. (2014) for a model that builds on this idea.
         GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                      14

5.1. Descriptive Evidence. Figure 1 shows a village network where we high-
light both the nominees and the village leaders used by BSS as seeds for micro-
finance information, and thus the best guess of this organization of the most
highly central people.20 We see in the figure that “leaders” include central
households but also some peripheral households. However, nominees appear
to be more central and are rarely peripheral. Additionally, nodes that are both
leaders and nominated are highly central.
   Let us examine the relative network position of nominees in detail. Since
the relevant number of periods to compute diffusion centrality is in principle
application-dependent, we start with eigenvector centrality, which is a limit as
T → ∞ of diffusion centrality for large enough p (above the inverse of the first
eigenvalue). We return to compare what happens with other p and T , below.
   Figure 2 builds on the theme presented in Figure 1. Examining the like-
lihood that a nominated household is highly central, we find that 47% of
households that are both nominated and have a leader are within the top 10%
of the eigenvector centrality distribution. Furthermore, 23% of the households
that are nominated but are not leaders are in the top decile of the centrality
distribution.
   This contrasts with households that are not nominated, irrespective of whether
they have a leader. Only 16% of households that are not nominated but have a
leader, and only 7% of households that are not nominated and have no leader,
are in the top decile of the eigenvector centrality distribution.21 Another way
to see this is that the average percentile in the distribution of eigenvector cen-
trality for those nominated for the loan question is 0.71 (and 0.7 for event),
while it is 0.62 for the traditional leaders.
   Not only are nominated nodes more central in the network, but more central
nodes also receive more nominations, as predicted by the theory. Figure 3
shows that households with higher levels of eigenvector centrality receive more


20This is not a geographic representation of nodes but, rather, a representation using a
simple algorithm to visually represent the sub-community structure of the network.
21The difference between the 23% of households that are in the top decile given that they are
nominated but not leaders and the 16% in the top decile given that they are not nominated
but are leaders is significant with a p-value of 0.00 under a Welch test.
                                              GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15




                                                                                                                                             70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           70
                                                                                                                 51




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  51
                                                                                                                           66




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            66
                                                                                                                      67




                                                                                                                                                                     76




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       67




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               76
                                                                                                                                                                                 78




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         78
                                                                                                                                             68




                                                                                                                                                                           77




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           68




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    77
                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                            42




                                                                                                                                                   69




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               42




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                69
                                                                                                                                                   71




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                71
                                                                                      45




                                                                                                      75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75
                                                                                                                                       65




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65
                                                                                                                                                               74




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          74
                                                                                                      49




                                                                                                           62




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        49




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             62
                                                        36




                                                                                                                                 64




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           36




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 64
                                                                                                                                                                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                 43




                                                                                           46




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    43




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              46
                                                                                                                                                                                                   81




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        81
                                                                                                                                                         73




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     73
                                                             39




                                                                                                                           63




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                39




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            63
                                                                                                                                                                                                         82




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             82
                                                        37




                                                                                                                                       72




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           37




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      72
                                                                       41




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          41
                                                                                                 47




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   47
                                                                                                           52




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             52
                                                   34




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      34
                                                                  40




                                                                                                                           55




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            55
                                                                                                                                                                                       79




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              79
                                              33




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 33
                                                             38




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                38
                                                                                                 48




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   48
                                                                                                                      61




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       61
                                                        35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           35
                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                                                                      54




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       54
                                                                                                                                                                                                               83




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  83
                                                                                           44




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              44
                                                                                                                 53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  53
                                                                                                                                             58




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           58
                                                                                                                                                               88




                                                                                                                                                                           91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          88




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    91
             28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              28
                                                                                                                                                                           90




                                                                                                                                                                                 92




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         92
                                                                                                                                                         86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     86
                                                                                                                                                   59




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                59
                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                     89




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               89
                                                                                                                                                                                       94




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              94
                      8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                    11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       11
                                                                                                 97




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   97
                                                                                                                                       57




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      57
                  7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                                 56




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 56
                                                                                                                                                                                                   96




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        96
                                                                                                                                                   84




                                                                                                                                                                                             95




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                84




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   95
                                                                                           30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                 32




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   32
                                                                       23




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          23
                                                                                                                                                               85




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          85
                                    12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       12
                          9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9
93




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               93
                      3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                        19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19
                                                                  22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     22
                                              15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15
87




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               87
26




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               26
                                                                                 21




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    21
0




     1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                            25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               25
                                                   17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                                      29




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         29
                                         14




                                                                                 27




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27
         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                  6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                   18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      18
                                    13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
         2




             5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                           31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              31
                                                                                                 98




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   98
                          16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                       24




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          24
                                                   (a) Village network with lead-                                                                                                                                                                                 (b) Village network with nominees flagged
                                                   ers flagged

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               51




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    67




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            76




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      78
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        68




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 77
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                                                                                                                        42




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             69
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             71
                                                                                                                                                                                                    45




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   65




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       74
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     49




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          62
                                                                                                                                                                36




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              64




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                                              43




                                                                                                                                                                                                          46




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     81
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  73
                                                                                                                                                                      39




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         63




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          82
                                                                                                                                                                37




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   72
                                                                                                                                                                                  41




                                                                                                                                                                                                                47




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          52
                                                                                                                                                          34




                                                                                                                                                                            40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         55




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           79
                                                                                                                                                    33




                                                                                                                                                                      38




                                                                                                                                                                                                                48




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    61
                                                                                                                                                                35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    54




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               83
                                                                                                                                                                                                          44




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        58




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       88




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 91
                                                                                                            28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             59
                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            89




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           94
                                                                                                                       8




                                                                                                                                        11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                97




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   57
                                                                                                                  7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              56




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     96
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             84




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                95
                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                32
                                                                                                                                                                                  23




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       85
                                                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                                            9
                                                                                            93




                                                                                                                       3




                                                                                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                                                                            22
                                                                                                                                                    15
                                                                                            87
                                                                                            26




                                                                                                                                                                                              21
                                                                                            0




                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                                                                          17




                                                                                                                                                                                                    29
                                                                                                                                              14




                                                                                                                                                                                              27
                                                                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                  6




                                                                                                                                                          18
                                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                       2




                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                          31




                                                                                                                                                                                                                98
                                                                                                                            16




                                                                                                                                                                                  24




                                                                                                                      (c) Village network                                                                                                with                          nomi-
                                                                                                                      nees/leaders flagged

                                                   Figure 1. A village network with nominees (red), leaders
                                                   (blue) and those who fulfill both categories (purple) flagged.

                      nominations on average than households of lower centrality, by a factor of
                      about four when comparing the highest quintile to the lowest.
                        Figure 4 presents the distribution of nominations as a function of the net-
                      work distance from a given household. If information did not travel well
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                                                             16

    0.9	  

    0.8	  

    0.7	  

    0.6	  

    0.5	  

    0.4	  

    0.3	  

    0.2	  

    0.1	  

       0	  
                Nominated,	  leader	             Nominated,	  not	                 Not	  nominated,	      Not	  nominated,	  not	  
                                                      leader	                                leader	                   leader	  

                        Probability	  of	  being	  in	  the	  top	  10%	  of	  centrality	       PopulaCon	  share	  

              Figure 2. The probability that a randomly chosen node with
              a given classification (whether or not it is nominated under the
              event question and whether or not it has a village leader) is in
              the top decile of the eigenvector centrality distribution. 95%
              confidence intervals are displayed.

through the social network, we might imagine that individuals would only
nominate households to whom they are directly connected. Panel A of Figure
4 shows that fewer than 20% of individuals nominate someone within their
direct neighborhood. At the same time, over 27% of nominations come from a
network distance of at least three or more. Taken together, this suggests that
information about centrality does indeed travel through the network.
   From Panel A of Figure 4, we also see that, while people do nominate
individuals in households who are closer to them than the typical household
in the village, respondents generally name people outside of their immediate
neighborhoods and sometimes quite far. Moreover, it is important to note
that highly central individuals are generally closer to people than the typical
household, so, if they did nominate the most central people, this is what we
should expect to find.
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                 17




            (a) Loan Question                               (b) Event Question

       Figure 3. The average number of nominations per household
       vs. the quintile of the households’ eigenvector centralities.


   It is plausible that individuals may not have good information about who is
central in parts of the network that are far from them. However, in Panel B
of Figure 4 we see that the average eigenvector centrality percentile of those
named at distance 1 is the same as at distance 2 or distance 3 or more. This
suggests that individuals have reasonable and comparably accurate informa-
tion about central individuals in the community who are immediate neighbors
or at greater distance from them.


5.2. Regression Analysis. Motivated by this evidence, we present a more
systematic analysis of the correlates of nominations, using a discrete choice
framework for the decision to nominate someone.
   Our theory suggests that if people choose whom to nominate by picking
someone whom they hear about most frequently, then diffusion centrality
should be a leading predictor of nominations. While the aforementioned re-
sults are consistent with this prediction, there are several plausible alternative
interpretations. For example, individuals may nominate the person with the
most friends, and people with many friends tend to be more diffusion central
than those with fewer friends (i.e., diffusion centrality with T = 1 and T > 1
       GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                          18




        (a) Share of nominees in speci-                    (b) Average eigenvector centrality percentile
        fied neighborhood                                  of nominees in specified neighborhood

                Figure 4. Distribution of centralities of nominees

can be positively correlated). Alternatively, it may be that people simply nom-
inate “leaders” within their village, or people who are central geographically,
and these also correlate with diffusion/eigenvector centrality. There are indeed
a priori reasons to think that leadership status and geography may be good
predictors of network centrality, since, as noted in Banerjee et al. (2013), the
microfinance organization selected “leaders” precisely because they believed
these people would be informationally central. Similarly, previous research
has shown that geographic proximity increases the probability of link forma-
tion (Fafchamps and Gubert, 2007; Ambrus et al., 2014; Chandrasekhar and
Lewis, 2014) and therefore one might expect geographic data to be a useful
predictor of centrality. In addition to leadership data we have detailed GPS
coordinates for every household in each village. We include this in our analysis
below.22
22To   operationalize geographic centrality, we use two measures. The first uses the center of
mass. We compute the center of mass and then compute the geographic distance for each
agent i from the center of mass. Centrality is the inverse of this distance, which we normalize
by the standard deviation of this measure by village. The second uses the geographic data
                                                                                      1
to construct an adjacency matrix. We denote the ij entry of this matrix to be d(i,j)     where
d(·, ·) is the geographic distance. Given this weighted graph, we compute the eigenvector
centrality measure associated with this network. Results are robust to either definition.
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                 19

   Of course, the correlations below are not a “test” that the causal mechanism
is indeed gossip, as in our model, but they do rule out that our diffusion
centrality measure simply picks out degree centrality, geography or traditional
leadership.
   To operationalize our analysis using diffusion centrality, we need to first
identify p and T . We use the average of the transmission probability pa-
rameters estimated in Banerjee et al. (2013), which studies the diffusion of
information about a loan, and finds p = 0.2. We set T = 3, since the aver-
age distance between nodes in our network is 2.7 and thus 3 represents the
distance to which information travels before it begins to echo backwards. In
what follows, we use DC(0.2, 3) when we refer to diffusion centrality.
   We estimate a discrete choice model of the decision to nominate an individ-
ual. Note that we have large choice sets as there are n − 1 possible nominees
and n nominators per village network. We model agent i as receiving utility
ui (j) for nominating individual j:

                      ui (j) = α + β 0 xj + γ 0 zj + µv + ij,v ,

where xj is a vector of network centralities for j (eigenvector centrality, DC(0.2, 3),
and degree centrality), zj is a vector of demographic characteristics (e.g., lead-
ership status, geographic position and caste controls), µv is a village fixed
effect, and iv,j is a Type-I extreme value distributed disturbance. For conve-
nience given the large choice sets, we estimate the conditional logit model by
an equivalent Poisson regression, where the outcome is the expected number
of times an alternative is selected (Palmgren, 1981; Baker, 1994; Lang, 1996;
Guimaraes et al., 2003).
   Table 2 presents our estimates of β and γ. First we show that DC(0.2, 3)
is a significant driver of an individual nominating another (column 1). A one
standard deviation increase in eigenvector centrality is associated with a 0.634
log-point increase in the number of others nominating a household (statistically
significant at the 1% level). In column 2 we see that this is robust to controlling
for leadership status, geographic centrality of households, as well as village and
caste fixed effects: a one standard deviation increase in diffusion centrality is
associated with a 0.616 log-point increase in the number of others nominating
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                 20

                     Table 2. Factors predicting nominations

                                          (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)           (7)       (8)

DC(0.2, 3)                             0.634*** 0.616*** 0.639** 0.749* 0.982 0.681*                   0.727*     1.208
                                        (0.073)  (0.099) (0.286) (0.399) (0.814) (0.358)               (0.427)   (1.179)
Eigenvector Centrality                                    -0.005          -0.142 -0.064                           -0.300
                                                         (0.276)         (0.350) (0.349)                         (0.594)
Degree Centrality                                                 -0.117 -0.208                         -0.113    -0.295
                                                                 (0.405) (0.535)                       (0.428)   (0.662)
Leader                                           0.637**                         0.636**               0.640**   0.640**
                                                 (0.298)                         (0.298)               (0.296)   (0.296)
Geographic Centrality                             -0.305                          -0.303                -0.309    -0.308
                                                 (0.216)                         (0.215)               (0.217)   (0.217)

Observations                             6,466     5,733      6,466    6,466    6,466     5,733         5,733     5,733
Village and Caste FE                      No        Yes        No       No       No        Yes           Yes       Yes
p−value of βDC(0.2,3) = βEigenvector                          0.248             0.324     0.288                   0.389
p−value of βDC(0.2,3) = βDegree                                        0.279    0.373                   0.323     0.410
Notes: The table reports estimate of a Poisson regression where the outcome variable is the expected number of
nominations under the loan question. Degree centrality, eigenvector centrality and DC(0.2, 3) are normalized by
within-village standard deviation. Standard errors (clustered at the village level) are reported in parentheses. ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




the household (significant at the 1% level). Leadership status does affect the
number of nominations as well, as we saw in the descriptive evidence, but the
point estimate of the diffusion centrality coefficient hardly changes.
   In columns 3-5 we add eigenvector and degree centrality as points of compar-
ison. It seems that it is indeed diffusion centrality that best predicts nomina-
tions. A one standard deviation in DC(0.2, 3) corresponds to a 0.639 log-point
increase in the number of nominations (statistically significant at the 5% level)
as compared to -0.005 log-points when looking at eigenvector centrality (not
statistically significant, column 3). Similarly, including both DC(0.2, 3) and
degree centrality leaves the coefficient on DC(0.2, 3) mostly unchanged, a 0.749
log-point increase in the number of nominations associated with a one standard
deviation increase in centrality, whereas there is no statistically significant as-
sociation with degree centrality and the point estimate is considerably smaller
(-0.117, column 4). However, parameter estimates are noisy and one cannot
reject the hypothesis that the coefficients on DC(0.2, 3) and eigenvector cen-
trality as well as DC(0.2, 3) and degree are statistically the same, despite the
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                 21

difference in the point estimates. The p-values of a test of equality of coeffi-
cients are 0.248 and 0.279 in columns 3 and 4, respectively (see the last row
of the table). Further, we include all three centrality measures in column 5
and are unable to reject that any individual coefficient is statistically different
from zero, although they are jointly significant with a p-value of 0.00). The
point estimate of DC(0.2, 3) remains similar to those in column 4, and both
degree and eigenvector centrality have negative point estimates. However, due
to the colinearity of the three centrality variables, standard errors are more
than twice as large than in the previous columns. Columns 6-8 repeat the exer-
cises of columns 3-5, now including leadership status and geographic centrality
as extra control variables. Additionally, we add village and household caste
fixed effects. As before we find that DC(0.2, 3) enters significantly and with
similar effect sizes, unless all three centralities are included, where the esti-
mates become noisy. Moreover, in our pairwise comparisons neither degree nor
eigenvector centrality coefficients are large and statistically significant drivers
of the number of nominations.
   Our results provide suggestive evidence that a key driver of the nomina-
tion decision involves diffusion centrality with T > 1 although, given the high
degree of correlation of these metrics in our sample, we cannot statistically re-
ject that all centrality variables matter equally. The point estimates, however,
point towards the diffusion centrality as the most robust factor. Overall, it is
clear that individuals are able to accurately name highly central individuals,
well beyond using other status variables.




                          6. Concluding Remarks

  Our model illustrates that it should be easy for even very myopic and non-
Bayesian agents, simply by counting, to have an idea as to who is central in
their community (according to fairly complex definitions). Motivated by this,
we asked villagers to identify central individuals in their village. They do not
simply name locally central individuals (the most central among those they
know), but actually name ones that are globally central within the village. This
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                22

suggests that individuals may use simple protocols to learn valuable things
about the complex systems within which they are embedded.
   Our findings have important policy implications, since such nomination data
are easily collected and therefore can be used in a variety of contexts, either on
its own, or combined with other easily collected data, to identify who would be
a good seed for an information. For instance, if a household is both a nominee
and a leader, it has a 47% likelihood of being in the top 10% of the centrality
distribution.
   It is also worth commenting that our work focuses on the network-based me-
chanics of communication. In practice, considerations beyond simple network
position may determine who the “best” person is to spread information, as
other characteristics may affect the quality and impact of communication. An
avenue for further research is to investigate whether villagers take such char-
acteristics into account and thus may nominate individuals who are even more
successful at diffusing information than the most central individual in the net-
work. Beyond these, the work presented here opens a rich agenda for further
research, as one can explore which other aspects of agents’ social environments
can be learned in simple ways.



                                 References

Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, A. G. Chandrasekhar, R. Hanna, and
 B. A. Olken (2014): “Network structure and the aggregation of informa-
 tion: Theory and evidence from Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper. 19
Ambrus, A., M. Mobius, and A. Szeidl (2014): “Consumption Risk-
 Sharing in Social Networks,” American Economic Review, 104, 149–82. 5.2
Baker, S. G. (1994): “The multinomial-Poisson transformation,” The Statis-
 tician, 495–504. 5.2
Ballester, C., A. Calvó-Armengol, and Y. Zenou (2006): “Who’s
 who in networks, wanted: the key player,” Econometrica, 74, 1403–1417. 1
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and
 M. Jackson (2014): “Come play with me: information diffusion about
 rival goods,” mimeo: MIT, Columbia, and Stanford. 3.1
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK          23

Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2013):
  “Diffusion of Microfinance,” Science, 341, DOI: 10.1126/science.1236498,
  July 26 2013. 1, 2.2, 12, 2.3, 3.1, 4, 4, 18, 5.2
Benzi, M. and C. Klymko (2014): “A matrix analysis of different centrality
  measures,” arXiv:1312.6722v3. 12
Bloch, F., G. Demange, and R. Kranton (2014): “Rumors and Social
  Networks,” Paris School of Economics, Working paper 2014 - 15. 1
Borgatti, S. P. (2005): “Centrality and network flow,” Social Networks, 27,
  55 – 71. 1
Chandrasekhar, A. and R. Lewis (2014): “Econometrics of sampled
  networks,” Stanford working paper. 5.2
Dodds, P. S., R. Muhamad, and D. J. Watts (2003): “An Experimental
  Study of Search in Global Social Networks,” Science, 301, 827–829. 2
Fafchamps, M. and F. Gubert (2007): “The formation of risk sharing
  networks,” Journal of Development Economics, 83, 326–350. 5.2
Golub, B. and M. Jackson (2010): “Naive Learning in Social Networks
  and the Wisdom of Crowds,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics,
  2, 112–149. 13
Guimaraes, P., O. Figueirdo, and D. Woodward (2003): “A tractable
  approach to the firm location decision problem,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 85, 201–204. 5.2
Jackson, M. (2008): Social and Economic Networks, Princeton: Princeton
  University Press. 10
Jackson, M. and L. Yariv (2011): “Diffusion, strategic interaction, and
  social structure,” Handbook of Social Economics, San Diego: North Holland,
  edited by Benhabib, J. and Bisin, A. and Jackson, M.O. 6
Katz, E. and P. Lazarsfeld (1955): Personal influence: The part played
  by people in the flow of mass communication, Free Press, Glencoe, IL. 1
Kempe, D., J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos (2003): “Maximizing the
  Spread of Influence through a Social Network,” Proc. 9th Intl. Conf. on
  Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 137 – 146. 1
——— (2005): “Influential Nodes in a Diffusion Model for Social Networks,”
  In Proc. 32nd Intl. Colloq. on Automata, Languages and Programming, 1127
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK           24

  – 1138. 1
Lang, J. B. (1996): “On the comparison of multinomial and Poisson log-
  linear models,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Method-
  ological), 253–266. 5.2
Lawyer, G. (2014): “Understanding the spreading power of all nodes in a
  network: a continuous-time perspective,” arXiv:1405.6707v2. 6
Milgram, S. (1967): “The small world problem,” Psychology Today. 2
Palmgren, J. (1981): “The Fisher information matrix for log linear models
  arguing conditionally on observed explanatory variables,” Biometrika, 563–
  566. 5.2
Rogers, E. (1995): Diffusion of Innovations, Free Press. 1
      GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                  25

                               Appendix A. Proofs

  We prove all of the statements for the case of weighted and directed net-
works.
  Let v (L,k) indicate k-th left-hand side eigenvector of g and similarly let v (R,k)
indicate g’s k-th right-hand side eigenvector. In the case of undirected net-
works, v (L,k) = v (R,k) . In the case of directed networks, eigenvector v (1) in the
main body corresponds to v (R,1) .
  The following lemma is used in proofs of the theorems.


Lemma 1. Consider a positive and diagonalizable g. Then g has a unique
largest eigenvalue. Moreover, letting g
                                      e = g/λ1 ,
                                                   (R,1) (L,1)
                                [geT ]ij →T vi          vj .


Proof of Lemma 1. The uniqueness of the largest eigenvalue follows from
the Perron-Frobenius Theorem (given that g is positive). By diagonalizability
we can write g as
                              g = VΛV−1
where Λ is the matrix with eigenvalues on the diagonal (ordered from 1 to n in
order of magnitude) and V is the matrix with columns equal to the right-hand
eigenvectors, and V−1 is not only V’s inverse, but is also the matrix with rows
equal to the left-hand eigenvectors. By normalizing g e = g/λ1 , it follows that
                                                                 n                o
g
e = VΛVe −1 , where Λe is the diagonal matrix such that Λ
                                                        e = diag 1, λ          e ,
                                                                      e , ..., λ
                                                                       2        n
           λk
and λ
    e =
     k     λ1
              .   Since the largest eigenvalue of g is unique, it also follows that
0≤ λ
   e < 1 for k > 1.
     k
                                                         (R,k)
   It helps to write the ik-th entry of V as vi , and similarly, the kj-th entry
      −1                (L,k)
of V is written as vj . Therefore, it is straightforward to check that
                                        n
                                 T
                                        X      (R,k) (L,k) e T
                               g
                               e ij =         vi    v j λk .
                                        k=1

Separating terms,
                                                   n
                          T     (R,1) (L,1)        X      (R,k) (L,k) e T
                        g
                        e ij = vi    vj       +          vi    vj λk .
                                                   k=2
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                26

                    T
Thus, given that λfk → 0 for k ≥ 2, it follows that
                                         T         (R,1) (L,1)
                                       g
                                       e ij →T →∞ vi    vj ,

as claimed.



Proof of Theorem 1. We show the second statement as the others follow
directly.
    First, note that in any neighborhood of any nonnegative matrix g, there
exists a positive and diagonalizable matrix g0 . Next, consider any nonnegative
g. If the statement holds for any arbitrarily close positive and diagonalizable
                 DC(g;p,T )
g0 , then since P T        t is a continuous function (in a neighborhood of a non-
                  t=1
                        (pλ1 )
negative and strongly connected g) as is the first eigenvector, the statement
also holds at g. Thus, it is enough to prove the result for a positive and
diagonalizable g, as in what follows.
   In fact, we show the following strengthening of the statement for a positive
and diagonalizable g.

     • The ‘tail terms’ approach eigenvector centrality:

                                 (g/λ1 )t · 1 → v (R,1) as t → ∞.

     • If p > λ−1
               1 , then

                      DC (g; p, T )       DC (g; p, T )
                  lim PT          t = lim pλ1 −(pλ1 )T +1 = v (R,1) .
                       t=1 (pλ1 )
                 T →∞                T →∞
                                             1−(pλ )        1


     • If p =   λ−1
                 1 ,    then

                                      1              
                                 lim    DC g; λ−1
                                               1  , T   = v (R,1) .
                                 T →∞ T


  By diagonalizability we write

                                           g = VΛV−1 ,

and normalizing g  e = g/λ1 it follows that g       e −1 . Normalize the eigen-
                                              e = VΛV
vectors to lie in `1 , so the entries in each column of V−1 and each row of V
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                           27

                                                  e T · 1 is such that
sum to 1. Then, applying Lemma 1, it follows that g
                                     e T · 1 → v (R,1) .
                                     g

This completes the proof of the first statement.
  Next, we turn to the sum ∞        e t · 1 and show the second statement for the
                                t=1 g
                              P

case where p = 1/λ1 . It is sufficient to show
                                                      
                                 DC g; λ−1
                                        1 ,T
                          lim                              − v (R,1) = 0.
                         T →∞                T
First, note that as with our calculations above,
                                                T X
                                                                      (R,k) (L,k) e t
                    DCi g; λ−1
                                                 XX
                            1 ,T =                               vi        v j λk
                                                 j t=1 k

Thus,
               
DCi g; λ−1                                                        (R,k) (L,k) e t
                                     P PT              Pn
        1 ,T             (R,1)               j   t=1       k=1   vi    vj λk               (R,1)
                    −   vi       =                                                      − vi       =
         T                                                  T
                                          T X n                      T X n      n
                                     1 XX         (R,k) (L,k) e t 1X           X    (L,k)   et
                                 =               vi    vj λk ≤              1·     vj     · λ k
                                     T j t=1 k=2                  T t=1 k=2    j=1
                                                                                                       |   {z   }
                                                                                                           ≤1

                                     nX T           λ
                                           et = n
                                                    e             
                                 ≤        λ
                                                      2
                                                            1 − e T → 0.
                                                                λ2
                                     T t=1 2    T 1− λ e
                                                         2

Since the length of the vector (which is n) is unchanging in T , pointwise
convergence implies convergence in norm, proving the result.
   The final piece repeats the argument for pn > 1/λ1 , obut now uses the def-
inition g
        e = (pg). Then we have Λ    e = diag λ   e , ..., λ
                                                  1
                                                          e
                                                            n with pλk = λ
                                                                         e . We
                                                                          k
show
                             DC (g; p, T )      (R,1)
                        lim PT             t −v        = 0.
                                t=1 (pλ1 )
                       T →∞
         GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                                               28

By similar derivations as above,
                            
        DCi g; λ−1                                                                (R,k) (L,k) e t
                                                      P PT                  Pn
                1 ,T                  (R,1)               j           t=1    k=1 vi    vj λk                       (R,1)
              PT        et
                                 −   vi           =                          PT e t                           − vi         =
                  t=1   λ1                                                    t=1 λ1
                                                                             T X
                                                                               n
                                                              1             XX              (R,k) (L,k) e t
                                                  =   PT              et
                                                                                           vi    vj λk
                                                          t=1         λ1    j t=1 k=2

                                                                           T X
                                                                             n             n
                                                           1               X               X      (L,k)     et
                                                  ≤ PT            et
                                                                                      1·         vj       · λk
                                                          t=1     λ   1 t=1 k=2            j=1
                                                                           T
                                                           n               X
                                                                                 et .
                                                  ≤ PT        et
                                                                                 λ2
                                                          t=1 λ1           t=1

Note that this last expression converges to 0 since λ
                                                    e > 1, and λ   e .23
                                                               e > λ
                                                      1          1   2
which completes the argument.
                                                                                                              P               
Proof of Theorem 2. Recall that H = Tt=1 (pg)t and DC =                                                            T
                                                                                                                         (pg)t ·1
                                                                      P
                                                                                                                   t=1
and so
                                  X
                           DCi =    Hij .
                                                                  j
  Additionally,
                                                                                  !                            !
                                             X                X DCk                              X Hkj
                  cov(DC, H·,j ) =                 DCi −                                Hij −                      .
                                              i                   k         n                     k       n
Thus
                                                                                !         P      
         X                               X                X DCk                   X       X j Hkj
              cov(DC, H·,j ) =                    DCi −                            Hij −         ,
          j                              i                    k        n              j               k        n
implying
                                                                       !                                  !
  X                              X                    X DCk                                X DCk
         cov(DC, H·,j ) =                DCi −                                   DCi −                        = var(DC),
    j                                i                k           n                        k      n


23Note   that it is important that p ≥ 1/λ1 for this claim, since if p < 1/λ1 , then pλ1 < 1. In
that case, observe that
                                   PT          t
                                                   e2 1 − λ˜1
                                      t=1 λ̃2      λ
                                                 =   ·
                                                   λ1 1 − λ˜2
                                     PT      t
                                       t=1 λ̃1
                                                   e
by the properties of a geometric sum, which is of constant order. Thus, higher order terms
 e2 , etc.) persistently matter and are not dominated relative to PT λ
(λ                                                                        et .
                                                                        t  1
        GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                                                29

which completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 3. Again, we prove the result for a positive diagonaliz-
able g, noting that it then holds for any (nonnegative) g.
  Again, let g be written as

                                              g = VΛV−1 .

Also, let λ̃k = pλk . It then follows that we can write
                               T                 T       n
                                                                                            !
                               X          t
                                                 X       X      (R,k) (L,k) e t
                         H=          (pg) =                    vi    vj λk                      .
                               t=1               t=1     k=1

By the ordering of the eigenvalues from largest to smallest in magnitude,
                         T                                                                                  
                                          (L,1) t                    (L,2) t                              t
                                v (R,1) vj             + v (R,2) vj
                         X
              H·,j =                           λ̃1                        λ̃2       +O              λ̃2
                         t=1
                         T                                              
                                         (L,1)                        t
                                v (R,1) vj λ̃t1
                         X
                     =                                 +O       λ̃2
                         t=1
                                          T                    T
                                                                                !
                                  (L,1)                                     t
                         v (R,1) vj             λ̃t1
                                          X                    X
                     =                                 +O             λ̃2           .
                                          t=1                  t=1

So, since the largest eigenvalue is unique, it follows that
                                                                                        t
                                                                                           
                                                                     PT
                         H·,j               (L,1)      t=1 λ̃2 
                       PT      t
                                 = v (R,1) vj     + O  PT     t
                                                                 .
                         t=1 λ̃1                         t=1 λ̃1


Note that the last expression converges to 0 since λ
                                                   e > 1, and λ
                                                    1
                                                              e >λ
                                                                1
                                                                  e . Thus,
                                                                   2

                                       H·,j               (L,1)
                                     PT      t
                                               → v (R,1) vj
                                       t=1 λ̃1

for each j. This completes the proof since each column of H is proportional to
v (R,1) in the limit, and thus has the correct ranking for large enough T .24 Note
that the ranking is up to ties, as the ranking of tied entries may vary arbitrarily
                                    (R,1)    (R,1)
along the sequence. That is, if vi        = v` , then the ranking that j has over




24The   discussion in Footnote 23 clarifies why p > 1/λ1 is required for the argument.
     GOSSIP: IDENTIFYING CENTRAL INDIVIDUALS IN A SOCIAL NETWORK                 30

i and ` could vary arbitrarily with T , but their rankings will be correct relative
to any other entries with higher or lower eigenvector centralities.
