NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMMIGRATION AND THE ECONOMY OF CITIES AND REGIONS
Ethan Lewis
Giovanni Peri
Working Paper 20428
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20428
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

This paper has been written as a chapter of the “Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics”, Volume
5, Duranton, Henderson, and Strange editors, Elsevier. We thank Vernon Henderson, William Strange
and Gilles Duranton for their comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Ethan Lewis and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions
Ethan Lewis and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 20428
August 2014
JEL No. F22,J61,R23
ABSTRACT
In this chapter we analyze immigration and its effect on urban and regional economies focusing on
productivity and labor markets. While immigration policies are typically national, the effects of international
migrants are often more easily identified on local economies. The reason is that their settlements are
significantly concentrated across cities and regions, relative to natives. Immigrants are different from
natives in several economically relevant skills. Their impact on the local economy depends on these
skills. We emphasize that to evaluate correctly such impact we also need to understand and measure the
local adjustments produced by the immigrant flow. Workers and firms take advantage of the opportunities
brought by immigrants and respond to them trying to maximize their welfare. We present a common
conceptual frame to organize our analysis of the local effects of immigration and we describe several
applications. We then discuss the empirical literature that has tried to isolate and identify a causal impact
of immigrants on the local economies and to estimate the different margins of response and the resulting
outcomes for natives of different skill types. We finally survey promising recent avenues for advancing
this research.
Ethan Lewis
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
ethan.g.lewis@dartmouth.edu
Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

1.

Introduction

International migrants to the US and to other rich countries have grown in number and as
share of the population during the last four decades. As of 2010 about 10% of the
population in the average OECD country (the club of most economically advanced nations)
was foreign born. In the US this percentage was 12.9, only slightly above that average. The
increase over recent decades of such share was also significant as immigrants comprised
only 4.7% of the US population in 1970. While this aggregate number is not negligible, what
makes immigration particularly interesting to urban and regional economists is its
remarkable concentration in some regions and cities. The US is a good example of this.
Immigrants are more geographically concentrated than natives no matter what
geographical unit we choose. We will illustrate this fact with more detailed statistics in the
next section. For now, let us just mention that California, the top immigration state, hosts
25% of all US foreign-born but only 9% of its natives. New York, the top immigration
metropolitan area, hosts 14.5% of all US foreign born but only 5.5% of natives.
As a consequence, native individuals have a very different degree of exposure (in any
aspect of their life) to immigrants depending on where they live. Among California
residents, in 2011, for every two US born there was one foreign-born. Hence it was very
likely that the effects of those foreign born individuals, through their economic and labor
market transactions, were felt, in some form, by natives.

At the other hand of the

spectrum among West Virginia’s residents for every 99 natives there was one immigrant.
This makes it much less likely that those few immigrants produced any noticeable
economic or labor market impact on most native West Virginians. Even more extremely,
Miami and Los Angeles counted more than 40% of foreign-born residents2 (almost one
foreign born for each native) in 2011 while other metropolitan areas (such as Johnstown,
PA and Billings, MT) had less than 1% of foreign born residents3.

2 The percentage of foreign born residents was 62% in Miami and 43% in Los Angeles.
3 These percentages are calculated from ACS microdata including all working individuals 18-65 not resident
in group quarters.

2

The very uneven distribution of immigrants across regions, relative to the native
population, makes for a very good “prima-facie” set-up to study the differential impact of
immigration on the local economies. Different geographic areas, and the native workers
and firms within them, have been exposed to very different inflows of immigrants over the
last decades. Hence, by appropriately tracking their economic performance (wage and
employment of native workers and productivity of firms) subsequent to the inflow of
immigrants, we may be able to identify the effects of immigration on these economies.
Certainly one has to be very careful in drawing causal inference from statistical association.
The location of immigrants is not random but is itself the result of decisions that depended
on local economic conditions. A booming economy attracts more workers and more firms.
If immigrants respond more vigorously to economic incentives than natives (and there is
some evidence of this, see for instance Cadena and Kovak 2013) an increase in their share
in the population may be a consequence (and not a cause) of regional economic success.
Caution is also required in identifying the total economic effect of immigrants by analyzing
regions, as those are interconnected: the effects of an inflow of immigrants in one region
can spill to others through labor mobility, capital mobility or trade. Nevertheless, exploiting
the massive differences in migrant settlements across regions and cities and correlating
those differences with local economic outcomes has been the foundation of the largest part
of the empirical studies that have focuses on the local effects of immigrants.4
Let us emphasize right away that the features of geographical concentration (and skill
concentration, as described below) of immigrants relative to natives are not only typical of
the US but of most industrialized countries. European cities (such as London, Paris and
Barcelona) have an immigrant density comparable to the top US cities. Our chapter, in fact,
will analyze features of immigrants and local economies that can be considered as very
general across industrial countries. While we will begin by reviewing several studies that
In the 1990’s and part of the 2000’s studies using the geographic variation of immigrants to estimate their
economic effects were identified as using the “area approach.” The more competent of those studies,
however, always accounted also for the skill-distribution of immigrants across area units not simply their
density.

4

3

focus on the US, where this literature originated because of data availability, we will also
discuss and analyze many studies and results for other countries, especially in Europe,
where immigration flows have been particularly large during the years since 2000, feeding
a very contentious policy debate, and where very good administrative data have become
available in the recent years, making empirical analysis much more detailed and
interesting.
Considering immigrants as one group and focusing only on their uneven geographic
distribution cannot by itself provide good insight on their economic impact on natives.
Immigrants, in fact, are also distributed differently than natives across other dimensions
that we broadly define as “skills.”

Considering the specific “skill” distribution of

immigrants is crucial. For one, it provides us with another dimension of variation to
analyze the effect of immigrants. More importantly it forces us to develop a theoretical
approach to analyzing productivity and economic effects of migrants in a context of
productive specialization and complementarities across skills. First, we need to identify the
more appropriate cells that best correspond to homogeneous skills (or “factors of
production”). Then we need to specify how they are combined in production exhibiting
certain patterns of complementarity and substitutability with each other. The immigrant
and native distribution across these skill cells and the ability of natives to move across
them in response to immigration (as well as to move across geographic units) will be very
important factors in determining productivity, wage and employment effects of
immigrants.
There are three dimensions of the native-immigrant difference in skill characteristics that
have been used in the literature, leading to somewhat different strategies to identify and
analyze the immigrants’ effect. First, immigrants differ in their educational composition
vis-à-vis natives. They are relatively more represented among very high (Ph.D. degrees)
and very low (less than high school diploma) levels of schooling. Second, they differ in
their age distribution, as they are over-represented among young individuals in the labor
force (18-35 years old). Third, they are employed in some occupations much more than in
others with a clear and specific pattern: they are over-represented in manual-physical
4

intensive jobs among the less educated, and they are over-represented in ScienceTechnology-Engineering-Math intensive jobs (STEM) among the highly educated.

In

contrast, they are relatively rare in white collar, communication-intensive, bureaucratic
types of jobs. This is possibly because their language skills provide them with a
comparative disadvantage in those jobs as their physical/manual skills (on one hand) or
mathematical/analytical skills (on the other) are more internationally transferrable.
This concentration of immigrants in some skill-groups produces three interesting
theoretical consequences that we need to consider when analyzing the impact on the native
economy. First, the effect on natives will depend on a native’s characteristics: individuals
with skills and in occupations similar to those where immigrants concentrate will
experience their competition more strongly. Individuals in other jobs will experience a
beneficial effect or no effect at all, depending on the productive interactions
(complementarity) between skills. Second, this uneven concentration will introduce
differential incentives for natives to “move” out of their cells. While they may move across
local economies towards or away from the areas where immigrants concentrate
(depending on their competition or complementarity) they can also move away from the
skill-cells in which immigrants are concentrated and towards those skill-cells benefitting
from immigrants. While workers cannot change their age, they can change their education,
occupation and job specialization and they typically do over their working career. When
exposed to immigration, natives will have economic incentives to specialize, upgrade and
direct their career in order to maximize returns and minimize losses from immigration.
Finally firms are also important players. When faced with a changing concentration of
potential workers across skill-cells, they may adopt differential technologies or techniques
or they may change product combination so as to use more intensely and more efficiently
those skills that have become more abundant.

Traditionally the economic analysis has distinguished between short and long run effects of
immigration. However, the so-called short-run effects are mostly a theoretical device to
decompose a complex effect. When economists analyze the “short-run effects” of
5

immigrants they try to isolate the consequences of immigration when all other variables
(including the stock of capital, the skill supply of natives and the technology and productive
structure) are fixed. This should be called “partial” effect. It is a way to understand and
isolate a specific effect, not a way to forecast what happens, even in the short run. The
adjustments in skill supply of natives, the adaptation of technologies and the related capital
investments and the change in product composition described above have typically been
associated to the long-run response to immigration. However, bar some exceptional cases,
immigration has been a slow and consistent force in the last decades for most countries. It
has rarely (if ever) been a temporary one-year burst followed by slow adjustment.
Typically, the yearly inflow of immigrants in countries with fast growing foreign population
has been between 0.3 and 0.6% of the resident population. These inflows have produced
significant changes over time but the horizon to observe these consequences are decades,
not years. Hence the speed of these inflows and their progression and relative
predictability imply that the correct perspective is a “long-run” one. Within this time
horizon, the described adjustment margins (changes of native skill supply, of capital,
technology and of output composition) have also played important roles and need to be
analyzed as part of the effect of immigration. Let us also add that a focus on the “long-run”
consequences of migration implies that the most relevant measure of immigration flows in
a country is the change in the stock of foreign-born, hence net migration. This implies that
short-run temporary flows of migration and return are not central in our chapter. While
there is an interesting literature devoted to the selection of returnees, and to how this
affects the features of remaining migrants (e.g., Abramitzki et al. 2014) we are simply
focusing on the characteristic of non-returning migrants in the long run and their effects on
the receiving economies.
The “long-run” nature of the migration phenomenon and the skill characteristics of
migrants, at the top and bottom of the receiving-country human capital distribution, imply
that at the national level immigration could have an important role in economic growth and
economic inequality. In particular, due to the increase in economic inequality in the US
during the last three-four decades immigration has been sometimes scrutinized as a
potential determinant of it, through its labor market competition effects on less educated
6

natives. Card (2009) and Blau and Kahn (2012) do not find a significant role of immigration
in the increase in US inequality during the recent decades. The relatively balanced inflow of
immigrants between college and non-college educated, and the response of local markets
and native workers (that we will analyze below) imply a small effect of immigration on
native wage (and income) inequality. Also, while some immigrants themselves are at the
bottom of the income distribution, their number as share of population is relatively small5.
Several of the studies at the national level that we will review in section 3.26 have
quantified the contribution of immigration to inequality in the US and none of them has
found more than a very small role. Dustmann et al. (2013) consider more directly the effect
of immigration on the UK wage distribution and find a mild positive effect on inequality,
mainly through an increase in high wages due to complementarity with immigrants.
On the other hand, very limited research exists, at the national level, on immigration and
growth. Ortega and Peri (2014) are among the few to tackle the issue of estimating the
impact of immigration on average GDP per person and aggregate productivity using crosscountry analysis. They use geographic features predicting immigration and control for an
array of institutional, cultural and historical determinants, to isolate the effect of
immigration. They find a strong positive effect of the immigrant share on productivity
across countries, and they document that this derives in part from more innovation and
from other benefits of diversity. Alesina et al (2013) adopt a similar approach to analyze
the effect of “country of birth” diversity on GDP per person and productivity and also find a
positive and significant effect. Also promising are those studies analyzing the impact of
highly skilled immigrants (Scientists and Engineers) on average wage and productivity
growth in US cities (such as Peri et al. 2014, described in section 3 and 5). The aggregate
studies mentioned are interesting and quantitatively useful. However, our approach in this
chapter will look in greater detail at mechanisms and models that help us understand the
working of immigration on economic activity, productivity and labor markets. Focusing on

Peri (2013) analyzes directly the impact of immigrants on native poverty rates in the US during the years
1990-2010, through the labor market competition channel. He finds extremely small effects.
6 See in particular Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012).
5

7

local economies and shedding light on those mechanisms has clearly important
implications on the role of immigration on aggregate inequality and growth.
After presenting in Section 2 some statistics about the distribution of immigrants across
geography and skill space, section 3 introduces a rather general “production function
approach” to the economic effects of immigration. We will focus on wage and employment
effects of immigrants, and we will also discuss productivity effects which need to be
considered as we analyze specialization and choice of technique. The analyzed approaches
model the skill interactions across different type of workers in a city (or region) using a
production function approach. We devote special attention to the nested CES approach that
organizes native and immigrants workers in education, age and nativity cells and then into
production tasks. Variations of this model have been widely used in the recent literature.
Using this framework we derive effects on productivity and wages, and they also produce
predictions on changes in specialization, skill supply and choice of production technology,
consequent to immigration-induced changes to the distribution of skills.
Then Section 4 analyzes the empirical strategies used to isolate immigration as an
exogenous change in skill supply at the local level. We will consider the potential challenges
to identification and the proposed remedies. In particular the methods based on preexisting settlements and current aggregate inflow by nationality, and those focusing on
some sudden and large migration shocks or policy changes are considered.

Then in

Section 5 we review estimates of the effects produced by immigration on local economies
in terms of wages and productivity outcomes and we will pay attention to native responses
to immigration and to a general equilibrium effect. The inflow of immigrants, in fact,
appears to trigger a mobility response of natives (as immigration changes the relative
rewards for them). It turns out that the most significant responses are not represented by
net outflows or inflows of natives in geographical areas (what Card and DiNardo 2000,
called the “skating-rink” hypothesis) but by increased mobility across skill cells
(specialization, occupation upgrading and education improvement). This is important
because mobility in the skill space affect native wages in a different way than mobility
across regions. In particular if natives move from skills (occupation, tasks and jobs) that
8

are more substitutable to skills that are more complementary to immigrants’ in response to
their inflow, this response would increase the native gains from immigration and those
gains can be captured within an economic area. If they instead move out of the area simply
to avoid competition, they may not gain from immigrants and the area analysis may miss
some of the total effect. Another aspect that we emphasize is that firms may be induced to
adopt technology and capital in order to take advantage of immigrant skills. This is even
more important in the long run because it may change the productivity of specific skills. We
will analyze studies that combine the direct effects and the induced responses (of native
workers and firms) to determine the observed productivity and wage outcomes.
Analyzing recent contributions we think that the differentiated skill-cell approach, using
variation across regions and cities, is emerging as dominant in the study of immigration to
the US and to other developed countries. Recently, individual and firm-level data from
different developed countries (mainly in Europe) have also been tackled to analyze these
effects. The most interesting European data are from administrative sources and make
available to the researcher panels of individuals over time as well as panel of
establishments over time. The ability to identify firm outcomes and the possibility of
following individual workers makes those data sets able to reveal in more detail the microlevel mechanism of adjustment of local economies to immigration. While several empirical
and identification issues still exist when using these data, we think they add very
interesting tools to our understanding of the role of immigrants and in particular they
allow a closer inquiry of the mechanisms at work within labor markets. In Section 6 we will
analyze the possibilities opened in terms of methods and analysis by the availability of
these individual panel datasets and we also review some recent studies using historical
micro-data to analyze the productive response to immigrants in historical large migration
episodes. Finally, in Section 7 we briefly summarize and conclude the chapter.

9

2.

Immigrants’ Distribution and Native Exposure

Immigration affects the geographic and the skill distribution of productive resources
(workers) in a country. Defining the relevant cells to analyze the economic and productive
consequences of immigrants is important. First, however, we describe how the distribution
of immigrants in the US differs on dimensions of geography and skills relative to the
distribution of natives. These differences are what create economic opportunities and
incentives to implement changes and adjustment by native agents. We use data from the
American Community Survey 2011 and we select only individuals who are currently
working.7

A few simple statistics help us to see that the largest variation in native

exposure to immigrants is in the geographic dimension, using metropolitan areas as units
of analysis. Not only does immigrants’ share of employment vary hugely across units, but
immigrants also exhibit a much stronger absolute concentration in the top locations than
natives do. Then we analyze the distribution of immigrants and natives across occupations,
using the Census occupational classification and finally we describe the distribution of
immigrants across education and age groups. All empirical studies we are aware of use one
or more of these dimensions as unit of analysis to identify the productive and labor market
effects of immigrants.
The upper part of Table 1 shows some simple statistics on the overall concentration of
immigrants, relative to natives, across different dimensions. The lower part of Table 2
shows instead statistics representing the variation in exposure of natives to immigrants
across cells in that dimension. Column 1 of the Table considers 284 Metropolitan areas as
cells, Column 2 considers 50 states. Column 3 considers 333 occupations and column 4
uses seven schooling groups.8

Finally Column 5 considers seventy education-by-age

groups (seven education groups each divided into ten age bins, for workers between 18
and 65).
Specifically we consider individuals 18-65 years of age, not living in group quarters who have worked at
least a week.
8 The groups are: no diploma, high school diploma, some college, associate degree, college degree, Master and
PhD.
7

10

The production models that we analyze below consider a stronger direct competition effect
of immigrants on natives when they are in the same cell. Hence the variation in exposure
across cells is a crucial dimension to identify the direct competition effect. On the other
hand, it is also very important to consider different degrees of interaction between cells
and also different ability of natives to move across cells. The more recent empirical studies
have been careful in accounting for these cross effects and responses. The interaction
between

skill

cells

is

typically

analyzed

within

the

context

of

complementarities/substitutability, of skills in production, while the interaction across
geographic cells is usually considered in the context of the native migration response to
immigrants.
The distribution across metropolitan statistical areas (MSA) shows the strongest difference
in concentration of immigrants relative to natives. The Herfindal index of concentration
across MSA’s, which is calculated as the sum of squared share of total population in each
unit, captures the degree of concentration of a population in cells. The Herfindal index of
urban population (between 0 and 1) would be close to 1 if most of the urban population
(immigrant or native) in the US were concentrated in the largest metropolitan area. It
would be essentially 0 if the urban population was instead equally distributed across
metropolitan areas of the same size. The table reports the Immigrant-Natives ratio of such
Herfindal Index and implies a 3.5 times larger value for immigrants than for natives
denoting a significantly larger concentration of their urban population in the largest
metropolitan areas. Similarly (second row) the percentage of immigrant employment in the
top metro area is 2.5 times as large as the percentage of natives employed in the top metro
area. The percentage of immigrants in the top 5% of metro areas is 1.8 times the
percentage of natives in top 5% of metro areas, and immigrants in the top 10% MSA’s are
1.6 times the percentage of natives in the top 10% metro areas. The stronger concentration
of immigrants across metropolitan areas relative to natives is also shown in Figure 1. In
that figure we see that the percentage of total immigrant employment in the top 15
metropolitan areas is significantly larger than that of natives. When ranking metropolitan
areas based on their percentage of total urban employment, the mass of immigrants is
strongly shifted towards the very top areas, relative to the mass of natives. A similar
11

pattern of stronger geographic concentration is also revealed in column 2 when we
consider states. California, the top immigrant state had 25% of all US working immigrants
but only 9% of all US native workers. Similarly Figure 2 shows much larger concentration
of immigrants in the top 5 states relative to natives.
The lower part of Table 1 shows even more interesting statistics. We show the range in the
exposure of natives to immigrants as the ratio between the share of foreign born in the
most exposed and in the least exposed cells. The bottom row is the ratio of the highest to
the lowest exposed cell, the next row up is the ratio of the cell at the 95 percentile (top 5%)
and the one at the 5th. The row above that shows the ratio of the 90-10 percentile.
Remarkably the share of foreign born in the city with highest concentration (Miami) was
65 times the share in Johnstown (PA), the city with lowest relative presence of immigrants.
Even the 90-10 percentile ratio was a very large 11. This means that in metropolitan areas
with high concentration of immigrants their density relative to natives was more than ten
times larger than in metropolitan areas with low concentration. Across states the variation
was also remarkable with a top-bottom ratio of almost 22. While these differences are
certainly not random, comparing wage, productivity, employment and other economic
outcomes across cells that experience such a drastically different presence of immigrants, if
done carefully, could reveal important implications of their presence.
Let’s then analyze similar statistics calculated across occupations (column 3) and education
and age (column 4 and 5). In terms of occupations, we notice that immigrants are not more
concentrated across them, in absolute terms, than natives are. The indices of relative
concentration in the upper part of the table are, in fact, close to 1. However, their
distribution across occupations is very different from that of natives, and it generates very
different degrees of exposure of natives to immigrants depending on the occupation they
are in. The top-bottom ratio is 63 and the 95-5 percentile ratio is 7.3. A native working as
“sorter of agricultural products” (the top occupation as share of immigrants) is exposed to
a share of immigrants 63 times larger than one working as “funeral director (sic!)” (the
occupation with lowest share of immigrants). Occupations, therefore, as metropolitan
areas, vary enormously in the presence of immigrants. Moreover both dimensions exhibit a
12

significant inter-cell mobility of native workers over their lifetime, especially when young.
Hence the differential immigration “pressure” across cells may produce a significant
response of natives in flowing across cells. This does not imply that they cannot be used as
units of analysis of the effects of immigrants, but one certainly needs to account for flows of
natives between them as potential response to immigration.
The last two columns show the relative concentration and distribution of immigrants
across education and education-age cells. In both dimensions immigrants and native have
similarly concentrated distributions (ratios are close to 1). Moreover, the educational
grouping, as it only includes seven cells that are much larger than those of other grouping,
does not exhibit the extreme differences in native-immigrant exposure as the other groups.
Even when we consider 70 education-age groups the range of exposure to immigrants is
significantly smaller than for the geographic dimension. Column 5 in table 1 shows a range
of exposure of 10 in the top-bottom comparison and of 5 in the 90-10 percentile, both
values are well below the corresponding ratio in the geographic units (metropolitan areas
and states). An interesting feature of education-age as skill groups is that the inter-cell
mobility of natives in response to immigrants may be significantly smaller than for the
geographic-occupation cells. As we will see, the “given” native supply (nationally) within
each cell, even as immigrant pressure may vary across them, has contributed to the success
of this cell-structure in analyzing the effect of immigration.
Let us, finally, emphasize that there is a key economic difference between the geographic
and the skill cell units. In the first case one can treat cells as separate units (in production
and as labor markets), and worry later about potential interactions across them because of
native mobility or trade of goods and capital. This has been the approach of regional and
labor economists, assuming at first independent units (cities, states) and then checking
whether the linkages (through internal migration or trade) would affect the findings. In the
skill approach, instead, cells are considered as factors interacting within one same
production process and hence one cannot analyze each cell in isolation. Economists have
clearly understood the need to model right away linkages and interactions among them as
a first-order concern. The approaches we prefer combine skill cells as factors of production
13

and geographic cells as different production units. It is time to introduce a framework for
organizing workers in skill cells and a simple structure to analyze cross-cell interactions
and potential cross-cell mobility.

14

3.

Theoretical framework: the Skill Cells approach at the National and local level

3.1 Basic Framework: production and labor demand
The commonly used framework to think about the impact of immigrants within the skillcell approach considers an area (typically a region, state or a city) as producing an
homogeneous tradable final good by combining different production skills and physical
capital through a production function. This final good (output) is the numerarie and we can
think of the production function of a region as the reduced form of a multi-good economy
in which different non-tradable intermediate goods (and services) each provided by a skilltype are combined in the typical final consumption basket (the final output). The
simplification is that all local economies produce and consume the same final good, y. They
may, however, have different supplies of each intermediate factor (skill) as well as different
techniques in production and hence different marginal productivities and returns to skills.
An alternative framework is one in which individual localities produce a number of
different varieties and they partially specialize in the production and trade of varieties.
This would generate a Heckscher-Ohlin type of model with a further margin of adjustment
to changes in skills due to immigration, represented by changes in the variety composition
of production. An increase of a type of skill due to immigrants could be fully absorbed by a
change in production composition towards goods intensive in the use of that skill (the socalled Rybczynsky effect). However, Lewis (2003) and Card and Lewis (2007), among
others, show that the adjustment in the variety composition of output is not an important
margin of adjustment to immigration. This implies that the constant output composition
model (the one-good model, used here) does not miss an important margin of adjustment
and is a reasonable working model.
For area (region, city) r the production function of output can be represented as follows:
=

(

,

,

(

,

,

,

,

,

,…

,

15

,

)) for

= 1,2, …

(1)

where Ln,r is the amount of factor (skill/task) n used in the production of area r. Similarly
An,r is the productivity of factor n in area r. In general we allow for factor-specific
productivity (determined by the chosen technology), to vary across localities (hence the
subscript r). Notice that we included the physical capital K (and its productivity AK) as a
factor separable from an aggregate labor factor (L) that, in turn, combines all the skill
groups L1,… Ln and their productivity A1,… An. This implies that physical capital is
combined

with

the

labor

aggregate

and

has

the

same

degree

of

substitutability/complementarity with all skill cells. An alternative to this assumption is
entertained by Lewis(2013a) who explores the consequences of considering different
degrees of complementarity between physical capital and different skill groups. In
particular, in the more relevant case of complementarity between capital and collegeeducated workers, Lewis (2013a) shows that the capital response to immigration of college
educated will attenuate its wage impact.9 Capital-skill complementarity is an interesting
and important avenue to pursue. However the current literature on regional impact of
immigrants mostly relies on the assumption of separability between capital and aggregate
labor.10
The capital separability assumption, combined with the assumption of long-run mobility of
capital and constant long-run returns for capital, imply that we can solve physical capital
out of the function to obtain a reduced form:
=

9

,

,

,

,

,

,

,…

This can be shown with the derivative identity,

,

for

,

(

⁄

)

(

⁄

)

=

= 1,2, …

(

⁄

)

(

⁄

)

+

(2)

(

⁄

)
(

⁄

, which says the

)

total relative wage response to a change in the supply of skilled labor (S) relative to unskilled labor (U) is
)
( ⁄
, the (negative of the) inverse elasticity of substitution – plus
equal to its partial direct effect –
( ⁄ )
indirect effects working through the adjustment of capital. Under capital-skill complementarity, both
)
)
( ⁄
( ⁄
and ( ⁄ ) are positive, so the adjustment of capital attenuates wage impacts ( ( ⁄ ) >
(

⁄

)

(
(

⁄
⁄

)
)

(

⁄

)

). When capital is instead assumed separable from labor inputs in production
=

(

⁄

)

(

⁄

)

(

⁄

)

= 0, so

(which makes it convenient to make this assumption).

To partial defense of this approach many of the insights from capital-skills complementarity are recovered
in the literature through the introduction of endogenous choice of techniques (hence technology-skill
complementarity) that we will review in section 3.6 below.
10

16

In (2) the parameter  is a combination of parameters including the return and
productivity of physical capital and total factor productivity, while the terms
relative productivity of factor (skill) n standardized so that ∑

capture

= 1 . In the long-run,

competition among workers and firms ensures that each factor is paid its marginal product.
Hence the compensation to each skill, wn,r is as follows:

,

=

,

=

,

,

,

,

,

,

,…

,

,

(3)

If the reduced-form production-function is constant return to scale in the labor aggregate
then the sum of compensation to skill equal total output in region r.
3.2. Education and age based skill cells in a CES production function: The national
approach
While early studies (such as Grossman 1982) experimented with different functional forms
for the production function in (2), such as the flexible translog specifications, the more
recent research on the local (and national) impact of immigrants has focused on CES and
specifically on nested CES functions. The reason is that the nested CES provides a simple
expression of the (log) marginal productivity of each skill as function of the supply of the
same skill, of simple aggregators of other skill supply and of a small number of parameters.
Hence observing skill supply and compensation (wages) and accounting for the factor
aggregators (also easily constructed) one can use (3) to estimate empirically the few
parameters regulating the response of wages to changes in skill supply.
It is useful to describe in some detail, following Ottaviano and Peri (2012), how the nested
CES approach can be used to estimate important elasticity parameters and to calculate
effects of the change in immigrant supply on wages. This approach has been used by
several recent empirical papers. The most relevant characteristics used to organize cells in
the nested CES framework have been education levels, age groups (or experience groups)
and nativity groups (foreign-native). These have provided the grid to organize workers into
17

cells. Adopting a CES structure one could represent production function (2) with a small
number of parameters. And one would be able to estimate those parameters using the
whole country as relevant area, simply exploiting the variation of immigrant supply over
time and across skill cells.
The cell structure we describe here, originally proposed by Borjas (2003) and Card and
Lemieux (2001) has then been followed and enriched by Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and
Manacorda et al. (2012) and then followed by other studies after those. All those studies
have considered the whole country, rather than local areas, as units of analysis and hence
we omit the area subscript (r) in this section. One appealing feature of this approach is that
considering relatively fixed characteristics (such as age, education and nativity) and a
national market makes more plausible the operational assumption that skill supply by
natives did not respond to immigration. In this national approach the typical assumption is
that the supply of skills by natives is totally inelastic (given).
We describe the flexible nested-CES structure that embeds various alternative models
studied in the literature, using general notation and allowing for recursive expressions of
general results. Consider four characteristics numbered n=0,...,3. Characteristic 0 is
common to all workers and defines them as such. Characteristic 1 is education and can be
used to partition workers into groups i(1)=1,...,M₁ that differ according to educational
attainment (e.g. high school dropouts, high school graduates and college graduates). Then,
each of these education groups can itself be partitioned into groups i(2)=1,...,M₂ that differ
according to characteristic 2, which is age (say age- intervals in the range 18 to 65 years
old). Finally each of those can be partitioned into two groups “natives” and “foreign-born”
according to characteristic 3 which is “nativity”11. This sequential partitioning and its
relative notation are illustrated in Figure 3. The figure shows how groups are nested into
each other with n indexing the nesting level.

Studies that are focused on the diversity of immigrants consider “country of birth” as relevant
characteristics and include several countries (or groups) as categories for this partition. See for instance
Ottaviano and Peri (2005, 2006)

11

18

The nested CES structure allows us to define production function (2) in the following
recursive form. Let us call i(n) a group (cell) of workers defined by common characteristics
up to n, and define as Li(n) the corresponding factor supply. The CES aggregator at the level
n is then defined as:

( )

=

(
(

where
1)[i(n)]=1

(

)

)

(

n=0, 1, 2, 3

)

(4)

)∈ ( )

is the relative productivity level of type i(n) standardized so that ∑i(n)∈i(n-

Any common multiplying productivity factor is absorbed in the TFP parameter A

shown in expression (2). Both the parameter A and
technological factors only. The parameter
types i(n). Hence

(

)

depend on exogenous

>0 is the elasticity of substitution between

is the elasticity of substitution across education group,

elasticity across age groups within education category and

is the

is the elasticity between

native and immigrants in the same education-age group. Given the ordering of
characteristics and sequential partitioning that leads to less and less heterogeneous groups
i(n) as n increases, a reasonable assumption it that

>

>

> 1. As type i(0) includes all

workers, we can embed the nested structure defined by (4) into (2) by writing that
equation as

= ( ,

) where L0 is the top level aggregator in the nesting.

Using this structure and notation, we can express the wage of a worker of type i(3),
where i(3) indicates a cell for specific values of education, age and nativity, as the value of
her marginal productivity:

ln
( )

( )

= ln( ) +

−

( )

ln( ) +

( )

−

−

( )

+

( )

−

−

( )

+

(5)

First, focusing on the last level of nesting and considering native (nat(3))and foreign-born
(for(3)) sharing the same characteristics of the first two nests, education and experience
(i(2) and i(1)) equation (5) implies:

19

( )

ln

( )

Therefore,

( )

=

( )

( )

−

(6)

( )

the inverse elasticity of substitution between native and immigrants in the

same education-age cell can be estimated from observations on wages and employment
levels of natives and immigrants over time, using fixed effects to control for

( )
( )

.

Second, for higher nesting level m=1, 2 we can define wi(m) as the average wage of a specific
group of workers i(m) sharing characteristics up to m. Then, substituting m instead of 3 as
highest nest level in expression (5) gives the profit maximizing relation between wi(m) and
Li(m). In this case, using observations over time, the estimation of

can be achieved by

regressing the logarithmic wage of group i(m) on the logarithmic CES aggregate Li(m) with
the inclusion of fixed time effects to capture the variation of the aggregate terms ln(A) and
ln(L0), when estimating

. In

the case of m=2, when estimating the elasticity of

substitution across age groups we should also include education by year effects in order to
absorb the terms

( )

−

−

( )

that do not change with characteristic 2 (age).

Once we have estimated the elasticity of substitution between different types of workers at
each level of the nest, the wage equation (5) can also be used to compute the percentage
change in the wage of workers of a certain type j (defined by a specific combination of
education-age-nativity) caused by a percentage change in the labor supply of workers of
another type i (defined by another combination of characteristics). To show this in a
compact way let us denote by sim the type i's share of labor income among workers
exhibiting the same characteristics up to m as that type. Then, we can write the percentage
impact of a change in labor supplied by workers of type i on the wage of a worker of type j
who share the same characteristics up to m as follows:
∆
∆

=

>0

for m=0

And

(7)
20

∆

= −∑

∆

<0

for m=1,2,3

Three remarks are in order. First, an increase in the labor supply of a certain type i,
causes an increase in the wage of another type j only if the two types differ in terms of
characteristic 1 (education in our case) as shown in the first expression of (7). In that case
the factors are complements. Second, if the two types share at least characteristic 1, then a
rise in the labor supply of i always depresses the wage of j (second expression) as
>

if groups are ordered in increasing level of substitutability. This effect is stronger

the larger the number of differentiating characteristics j has in common with i, because this
implies more terms in the summation in (7). Third, and specific to the effect of immigrants,
while the partial effect of immigrants in the same education-experience group as natives is
negative, this is only a partial effect. The impact of immigrants in other education-age
groups on native wages may be positive and the total effect may therefore be positive. The
production function described above allows us to use the easy formulas in (7) to calculate
the wage impact of immigrants in each education-age group on the wages of natives in each
education-age group, once we have the elasticity and the wage shares.
3.2.1 Most commonly used Nests
Within the general structure described above the literature based on a nested CES function
has converged towards one (or a few) most commonly used partitions at each level of the
nesting. Beginning with the lower level (nativity) most of the literature since Ottaviano and
Peri (2012) has allowed two imperfectly substitutable groups of workers: natives and
foreign-born.

There are several reasons for this simple partition. First, even when

considering workers with equivalent education and experience, natives and immigrants
differ in detailed abilities, motivations and tastes that may set them apart. Second, in
manual and intellectual work they have culture-specific skills (e.g., cooking, crafting,
artistic abilities, sport talent) and limits (e.g., limited knowledge of the language or culture
of the host country), which create comparative advantages in some tasks. Third, due to
comparative advantage, migration networks, or historical accidents, immigrants tend to
choose different occupations with respect to natives, even for given education and
21

experience levels. Finally, there is no need to impose perfect substitutability between
natives and immigrants ex ante as, within the structure proposed, this elasticity can be
estimated. While one could envision a larger number of nativity groups, based on areas of
origin, the most common studies only separate natives and foreign-born.
In terms of the second level of the nest (characteristic 2 is age or experience) the literature
has been rather open handed. Some studies allow five or ten age-group partitioning
experience between 0 and 40 years of work (Card and Lemieux 2001, Borjas 2003). Others
only include 2 groups (young and old). As it turns out (see Ottaviano and Peri 2012) this
partition and the relative elasticity of substitution are not very relevant in determining
wage effects between immigrants and natives and between skilled and unskilled (usually
associated with educational differences). In some cases (Peri and Sparber 2009, Docquier
et al. 2011) this level of the nest is omitted altogether, because it does not affect much the
consequences of immigrants on native wage distribution. Finally, and importantly,
characteristic 1 determines the grouping according to education. The partition more
frequently used in the labor literature is a division into two broad educational
characteristics, "High School equivalents" which includes individuals up to a high school
diploma and "College-Equivalents" including individuals with some tertiary education and
a those with college degree. Several papers, most notably Goldin and Katz (2008) and Katz
and Murphy (1992) (but others as well12) have emphasized that college and high-school
educated are hard to substitute and their relative supply, combined with technological
progress and an elasticity of substitution around 1.5-2, explain well their relative wage
movements in the US post 1960. The further distinction between high school graduates
and high school dropouts does not seem useful to understand relative wages in the US (see
Card 2009; Ottaviano and Peri 2012) because those two groups seem close substitutes to
each other in production, at least after 1950 (Goldin and Katz 2008). Hence we will
consider the college-high school partition of education and the foreign-native partition of
nativity as the most common features of this approach, with a less clear preference for 2, 5,
10 or even omitting the level altogether, for age-experience groups.
Examples are Autor Katz and Krueger (1997), Krusell et al. (2000), Card and Lemieux (2001), Acemoglu
(2002) and Caselli and Coleman (2006) among others.
12

22

3.2.2. Partial and total wage effects of immigrants in the CES model
The nested CES model described above allows us to distinguish partial and total wage
effects of immigrants. The former is the wage impact on native workers due to a change in
the supply of immigrants with the same education-age characteristics, while keeping
constant the labor supplies of all other workers. This effect has been the main or only
coefficient of interest in many "reduced form" approaches that regress native wages on the
employment of immigrants in the same skill-groups13. However this effect is only an
“artificial” partial effect as it misses the entire set of cross effects. The total wage effect,
instead, accounts also for the indirect impact of immigration among all groups of workers
and is what one would be interested in when analyzing the impact of changes in
immigration flows (or immigration policies).
The direct partial wage effect can be estimated by panel regressions of ln(wj(N)N-1) the
logarithmic wage of natives, sharing characteristics up to N-1 (namely education and age)
on the supply of immigrants, lnLi(N) , in the same age-education group. Careful econometric
specifications (such as Borjas 2003) control for year-specific effects (to absorb the
variation of Lo the labor aggregate over time) and characteristic-by-year specific effects (to
absorb the variation of Li(n) for n=1,2) where characteristics are education and age groups,
when running these regression. Using the notation defined above, the resulting partial
elasticity can be written as:

=−

The term

−

(8)

represents the wage share of immigrants among workers within the same

education-age cell as native group i. Note that the direct partial wage effect (8) coincides

For instance, in Borjas (2003, sections II to VI) or in Borjas (2006) and in the studies inspired by these
seminal papers, the direct partial wage effect of immigration is the main estimated wage effect. Even the
recent meta-study by Longhi, Nijkamp and Poot (2005) considers this partial effect as the relevant estimate
across studies.

13

23

only with the last among the several terms composing the summation in (7) which includes
both direct and indirect wage effects. This happens because, by construction, the elasticity
captures only the wage effect of a change in immigrant labor supply operating
through the term

−

( )

in (5).

Hence, two important observations are in order. First,
elasticity of substitution between age groups,

is negative whenever the

, is smaller than the substitutability

between native and foreign-born in the same education-experience group,

. If those

elasticities of substitution are close to each other, the partial effect can be 0 or close to 0 (a
point emphasized in Peri 2011 and discussed in section 5). Second, the value and the sign
of

give incomplete information about the overall effect of immigrant supply changes

on the wages of domestic workers of type j. Indeed, (8) includes only the last term of (7). In
order to evaluate the total wage effect of immigrants on natives of type j, one has to
combine the impacts generated by (7) across all the i(3) cells that include foreign-born
workers for which Li(3) changes due to immigration. This implies that the total wage effect
of immigrants cannot be directly estimated from a regression: One can, however, estimate
the elasticities

,

,

and combine them with the income shares in (7) and aggregate

across all groups for which Li(N) changes due to immigrants.
This detailed analysis of the CES model exemplifies well the importance of recognizing the
crucial role of indirect general effects (cross complementarities in this case) in order to
capture the total impact of immigrants. We will consider in the next section another
important indirect effect of immigrants, namely their effect on native skill supply.

3.3 The area approach and the labor supply response
The nested CES approach, described in the previous section, can be used at the national
or at the local area level. However, the tenability of the assumption of a fixed skill supply of
natives, vis-à-vis changes in the supply of immigrants, is what has moved several
24

researchers to criticize the area approach and prefer a national market one (e.g., Borjas,
1994; Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997; Borjas, 2003). They have argued that, while at the
national level the assumption of a rigid labor supply by native workers is tenable, at the
local level, mobility of people between cities and regions would cause labor market
opportunity differentials to be arbitraged away. Hence, any potential effect of immigrant
skills on demand for native skills would be matched by changes in their supply (through
internal migration), leaving no effect (or much attenuated effects) on local wages and
making cross-area wage comparison uninformative.
This criticism is valid. It is not, however, a good reason to abandon the city and regional
data that still contain rich variation of immigrant flows and of their labor market effects.
First, of all the impact of an exogenous change in foreign-born skills on wages will be
uninformative only if native people are perfectly mobile in the long run and they fully undo
the change in skill supply generated by immigrants. Several empirical papers show that this
seems hardly to be the case as there is not strong evidence of native internal migratory
response to immigrants (Card 2001, 2005; Card and DiNardo 2000; Peri and Sparber
2011). Also, the skill distribution of immigrants seems to affect permanently the skill
distribution of a metro area and it is not undone by differential migration of natives. For
instance, as shown in Card (2009) and as reproduced in Figure 4 for 283 US metropolitan
areas as of 2011, the percentage of high school dropouts in an MSA’s labor force is strongly
positively correlated with the share of immigrants. This illustrates that cities receiving a
large share of immigrants are likely to be permanently affected in their relative skill
composition vis-a-vis cities not receiving them. Second, even if perfect (or large) mobility
takes place, we simply need to account for it. In particular, we should consider the labor
supply of natives at the area level as a potential margin of adjustment to immigration and
analyze the impact of immigrants on it. Within the skill-cell model sketched above, if we are
analyzing two regions, r and s, for each specific skill n, that we can think as an educationage group, we may model the change in native relative supply of that skill between region r
and s (driven by net migration between the two) as:

25

∆

= ∆

for n=1,2…N (9)

This represents a log-linear version of the relative native labor supply of skill n, between
area r and s. The parameter n is the elasticity of relative labor supply capturing the
response of inter-area migration by native workers of skill n, to wage differentials between
the two regions. Namely, an increase in the wage differential will move people towards the
high paying region and change the relative supply of skills in favor of that region. The
extreme cases would be represented by n =0, when prohibitive moving cost would imply
no response to wage differential (vertical labor supply) and by n =∞ which would imply
wage equalization across areas.
If we observe an exogenous inflow of immigrants in a large number of localities (and/or
periods of time) and we also observe the native employment (population) and wage change
associated to it, for each skill group, we could, in principle, identify the parameters of labor
demand and labor supply by solving the sets of equations in (2) and (9). Using the nested
CES production-function approach we restrict the number of cross-elasticity parameters to
estimate, and we can derive log-linear demand functions as (3) for each skill, across
regions. Then, introducing skill-specific supply would simply add one extra parameter (the
elasticity) for each extra equation (log linear labor supply as in 9). Information on relative
changes in native employment (population) and native wages will allow estimation of
demand and supply parameters.
An important variation of the supply function described by (9) accounts for the fact that the
migration response of natives between region r and s may depend on real rather than
nominal relative wages. In particular, the change in local housing price, which several
studies have shown to be one of the consequences of immigrants (e.g., Saiz 2007; Ottaviano
and Peri, 2006) can be a separate channel in adjusting relative real wages and hence may
affect the supply response of natives. In most cases, however, the housing price (or rent)
effects is a common area-level effect and does not vary across skills. It can be due to
changes in local amenities (as in Ottaviano and Peri 2006) or to an upward sloping housing
26

supply (Saiz 2007), but as long as it affects skill group similarly it will be absorbed by a
common area effect across skills. This approach -- identifying skill-cell effects in the
presence of supply response of natives and allowing for common housing price effects -- is
followed by Peri (2011) and we will describe his findings in section 5 below. Peri, Shih and
Sparber (2014), on the other hand use a skill-cell approach allowing for skill-supply and
(one of the very few cases we know of) skill-specific housing prices to evaluate the
demand/supply and productivity effect of STEM immigrants using an exogenous change
across US cities due to the introduction of the H1B visa.
Card (2009) uses also a skill-cell analysis across US cities to show that the employment of
natives does not respond much to immigration-driven changes in skill supply and that the
estimated labor demand parameters (from a nested CES) are broadly consistent with those
estimated at the national level (e.g. in Ottaviano and Peri 2012). Peri (2013) uses a
simulation of the same nested CES education-age skill model across US cities, with
nationally estimated parameters, to show that the immigrant inflow to US metropolitan
areas during the period 2000-2009 had very small effect on wages of less educated (and
usually positive effect from complementarity with college educated immigrants). The area
analysis of the impact of immigrants, therefore, has benefitted much from a more careful
treatment of immigrant skill composition and skill complementarities in production.
Accounting for the heterogeneity between immigrants and natives is crucial in finding
these complementarity effects.
Let us also notice that some recent papers such as Smith (2012), Hunt (2012), and Jackson
(2013) find that immigration may affect the probability that natives stay in school and
hence their distribution across age-education cells. We will describe the details in section
5.2. Here it suffices to say that the impact of immigration, by changing relative returns to
each skill cell, pushes natives to respond. They tend to move towards cells that are
complements (rather than substitutes) of immigrant skills. The skill-cell upgrading, which
we will analyze more in detail below, implies that we should not assume fixed native
supply of skills even when analyzing national markets.

27

A simple way to represent the supply response across skill groups of natives is to re-write
(or re-interpret) equation (9) as describing the response of supply across skill groups,
rather than regions, to wage differentials. In particular, omitting the regional subscripts
and considering two skill cells, n1 and n2, we can write:

∆

= ∆

(10)

This relationship can be seen as a basic consequence of a Roy (1951) selection model, in
which individuals, given their abilities, choose the skill group that maximizes their returns
and respond to changes in relative compensation of those groups. We develop this point
further in the next section, when talking about production tasks, but the main working of it
is clear already within the skill-cell model.
The native population may change its relative supply of skills in response to immigration.
Moreover, not accounting for this margin of adjustment, we would underestimate the
positive wage effect of immigrants on natives. Think for instance of a simple model with
two skill levels, high and low, as the one we will introduce below. If an inflow of immigrants
in the low-skill cell pushes natives towards the high skill cell (because its relative
compensation increases) then, at the end of the period, fewer natives are exposed to
competition and more natives benefit from complementarity from immigrants (assuming
the two skills are complementary). If we do not account for this and we evaluate wage
gains and losses of natives using the initial distribution of natives we overestimate the
competition and underestimate the complementarity effect of immigrants on natives.

3.4 Occupations and tasks
The CES model with three levels of nesting (education, age and nativity) described above is
an excellent framework to discuss wage effect of migrants across regions. However it has
two limitations that we address in this section. First, the “age-experience” tier adds
28

complication and number of cells to the model especially in a cross-area analysis, but it is
not very relevant to understand the impact of immigrants on native wage and their
distribution, as shown in Ottaviano and Peri (2012). This is because the largest differences
in native-foreign distribution of skills are among education groups and regions rather than
across age groups and also because age groups are often close substitutes for each other.
Moreover as experience in the country of origin may have a different labor market value
than experience in the destination, a fine partition on this dimension may generate
grouping together of rather different natives and immigrant workers. Hence, while
allowing individuals of different ages to have different productivity levels we combine age
groups and eliminate the second level of the nest. Second, and more importantly, the
described CES nesting assumes a difference between natives and immigrants skills, by
partitioning them in different groups within the third nest. This way we can estimate their
substitutability, but we do not have a theory of why and how immigrants and natives are
different in production for given observable skills. In this section, therefore, we substitute
the nativity nest with difference in productivity in performing different tasks, linked to
language ability, as the basis of the productive difference between foreign-born and
natives.
We maintain the top tier of the CES, as above, namely a partition between two education
groups, college and high school equivalents. This partition, we argued in section 5.2,
captures fundamental skill differences in production. Within each of those two groups we
include native and foreign-born of all ages so that the production function, re-introducing
the region index and keeping notation consistent with before, can be written as:

=

Where the factors

,

,

and

+

,

,

,

,

for r=1…R

(11)

represent employment of college equivalents and high

school equivalents, respectively, and the parameters

,

and

,

represent their

relative productivity and add up to one. The term Ar captures total factor productivity and
represents the elasticity of substitution between them. Within each of these groups,
29

age and detailed education (as well as other attributes) may affect relative productivity.
Hence one can use relative wages to convert workers into “high school” or “college”
equivalents. Namely

=∑

=∑

and

where the coefficients nJ are

the relative productivity (wages) of workers in subgroup j relative to a “pure” college or
high school equivalent. Notice that a two-cell model as (11) implies that for the US as a
whole, immigrants did not change much the cell distribution of skills, as it turns out the
immigrant composition between college educated and non-college educated is similar to
the native’s one.14 This approach argues that if immigrants affect the wage distribution
within each of these two broad skill groups this is because of different characteristics, not
captured by education and age only.
A prominent difference between native and foreign-born among high-school equivalent is
that the second group is highly concentrated in occupations characterized by the use of
manual and physical abilities much more intensively than communication and interactive
skills. In agriculture, construction, personal and household services (which are sectors
attracting large percentages of immigrants workers) immigrants are builders, sorters,
maidens, cooks and waiters. Rarely are they coordinators, supervisors or sales persons. In
part this is because of their schooling (no high school degree). However, also controlling for
observable characteristics, immigrants with a high school degree or less are
disproportionately concentrated in manual jobs. This may be due in part to their worse
language skills (Lewis, 2013b), in part to their larger tolerance for (lower disutility from)
manual labor (D’Amuri and Peri forthcoming).15 In any case, this type of specialization is
As of 2011, 31% of US-born workers had a college degree or more while for foreign-born that figure was
29%. The figures are from our calculations on ACS data.
15 There are several pieces of evidence supporting that language skills drives immigrant comparative
advantage. First, in the U.S. Lewis (2013b) shows that the elasticity of substitution between natives and
subgroups of immigrants with stronger English skills, such as those who arrived at younger ages, is larger
than between natives and those with worse English skills (such as those who arrived at older ages). Second,
you can find some cross-country evidence in support of this view. You cannot reject that immigrants and
natives are perfect substitutes in Puerto Rico (Lewis 2013b) or Costa Rica (Castillo, Gilles and Raphael 2009),
where both speak Spanish. Not all of the cross-country evidence is supportive. Amuedo-Dorantes and de La
Rica (2011) find, if anything, larger occupational specialization among immigrants in Spain – where a large
share of immigrants speak Spainsh – than Peri and Sparber (2009) find in the U.S. Another outlier is
Manacorda, Manning, and Wadsworth (2012), who find a small elasticity of substitution between immigrants
and natives in the U.K. U.K. immigrants may have particular issues with skills transferability, however, not
accounted for in the Manacorda study: while on paper “high skill” U.K. immigrants appear to compete mainly
14

30

typical of less educated immigrants in most rich countries. D’Amuri and Peri (2014) show
that this holds also for Europe and it is reasonable to think that immigrants have a
comparative advantage, and hence specialize in, manual jobs.
Peri and Sparber (2009) show this fact and model it in a simple way that we describe here.
When considering high school educated equivalents in the two-skill partition model
described above they suggest a further partition based on manual (M) versus
communication (C) skills and they also suggest to nest those two skills within LHS as a
lower level CES aggregate, as follows.

L

= (

Hence

)

and

+ ((1 − ) )

(12)

are the aggregate amount of manual and communication skills supplied in

area r,  captures the relative demand for manual skills and

represents the elasticity of

substitution between manual and communication skills. The relative supply of skills of each
individual is derived by O*NET data (from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics) that describes
the type of skills used in each occupation and allows a classification between manual
(strength, coordination, manipulation) and communication (spoken and written
interactions) tasks. The occupation distribution of natives and immigrants, therefore,
determines their supply of manual and communication skills. In particular, the much
larger employment of immigrants in manual-intensive occupations reveals that they have a
comparative advantage for manual jobs, as they are less proficient than natives in their
language skills. We formalize this concept in a simple way.
We assume that natives (N) have relative efficiency N and N in performing manual and
communication tasks, while foreign-born efficiency levels are F and F. The comparative
advantage of foreign-born in manual tasks is expressed as: (F/F)> (N/N). Each
with natives at the lower end of the skill distribution (Dustman et al. 2013). Future research might do more
of these cross-country comparisons of imperfect substitutability, ideally with harmonized methods, although
obtaining the wage data to do so would be challenging.

31

individual chooses to divide one unit of labor supply (time) into lj and (1-lj) units,
performing manual and communication tasks, respectively, at a return equal to

and

per unit of manual and communication service performed. With decreasing returns in
performing each type of task we can write the labor income of individual j (=F,N) as:

=

+ 1−

ξ

(13)

In (13) the amount of effective units of task-service provided are function of time spent in
the task and efficiency in the task as follows:

= 1−

and

=

. Assuming

 the income-maximizing choice of workers imply that each worker type supplies
relative tasks C/M as a positive function of her relative ability (F/F) and of task’s relative
compensation. In particular the logarithm of relative supply of communication/manual
tasks by workers of nativity j (=N,F) in region r is given by:

=

Expression

(14)

shows

that

+

high

school

(14)

natives

would

have

a

higher

communication/manual relative supply than foreign-born (CN/MN >CF/MF) because they
have comparative advantages in it (N/N) >(F/F). It is also easy to show that (14) implies
that an inflow of immigrants in region r decreases the overall relative supply C/M and
hence it increases the relative compensation wCr/wMr. This improves the wages of
occupations using communication skills and it decreases wages for those occupations using
manual skills. Natives who are more concentrated in communication-intensive jobs will
mainly benefit from the complementarity effect. Moreover, natives will move their choice
of occupations further towards communication intensive ones as their relative returns
(wCr/wMr ) increase and they have comparative advantages in those.
Let us emphasize that the shift in relative supply by natives obtained taking the difference
before and after immigration of equation (14) would be a supply response very similar to
32

the one described in (10), except that native reallocation takes place across supplied tasks
(manual-communication) rather than across skill groups. Equation (14) fully reflects the
selection of skill supply of natives, in response to relative compensation, typical of the Roy
(1951) model. Hence high-school educated natives benefit in relative terms, from an inflow
of high school educated immigrants through two channels. First, as they are already more
specialized in communication skills, their compensation increases. Second in response to
immigration they supply more communication skills and those skills are complementary to
(and usually better paid than) the manual ones supplied by immigrants. The stronger
competition effect is instead experienced by existing immigrants, more specialized in
manual –intensive occupations.
In general, the fact that high school equivalent immigrant workers filled manual-intensive
jobs, that are often at the bottom of the career ladder for natives, implies that in locations
with large inflows of immigrants, native workers move more rapidly towards
communication-intensive and more complex type of jobs. Peri and Sparber (2009) show
this mechanism at work across US states in the period 1960-2000 by estimating a
regression as (14), using the change in foreign-born as exogenous shifter of relative
compensation

and find a significant response of native relative task supply. D’Amuri

and Peri (forthcoming) show a similar push towards more “complex” jobs, when exposed to
immigrant-competition for European workers. Foged and Peri (2013) identify the same
effect in response to non-EU immigrants for Danish workers. Immigrants provide the
incentives and the complementary manual factors for natives to specialize in betterremunerated communication-intensive job.

Those individuals, therefore, move more

rapidly out of manual and physical intensive occupations. Accounting for this change in
relative skill supply of natives is crucial to measure the overall wage effects of immigrants
on natives. The upward mobility generated as part of this mechanism shields native wages
from competition.
A similar mechanism implying immigrant specialization in the occupation (task) spectrum
and subsequent change in the relative skill supply by natives may also take place among
33

college educated workers. Within that group, immigrants are particularly concentrated in
occupations that are STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) related. The
international selection of high skilled immigrants and the high transferability of
mathematical-analytical skills imply that foreign-born are particularly productive in those
skills.

Natives, instead, are relatively more specialized in supervisory, managerial,

interactive type of occupations and they further move towards those as more immigrants
arrive. Peri and Sparber (2011b) consider such a mechanism of specialization-response of
natives to college educated immigrants. Borjas and Doran (2013) show a similar margin of
adjustment in the much smaller field of “mathematician specialization.” In response to the
large inflow of Russian mathematicians after the collapse of the Soviet Union, US
mathematicians moved towards the fields of mathematics that were more complementary
and less crowded by Russian mathematicians.
High-skill STEM immigrants may also have a particularly important role in innovation and
technological growth, in part, because of their greater connections to the global economy
(Saxenian, 2002b).16 That foreign skilled workers are particularly concentrated in STEM
jobs and contribute substantially to patented innovation was shown by Hunt and GautierLoiselle (2010) and Kerr and Lincoln (2010). Peri et al. (2014) look directly at the
productive effects of STEM immigrants and find that they generated a positive
contribution, localized at the metropolitan area level, to the productivity of college
educated natives. First they show that in metropolitan areas with large inflow of foreign
STEM workers (determined by the change in aggregate H1B visa entry, the main channel of
entry of highly educated immigrants) the wage and employment of native college educated
workers was substantially faster than in metropolitan areas with small inflows. The use of
instrumental variables based on aggregate change in visa and pre-existing localization of
foreign STEM workers, show that the correlation can be causal. Then, they show that such
an increase is only compatible with a significant increase in AH, the specific productivity of
the college educated equivalents. They also show that AL, the productivity of high school
Saxenian (1994) has also written about the fact that, in addition to a deep concentration of high-skill
workers (including immigrants), institutions and culture which support idea sharing may also be a necessary
input into innovation and successful entrepreneurship.

16

34

equivalents, increased as well but not as much as AH. They emphasize, therefore, that the
productivity improvements introduced by STEM (foreign) workers appear to be “skillbiased” in that they increase the productivity of college educated more than that of high
school equivalents.17
The possibility that immigrants may affect productivity through their contributions to
technology and science (or through other channels) opens new and very important
potential channels through which immigration affects production. Immigration may not
only change the supply of foreign skills, inducing a response in the supply of native skills,
but it may also change their productivity Aj by affecting technology, techniques or
efficiency. If this is the case the overall surplus of immigration can be much larger than
calculated before. In particular, increasing the share of STEM or college educated workers
may have positive local externalities on the region. Papers by Ciccone and Peri (2006), and
Moretti (2004a, 2004b) have emphasized the importance of productive externalities in US
cities from increasing the share of college educated. Those effects go beyond the
complementarity effects analyzed above. In particular, local learning and the diffusion of
better ideas and of better technologies can be affected by the concentration of college
educated, many of whom are foreign-born. At least one paper (Iranzo and Peri 2009) has
directly connected the higher share of college educated in US cities, to a higher share of
some immigrants (Indian and Europeans) showing their positive impact on productivity.
Another recent paper (Docquier et al. 2011) also emphasizes the potential importance of
human capital externalities, driven by immigration in OECD countries, in positively
affecting wages. That paper considers OECD countries as units, and it emphasizes the fact
that immigration to those countries was prevalently college-biased during the 1990s and
2000s. Adopting a two-tier nested CES model similar to the one described in section 5.2,
but allowing for externalities due to increased share of college educated, that study
simulates positive wage effect of immigrants in most countries.

Table 2 reports the magnitudes of the effects that they estimate per percentage point increase of STEM
worker employment share.
17

35

Let us mention, in closing of this section, another way, used in a recent paper by Dustman
et al. (2013) of organizing skill cells in a CES model. That study considers workers as
belonging to the same skill group if their productivity (wage) is similar. Hence skills groups
are inter-decile intervals of the wage distribution. While this requires strong assumptions
(such as a uni-dimensional representation of skills), it proposes to analyze the more direct
competition effects of immigrants on natives at a similar level of wage. The paper finds
evidence of stronger competition of immigrants with natives of similar wages. It also finds
a strong positive effect of immigrants in raising the average native wage, possibly
indicating an aggregate productivity (or strong aggregate complementarity) effect. We will
focus on potential productivity effects in the next section.
3.5 The Margin of Technological choice
The simple production model of high-school and college equivalents, illustrated in equation
(11), had widespread diffusion in the literature. One reason for its success is that, when
combined with skill-based technological progress, it explains parsimoniously and
reasonably well the evolution of relative college-high school wages (e.g., Katz and Murphy
1992) in the US during the last four decades. Even more interestingly, Acemoglu (1998,
2002) has argued that the type of technology adopted in a market depends on the relative
supply of skills. When one type of skill (say college graduates) becomes more abundant,
technologies that increase its productivity (skill-complementary or skill-biased) become
more profitable and hence more frequently adopted. The rise in college educated workers
in the US during the last 40 years can explain, therefore, the adoption of skill-biased
technologies that in the long-run have increased the productivity of college educated and
even increased their wages relative to high school graduates. Against this long-run increase
in college education and adoption of skill-biased technology, the fluctuations of relative
college-high school supply has then determined the shorter-run change in relative wages.
Notice a very important implication of directed technological change. For a given change in
relative supply of skills, the adoption of directed technology, increasing the productivity of
the factor whose supply increases more, will attenuate the effect on wages, relative to the

36

case with unchanged technology.

This is seen very simply by deriving the relative

compensation of skills from (11).

=

An increase in the relative supply

−

(15)

would reduce the college-high school wage ratio,

everything else constant, as long as the two factors are imperfect substitutes. However if
the relative productivity

is also positively affected by the relative skill supply this

negative wage effect can be attenuated or even reversed.
Lewis (2011) tested the idea of directed technological adoption at the local (metropolitan
area) level when the shift in relative skills is caused by immigration. In particular, in MSA’s
with a large inflow of less educated immigrants Lewis (2011) finds that firms have fewer
economic incentives to adopt techniques that substitute for manual labor (such as
automation) and complement human capital relative to metropolitan areas with small
inflows of immigrants. Reducing automation and maintaining, instead, techniques that use
more efficiently manual and less skilled workers, will produce an increase in the relative
efficiency AHS/ACO and hence could attenuate or eliminate the relative wage effects of an
increase in LHS/LCO. Lewis (2011) is able to identify the adoption of specific mechanization
and automation procedures by firms in different metropolitan areas, and relate that to the
inflow of less educated immigrants. As predicted by the directed technological adoption
framework, the study finds that mechanization and automation is faster in metropolitan
areas with low immigration and hence lower supply of high school equivalents.
While Lewis (2011) provides evidence on directed technological adoption using micro
data, Peri (2012) estimates in a panel of US states the effect of immigration on
an aggregate production function model, which, per (15), means imposing a value of

within
(the

college-non college elasticity of substitution) established by the literature. The study finds
strong evidence of a negative correlation between the inflow of immigrants and the change
37

in

which is consistent with the theory of directed technological change. More details of

the empirical approach of this study are in section 5.2
Overall, the recent literature has emphasized several margins of response to immigration
taking place within area economies. A change in relative skills caused by immigrants
induces a change in relative skill supply of natives (also characterized as specialization,
occupational upgrading and possibly education upgrading of natives). It may also induce a
change in technologies/techniques adopted which results in a change in relative
productivity. Both responses reduce the “competition effect” of immigrants on similarly
skilled natives. And they both increase the surplus received by natives as a consequence of
immigration. Hence they can help to explain a smaller negative wage effect of immigrants
on wages of comparable natives than predicted by the “partial” effect (everything else
equal). We mentioned that the other margins, such as native migration across areas and
change in variety composition of output, have been investigated but do not seem to play a
major role. While no study accounts explicitly for each margin of adjustment, we will
overview the empirical findings on each of them and we will assess what their combined
effect implies on wage and productivity of natives.
3.6 Scale Externalities, Heterogeneity and Search
In the models considered so far, the increase in scale of the local economy due to inflow of
immigrants plays no role in productivity and hence wages (because of constant return to
scale). The simple increase in density of economic activity due to immigrants (representing
simply an increase in the number of worker) and to the fact that they tend to concentrate in
cities may have beneficial productivity effects (e.g. Ciccone and Hall 1996 and Greenstone
et al. 2010). However we review here some potential local externalities, from density, that
are more specific to immigration. Some recent papers, based on the trade and growth
literature, have considered an even finer differentiation of skills between immigrant and
natives and among immigrants themselves. Allowing for each country of birth to represent
a different skill group (producing a differentiated non tradable intermediate), and
38

combining them in a CES for final production these studies have derived that an index of
diversity (fractionalization) of immigrants in the area is positively related with local
aggregate productivity (and hence average wages, and possibly average rents). In this
framework, more immigrants from more countries have a direct positive productivity
effect. Ottaviano and Peri (2006) estimate such a model for US metro areas. Alesina et al.
(2013) estimate the effect of such country of birth diversity index across countries in the
world.

Trax et al. (2013) explore this relation at the firm/plant level. Within the

production-function context and treating each nationality as a different skill, a more
differentiated and larger population of immigrants has positive productivity effects at the
local level as it increases the variety of intermediates. There is significant evidence of this
positive effect in the mentioned papers and place of birth is a potentially important
dimension of differentiation18. However, this research is still at its early stage and we need
a better understanding of the channels through which and the level (firm, area, and sector)
at which this “place-of-birth-diversity” effect operates. Certainly an approach that
considers in greater detail the skill differences between immigrants and natives and looks
at the micro level (firm, plant) to identify these effects can shed light on important margins.
Most of the research on the effect of immigrants has focused on their skill differences with
natives, and has used a competitive approach to labor market equating marginal
productivity to wages. This is reasonable in the long run. An interesting new line of
research considers instead frictions in labor markets and employer-employees matching
that create match-specific surplus. In particular, following the huge success of search
models pioneered by Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) to analyze important labor market
features, some very recent studies have incorporated immigrants in search and matching
models. In this search context, differences between natives and immigrants on the labor
supply side (especially in their bargaining power and their outside options) may generate
surplus which native workers appropriate. In particular, Chassamboulli and Palivos (2014)
show that when immigrants have a worse outside option and/or a lower bargaining power
than natives, they will be paid less in equilibrium, even if they have identical productivity
Large part of the gains from trade are predicated on similar type of gains from varieties. See for instance
Weinstein and Broda (2006).

18

39

as natives. This in turn, implies that in a market with a larger percentage of immigrants,
firms will earn larger average surplus per vacancy filled. Hence they will create and post
more vacancies. If they cannot discriminate natives out of those vacancies, but they can pay
different wages, some of these jobs will be filled by natives and this will increase their
employment and also increase their wages (by making their bargaining position stronger).
While the model is somewhat specific it emphasizes a very general idea. If firms save on
their costs by hiring immigrants (who are paid less due to their lower bargaining power)
they will appropriate a larger surplus and they will be willing to create more jobs, and
expand because of that. The new jobs created as a consequence of this profit-seeking
expansion will also benefit natives. Hence differences on the supply side may also result in
a “complementarity” of a different kind between native and immigrants and imply
beneficial effects due to stronger job-creation when more immigrants are in the labor
market. In a similar vein, Chassamboulli and Peri (2014) analyze the effect of different
policies aimed at reducing undocumented immigrants, in a search and matching model of
the labor market and apply it to the US-Mexico case. This flexible frame allow them to
characterize documented and undocumented immigrants as having different outside
options, and hence to study their job-creation effect on the US economy. It also allows them
to internalize the decision to migrate (from US to Mexico) as a search decision and hence
analyzes the effect of policies on the incentives to migrate.
Having defined the main frameworks and a unifying approach used in the literature to
analyze the economic consequences of immigrants in local economies, we now focus on the
empirical implementation and on the issues related to identifying an exogenous change in
immigrants and their skill supply.

40

4

Empirical Approaches to identify causal effects on local economies

As summarized in the previous section, the skill-cell approach implies that immigration
may affect the absolute and relative productivity of skills. However, differential
productivity growth (possibly skill-specific) may also attract and select immigrants. The
economic conditions in receiving countries are a major motivation for migration (e.g., Clark
et al. 2007; Mayda 2010), and, at least in the U.S., evidence suggests that immigrants can be
very responsive to different conditions across labor markets (Cadena and Kovak 2013;
Borjas 2001). This potential endogeneity problem has been addressed with two related
strategies: (1) flows, often of refugees, arising from shocks in sending countries (and often
flowing to a small number of destinations) and (2) “shift share” type instruments which
largely take advantage of the autocorrelation in the regional distribution of immigrant
flows by origin. Both approaches were pioneered by David Card (1990, 2001). A useful
recent development is the linking of the “shift-share” instrument to variation driven by
actual immigration policies.
The first, “natural experiment” approach was pioneered in David Card’s (1990) study of the
Mariel Boatlift, the influx of about 125,000 Cuban refugees in 1980, on Miami, the largest
location in which they settled. There have been several studies since that time using this
approach, including Jennifer Hunt’s study of repatriates from Algeria to France (1992) and
Carrington and Lima’s (1996) study of African repatriates to Portugal. Other studies have
examined the impact of the refugee flows from the breakup of Yugoslavia (Angrist and
Kugler 2003), among other refugee flows (e.g., Foged and Peri 2013); and flows that are the
result of natural disasters (Kugler and Yuskel 2008).

These studies largely involve

immigrants which flow into the lower end of the labor market. Finding similar such events
which generate very high skill immigrant flows is more difficult, but not impossible.
Several studies have investigated the impact of the Former Soviet Union (FSU) immigrants
to Israel including Friedberg (2001), Lach (2007), and Paserman (2013).19 The impact of
the dismissal of Jewish scientists from Nazi Germany has also received attention
(Waldinger, 2008; Moser et al., 2012).
Borjas and Doran (2012) study the impact of the FSU flows on the academic labor market for
mathematicians in the US.

19

41

This approach has at least two challenges. The first challenge is that while a refugee crisis
may generate exogenous emigration, the location and occupations taken by refugees may
very well be endogenous to economic opportunities in the receiving country. Hence
defining a credible comparison group may be challenging. This is not a trivial problem, and
not all of the comparisons above necessarily get to credible causal inference.20 A second
challenge for some of these studies, raised in Donald and Lang (2007), is obtaining proper
and meaningful inference with a small number of “treatment” cells.21 Both challenges may
have become a bit easier with the spread of Abadie et al.’s (2010) synthetic control
technique, which uses data-intensive techniques to construct a matched comparison group
and also allows inference by placing the estimates in a distribution of similar structured
“placebo” regressions.

However, to date, this approach has seen little use in the

immigration literature.22
An additional concern with this approach is about external validity: studying a group of
immigrants which are narrow in type, often to a narrow set of destinations raises concerns
that the results may not generalize to more common types of immigrant flows. Most high
immigration countries have received significant (but not catastrophic) flows for a decade
or more and we are more interested in the effects of those.
A second approach, beginning with Card (2001), parallels Bartik-style (1991) of widelyused instrument for demand shocks. It essentially predicts flows of immigration in region r
For example, many of the studies that take advantage of the breakup of the FSU use the variation in location
of FSU immigrants within Israel across firms (Paserman 2013) or cities (Lach 2007). This is likely to be
endogenous, and so it is not clear that these analyses are more credible than OLS. To address this, Friedberg
(2001), who uses variation across occupations, uses occupation prior to arrival as an instrument.
21 This point is driven home by Angrist and Krueger’s (1999) examination of what they call the 1994 “Mariel
Boatlift that did not happen” as the Clinton administration blockaded what appeared to be shaping up to be
flotilla from Cuba similar in size to the 1980 boatlift. This analysis found a marginal significant positive effect
of the non-event on unemployment rate of blacks (using standard inference techniques which Donald and
Lang argue give incorrectly sized tests). There is also the question of whether meaningful inference is even
possible with such a small number of cells: Donald and Lang’s re-estimation of the confidence intervals in
Card (1990) suggests they are uninformative. Even Donald and Lang’s approach is made under restrictive
assumptions; Conley and Taber (2011) provide a more general procedure for inference in panel data with a
small number of treatment cells which tends to produce even wider confidence intervals.
22 One example is Bohn et al. (2014).
20

42

based on the lagged locations of similar immigrants.23 The basic structure of the key
“predicted immigration flows” component of the instrument is typically of the form:

=

where

_ ℎ =

⁄

(

_ ℎ ×

)

is the share of the stock of immigrants,

, from source country

“c” living in destination area “r” (usually a within-country region or metropolitan area) at
some point prior to the period of analysis (often the initial period of the analysis), and

is

the aggregate flows from country c during the periods of study. Note that the formula
above can be specialized to skill cells. In that case

would not simply be the total count of

immigrants from country c, but instead, the flow of immigrants in a specific skill cell. Often
the constructed variable

is called the “imputed” inflow of immigrants in area r (and skill

cell i, if it is skill-specific).

is also almost always normalized by some measure of the size

of the local economy (or of the cell), such as initial employment so that the final instrument,
for areas r and skill cell i is

=

(where

is initial employment in that

area cell).24
The basic argument for this instrument’s validity begins with the idea that the aggregate
component of the instrument is not driven by demand conditions in the destination
regions, but rather by conditions in the sending country and possibly by aggregate
conditions in the destination country; hence, this is sometimes referred to as the
23 The idea of using lagged immigrant shares as instrument for current immigration is older, going back to
Altonji and Card (1991), but this “shift share” formulation began with Card (2001).
24 A common approach is to normalize the predicted immigration variable in a way which mirrors the
endogenous variable of interest. For example, the endogenous variable in both Card (2009) and Lewis(2011)
is the ratio of two different education levels of workers, and so the predicted immigration expression is
calculated separately for high and low education levels (with the same
_ ℎ , but separate s for high and
low skill aggregate flows by country) and the final instrument is structured as the ratio of the two in the same
way it is in the endogenous variable. Peri et al.’s (2014) endogenous variable is high-skill workers/current
employment; the numerator is constructed with predicted immigration, and the denominator is constructed
by inflating base year employment by national employment growth. Smith (2012)’s independent variable is
the growth in the number of immigrants, so he normalizes by a number which imposes that all markets start
off at the same fraction immigrant and then grow at the national rate. He also considers alternative versions
of the instrument construction, including one which considers the mix of ethnic groups within markets rather
than their distribution across markets. The manner in which the predicted immigration variable is
normalized may affect the strength of the instrument or the plausibility of the exclusion restriction.

43

“supply/push” instrument (e.g., Card 2001). These aggregate flows are apportioned to
destination regions by

_ ℎ , the historical destinations of the same immigrant groups.

Mechanically, the strength of the instrument derives from the tendency of new immigrants
to choose destinations with existing concentrations of the same ethnicity (Bartel 1989).
The argument for validity rests on the idea that this is driven, rather than by
autocorrelation in demand for the labor of that group in a particular location, by labor
supply factors like family ties or a preference to settle in a culturally or linguistically
familiar environment.25
Note that this approach is not completely independent of the natural experiment approach,
which also tends to rely on the historical settlement locations of the immigrant groups
under study (when the analysis is regional in nature) such as Cubans to Miami. Indeed, one
concern with this instrument is that when destinations and sources are tightly linked –
such as Cubans to Miami, or Algerians to France – the aggregate flows might be partly
driven by regional demand conditions at the destination. Demand conditions in LA and
Chicago, for instance, might significantly affect Mexican arrivals to the U.S.
One way researchers have attempted to refine this instrument is to try to uncover more
exogenous sources of variation in the aggregate component of the instrument. Pugatch and
Yang (2011) use rainfall shocks in Mexico as a component of an instrument for Mexican
flows to the US. In their study of the impact of immigration in Malaysia, Ozden and Wagner
(2013) use the age structure of the population in the Philippines and Indonesia, two major
sending countries, in the instrument, with the idea that migration tends to be concentrated
in relatively young age groups.
A very promising recent development is the use of policy variation for the aggregate
component of the instrument. In addition to being potentially helpful for addressing the
25 One way to think of this is that an ethnic cluster is a group-specific amenity, an assumption supported with
wage and house price data in Gonzales (1998) for Mexicans in the US. Additional evidence supporting
validity is that a version of this instrument used to predict Mexican flows to particular metro areas in the US
appears uncorrelated with forecasts of employment growth (Card and Lewis, 2007). Lafortune and Tessada
(2013) compare the ability of the size of ethnic enclaves and the local occupation mix to predict where
immigrants will settle in historical data and find evidence that ethnic networks dominate in most cases.

44

endogeneity problem, this approach makes the estimates more policy relevant. A number
of studies have directly or indirectly used variation in the sometimes restrictive cap on the
number of H1-B visas (a high-skill visa issued in the U.S.) including Peri et al. (2014) and
Kerr and Lincoln (2010).26 Kato and Sparber (2013) examine the aggregate impact of the
large drop in the H1-B visa cap after 2003 on the quality of foreign students coming to the
U.S., using countries that have other visa options as a comparison group.
Much less has been done to make the “shares” (

_ ℎ ) part of the instrument more

credibly exogenous beyond using longer time lags.27 But, again, policy-driven variation has
begun to be used: some studies have used so-called “dispersal” policies, used in some
European countries to give initial, often random, placement of immigrants through public
housing.

Glitz (2012) uses this to study the labor market impact of immigration in

Germany. Another example is Damm (2009), who uses dispersal policies to study the
impact of living an “ethnic enclave” in Denmark at the individual level. Although it is not
used directly in their analysis, much of the variation in Foged and Peri (2013) – who study
the effect of non-EU and refugee immigrant share on native wages and occupation using
variation across Danish municipalities – likely comes from the effect of these dispersal
policies.
In the absence of definitive a priori grounds for lagged origin shares being random, another
approach has been to subject the instrument to various “falsification” tests. One which is
often available is to ask if trends in outcomes or treatment are correlated with the
instrument prior to the analyzed period. The challenge is that often many of the same
patterns of immigration tend to hold prior to the analyzed period, albeit at a lower
magnitude. After all, the instrument in fact exploits trends in the regional patterns of

26 Kerr and Lincoln (2010) do not use the “country” (“c”) element of the instrument described above – they
aggregate together all immigrant groups – and estimate a reduced form regression. The H1-B visa cap is not
country-specific, but aggregate.
27Part of Pugatch and Yang’s (2010) variation derives from the historical ties of three major border crossing
areas in Mexico to destination markets in the U.S. via historic railroad routes. Another aspect of the
instrument which has not received much attention is the level of detail with which the immigrant groups are
constructed, which for practical (small cell size) reasons are often not individual countries but groups of
similar countries.

45

immigration, so finding zero correlation in a just prior period is not necessarily realistic,
but certainly the correlation should be much weaker for the instrument to be credible. It
also helps to be studying a period which begins with a sharp break from prior patterns of
immigration, such as Foged and Peri (2013), who examine the impact of immigration from
the genesis of large refugee flows to Denmark, in the 1990s.28 Although harder to come by,
when available, examining contemporaneous outcomes that arguably should be unaffected
by the treatment is helpful.29 Although doubts about this approach will likely never totally
go away, in the absence of a new approach that captures enough of the variation in
immigration to precisely estimate its economy-wide impacts, it seems like the shift-share
instrument will remain a major analysis tool in the near term.

The dispersal policy which motivates their approach was in place before their period of study, but Foged
and Peri (2013) show there was little non-EU immigration to Denmark prior large refugee events in the
1990s (Yugoslovia, Somalia). In their study of native school district choice response to Mexican school-aged
arrivals, Cascio and Lewis (2012) examine changes from 1970, which is near the beginning of the large influx
of Mexican migrants to California, although Mexican immigration had been rising more slowly for decades
before that. Their pre-trend test examined changes in the 1960s.
29 For example, Lewis (2011) examined whether plans for technology adoption (asked in the baseline period)
were correlated with later immigration-driven skill mix shocks, and found they were not.
28

46

5

Estimates of Native responses and effects on outcomes

The considerable variation in immigrant density across cells defined by geography or skill
categories, as was described in Table 1, is potentially useful in estimating immigration’s
impact on native outcomes. However, as we illustrated in section 3, a challenge in both
identifying and understanding the impact of immigration using this variation is that natives
may move across these cells in response. This section considers more in detail the
empirical estimates of how natives respond to immigration by both moving across
geographic locations and skill cells. With that understood, it then turns to organizing the
estimates of the impact of immigration on wages, firm productivity, technology choice, and
externalities.
5.1 Geographic Mobility of Natives
The earliest papers which attempted to estimate the impact of immigration, such as
Grossman (1982), used variation across geographic space. However, it was not long before
the mobility response of natives was raised as a potential confounder of these estimates.
Borjas’s often-cited review article (Borjas, 1994) argued that estimates of the impact of
immigration across space had “no structural interpretation” (p. 1699). In fact, as equation
(9) described, a careful approach which allows for native supply mobility response can
uncover structural demand parameters, by estimating together wage and employment
regressions. Since the time of that review, a considerable literature on the native mobility
response to immigration has developed.
Using the “Bartik-style” style of instrument described in section 4, Card (2001) and Card
and DiNardo (2000) find no evidence of any native mobility response across U.S.
metropolitan areas to immigrant inflows within broad occupation classes.30 Borjas (2006)
counters with evidence of a native mobility response to immigration which, sensibly, is
increasing in going from large (census divisions) to small (metropolitan areas) geographic
units: he finds that for every 10 immigrant inflows to a metropolitan area, 6 natives move

Card and Lewis (2007) find a similar lack of native mobility response specifically in response to Mexican
inflows.

30

47

out. 31 This study differs from the other two in examining responses within relatively
narrow (education x experience) skill cells, in using the observed inflow of immigrants as
explanatory variable in an OLS, rather than an IV, approach and in how the mobility
response relationship is specified.
Indeed, significant concerns about the specification used in Borjas (2006) are raised in Peri
and Sparber (2011a). They argue that because the stock of natives appears both as the
dependent variable (native population) and in the denominator of the right-hand side
explanatory variable (immigrants as share of population including natives) in Borjas’s
specification, estimates may be biased towards finding a negative relationship. Using
simulations designed to match aggregate population moments, they confirm that Borjas’s
approach would tend to find strong evidence of native mobility response even in its
absence. Specifically, the authors assume the change in native population in region (r) x
skill (j) cell, ∆
∆

=

+ ∆

, is linked to foreign arrivals in the cell, ∆
+

, via the structural equation

.

They take random normal draws of ∆

and

(and choose ) to match the aggregate

mean and standard deviation of the observed data on ∆

and ∆

across state x

education x experience cells in the U.S. decennial census since 1960, under varying
assumptions about , including

=-1 (full displacement or “crowding out”),

displacement) and values up to

=1 (“crowding in”). To restate their findings, regardless

of the value of

=0 (no

chosen, Borjas’s specification (log of native employment on the share of

immigrants in employment) finds “evidence” of displacement.32 Through additional
simulations they also find that the bias in Borjas’s specification worsens in the relative

31 An older demographic literature also claims to find evidence of “native flight” (e.g., Filer, 1992; Frey, 1995).
However, this literature generally does not specify the relationships in a way which is consistent with the
recent understanding of how immigration impacts the labor market (described in section 3). In particular, it
fails to differentiate by skill category, and takes the observed choices of immigrant location as random.
32 Borjas also includes an alternative specification meant to reduce this bias, but the authors show that this
specification is also strongly biased towards finding evidence of native displacement: again, in all of their
simulations, it always finds displacement.

48

variance of Δ

compared to Δ

, and with the number of cells in the regression, which

may help account for how Borjas’s estimates vary with geographic scale.
So what is the specification producing the most reliable estimate of the magnitude of native
displacement? Peri and Sparber (2011a) find that the specification used in Card (2007)
performs best. In that study the author regresses
and

∆

on

∆

, where ∆

is the change in

is the initial size of the labor force (immigrants + natives). Notably, this is similar

to specifications used in Card (2001) and Card and DiNardo (2000) and all three studies
find little sign of native displacement. In this specification, a coefficient of 1 indicates no
displacement: immigration has a one-for-one impact on total skill supply. The authors also
point out that, equivalently, one could regress

∆

on

∆

, in which case the coefficient

would directly indicate the level of displacement, with a coefficient of 0 implying no
displacement.
Peri (2011) further advances the literature by characterizing the mobility response in
terms of the underlying parameters of an aggregate production function. Specifically, it
mirrors the CES structure developed and supported in Ottaviano and Peri (2012) and
discussed in section 3.2 above. In such a setup, using equation (5) and taking total
differentials with respect to changes in employment of natives and immigrants, one can
show that wage growth of native skill group j in local economy r will be

=

+

,

+

−

∆

+

where ̅ is the native wage bill share,

−

+

and

∆

− Δ ln

,

(16)

are, consistent with the notation of Section

3.2, the cross-experience-cell and immigrant-native elasticities of substitution, respectively
and the rest captures education-specific aggregators and unobserved productivity terms.

49

The key assumption motivating Peri (2011)’s approach is perfect mobility: natives move to
equilibrate wages across labor markets, so

is the same in all markets. So Peri (2011)

takes differences of (16) between market r and the rest of the country, and denotes with a
tilde“ ” above a variable, such a difference. Then exploiting full mobility and wage
equalization, he sets the differenced equation equal to zero, and solves for
of

∆

∆

as a function

. Recall that this is the displacement specification recommended by Peri and

Sparber’s (2011) simulations, but now the coefficient of that regression is characterized
structurally as proportional to (

−

), the difference between the elasticity of

substitution between native and immigrants and the cross-experience elasticity.
Comparing California to the rest of the country and using national net arrivals of Central
Americans as an instrument for

∆

, Peri finds little evidence of native mobility response

within these skill cells since 1960 (in either OLS or IV), despite the massive and constant
inflows of immigrants to California over this period. This can thus be rationalized in the
model by

≈

. What about his perfect mobility assumption? This is not rejected: Peri

(2011) also looks directly at wages and finds no response, which per (16) again could be
explained by

≈

.33 In plainer terms, the substitution/complementarity structure is

such that immigration ends up having little impact on natives’ wages within skill cells,
providing them no incentive to move out of California in response to immigration. Thus it
simultaneously rationalizes the “zero mobility” finding and explains why immigration
appears to have little impact on the wage structure.
A reasonable summary of this literature, then, is that the native mobility response to
immigration across geographic space is quite small, an outcome which may be incentive
compatible as the equilibrium effect of immigrants on native wages appears to be small.
A reasonable question to ask is whether this is consistent with the direct estimates of these parameters in
the national data, such as those in Ottaviano and Peri (2012). Peri (2011) asks this as well. Estimates of
tend to be around 10, while estimates of tend to be larger, around 20. Peri argues, however, that existing
direct estimates of 1/ may be biased downward in national regressions by endogeneity. One caveat on this
interpretation, which Peri points out, is that the regional wage impacts may be small for some other reason,
such as some remaining endogeneity (that is, despite having instruments) or adjustments of non-labor inputs
(see Lewis, 2013a).
33

50

Nevertheless, the best approach in geographically-based studies of immigration’s impact is,
per (9) above, to allow for the possibility of native mobility response in order to give
estimates the proper structural interpretation.
Incidentally, one specification which helps simplify this problem is (when appropriate) to
use as the right hand side variable the total supply in the relevant skill cells,

or a

transform of it, and then instrument total changes in skill supply with immigration (or
immigration instrument). Put differently, the right hand side variable is immigrants +
natives, rather than the old approach of treating the size of the immigrant stock itself as the
“treatment” variable. In this way, the first stage (regressing labor supply on immigrants by
skill across regions) implicitly adjusts for any skill-specific native mobility response, and is
also a direct indicator of the level of displacement. This approach is, in fact, standard in
area studies since Card (2001).34

5.2 Mobility across Skill Categories
An alternative approach to using variation across geographic space to identify the impact of
immigration is to use variation across skill cells over time. As described in section 3.2, this
approach was pioneered by Borjas (2003), who described it as a way around the problems
of endogeneity of immigrant flows to particular areas and native mobility response.
However, depending on one’s definition of skill categories, this approach may not be totally
immune to native mobility. Indeed, in some cases, such as across occupation, the native
mobility response is interesting per se in revealing elements of the structure of the labor
market. In addition, as was emphasized earlier, estimates which fail to take account of
native mobility may lead to an understatement of native gains from immigration.

A nice improvement going forward would be use an estimate of the within-skill category imperfect
substitutability between immigrants and natives, , to generate a more general skill group supply measure

34

that allows for such imperfect substitutability, that is to use
place of

=

+

.

51

1−

,

+

,

in

Native mobility response to immigration across occupations has probably received the
most empirical attention. Peri and Sparber (2009) were the first to show that native
comparative advantage played a role in this response. Specifically, they test the hypothesis
that, among less skilled workers, natives have a comparative advantage in
“communication” task-intensive jobs (e.g., sales) and immigrants have a comparative
advantage in manual-task intensive jobs (e.g., construction). If so, their model (see
equations 12-14) has three predictions which they evaluate: (1) immigration induces
natives to shift to more communication-intensive jobs; (2) immigration induces the overall
shift to more manual-intensive jobs; and therefore (3) it raises the relative price of
communication tasks. As was mentioned above, they measure task intensity with
occupation-level data from O*NET merged to census occupations. To measure the “price”
of tasks, they run state-time specific regressions of adjusted occupation-level wages on the
average manual and communication-intensity of each occupation.35 They run their analysis
across U.S. states over time using 1960-2000 decennial censuses, using both “imputed
Mexican immigration” (see section 4) and time-varying functions of the distance to the
Mexican border as instruments. They find support for all three predictions, and from the
third they also obtain estimates of the elasticity of substitution between tasks,

in

equation (12), which ranges between 0.6 and 1.4. Through simulations, they show that this
level of substitutability is of the right order to account for the magnitude of the directly
estimated elasticity of substitution between immigrants and natives,

(per Ottaviano and

Peri, 2012).
A similar pattern emerges among the highly educated: in that skill range, immigration is
associated with native shifts towards communication-intensive occupations, and away
from analytical- or quantitative-intensive occupations, which immigrants tend to specialize
in (Peri and Sparber, 2011b). Both are consistent with comparative advantage driven by

35 As is common, they combine several similarly-themed O*NET measures into a “percentile” index giving the
share of employment with a value at that level or lower. It is worth highlighting at least one unavoidable
measurement issue: the occupation-level averages in O*NET are not time varying, but measured at a single
point in time (2000). Although occupational attributes have been measured in other, older surveys including
the Dictionary of Occupational Titles, the overlap in the available measures across surveys is basically zero.

52

natives’ superior English-language skills (Lewis, 2013b), although other unobserved skill
or taste differences might also help rationalize this pattern.
Combining the results of the two Peri and Sparber (2009, 2011b) studies, Foged and Peri
(2013) define job “complexity” as ln((Communication + Analytical)/Manual)), using similar
O*NET occupation communication, analytical, and manual measures. Taking advantage of
the large influx of non-EU immigrants to Denmark since the mid-1990s due to major
refugee events (e.g., breakup of Yugoslavia) – and prior to that non-EU immigration to
Denmark was trivial – and using the “ethnic enclave” style of instrument, they use detailed
firm-worker level data to show that non-EU immigration tends to push both high and lowskill native Danes into more complex jobs, partly through occupational transitions. Since
the non-EU immigrants are employed in largely low skilled occupations, the fact that these
gains and occupational transitions occur for both low- and high-skill groups (albeit, larger
for low skill groups) is again consistent with gains from specialization. Another nice
feature of this study is that the “enclaves” in Denmark were largely the creation of random
assignment of the previous small stock of non-EU immigrants due to a dispersal policy that
distributed them around the country. Consistent with this, the authors are able to show
that there are no significant “pre-trends” (1991-1994) in outcomes.
An interesting recent finding is that immigration is not just associated with native
specialization across occupations, but more broadly native occupational “upgrading,” shifts,
that is, to occupations requiring higher skills and granting higher pay. Catteneo, Fiorio and
Peri (2013) use rare individual-level panel data for natives in several European countries
and find that immigration is associated with the natives of that country moving to higher
skill occupations in order to avoid competition. Foged and Peri (2013) find the same in
Denmark. The additional value that comes from the panel-level feature of these studies
will be described in section 6.
As was already discussed above, even within narrow occupations one can sometimes find
evidence of specialization. Borjas and Doran (forthcoming) analyze the interesting case of
Soviet mathematicians in U.S. departments, following the collapse of the Soviet Union.
53

Soviet mathematicians were particularly concentrated in certain specialties, and these
authors show that non-Soviet mathematicians tended to move out of these specialties after
the influx.
Other studies, like Borjas (2003) and Ottaviano and Peri (2012) define skill cells in terms of
education and (potential) work experience.

While it is not possible to move across

potential experience cells, there is new evidence that (young) natives may move up
education cells in response to low-skill immigration.

Using variation across U.S.

“commuting zones,” which are smaller than metropolitan areas and cover the entire U.S.,
Smith (2012) showed that youth employment rates are particularly sensitive to
immigration, a result which can partly be accounted for by a school enrollment response.
Using cross-state variation and carefully accounting for the effect of immigrant children on
the school system, Hunt (2012) finds that a supply of immigrant adults which pushes up
the relative supply of high school dropouts tends to increase the high school completion
rates of the native-born. Similarly, using cross-state variation and controlling separately
for the impact of immigrants as students, Jackson (2013) finds that increases in the relative
proportion of adult immigrants without a college degree is associated with increases in
college enrollment rates of native-born.36 This latter finding also reinforces the consensus
that dividing the workforce into two broad categories based on college education is a
reasonable first approximation of the labor market (see section 3.4 and Card, 2009).
5.3 Immigrant impacts
A very simple two-factor competitive model of the labor market, such as was presented in
equation (11) above, predicts that immigration can raise the average wages of native-born
workers (e.g., Borjas, 1999), although there will still be “winners” and “losers” as usual in
economics.

Note that in this simple, constant return to scale model, the impact of

immigration on overall average wages – that is, including both immigrants and natives
together – is by construction approximately 0. As was discussed above, richer models have

36

All of these studies use the “ethnic enclave”/”Bartik-style” style of instrument.

54

been developed that allow for other potential sources of gains from immigration, such as
direct impacts on productivity or production technology.
During the past decade economists have produced many different estimates of the impact
of immigration on wages and productivity. The richness of the mechanisms that they have
considered has increased as researchers have considered more detailed measures of
immigrants’ skills and additional outcomes besides wages, including investment and
technology choices, and they have considered various sources of complementarities and
“spillovers.” In Table 2 we summarize the estimates in some (but certainly not all) recent
studies which try to get to the overall impact of immigrants on productivity of native-born
workers.

While several studies in the past have focused on the “partial” impact of

immigration, that is, on natives within narrow skill cells, 37 -- such as in equation (8) above
– here, we are interested in the general equilibrium impacts of immigration on native
productivity and wages, accounting for adjustments, which has been the focus of several
studies in the recent decade.
A useful benchmark, reported in the first line of Table 2 comes from Ottaviano and Peri
(2012), who estimate the elasticity of substitution in a nested CES production function
(equation 4) and then use those to simulate the wage impacts of recent immigration on
native wages. Depending on the choice of parameters, they find that immigration between
1990 and 2006 (amounting to roughly 10 percent of the initial workforce) should have
raised the wages of the average native-born worker somewhere between zero and 0.7
percent. While this model is rich in terms of skill categories– it includes four education
groups x eight experience groups and allows for immigrant-native imperfect
substitutability within those cells – it may not account for all of the beneficial impacts of
immigrant skill diversity, let alone impacts through other mechanisms such as spillovers
and native responses.

37

These studies were summarized in Longhi et. al (2005) and in Kerr and Kerr (2011).

55

Ottaviano and Peri (2006) is an early paper suggesting that immigration is associated with
higher average wages through a skill diversity mechanism. They found both a general
positive association between immigration and wages, and, conditional on this, an
association with a measure the country diversity of immigrants, a Herfindahl index. Part of
this gain may be in the form of cultural amenities, as the index is also is associated with
higher housing rents (also found in Saiz, 2007). Table 2 reports the effect of an increase in
the diversity of country of birth index estimated in that article.
Ottaviano and Peri (2006) and Peri (2012) also produce useful “reduced form” benchmarks
for the impact of immigration on wages and productivity. The first study estimates the
elasticity of native average wages with respect to immigrant share is 0.57. Since Ottaviano
and Peri (2006) uses data from 1970-90, we have re-estimated a version of what they did
using more recent (2000-2010) data. Scatterplots and regression lines are shown in Figure
5. We find a native-born wage elasticity with respect to immigrant population share of 0.64
(with a standard error of 0.30) using variation in the percentage change of yearly earnings
regressed on changes in share of foreign-born across 219 metropolitan areas, weighted by
initial population.38
Peri (2012) examines productivity. Using Gross State Product (GSP) data merged to
imputed state estimates of capital stock and skill mix, he log linearizes a generalized
version of (11) (in particular, adding capital as a factor of production) and then regresses
each component of the aggregate production function on immigration-driven population
change.39 After imposing an elasticity of substitution between college and non-college
workers of  = 1.75 (compatible with consensus estimates, including Katz and Murphy,
1992; other studies include Hamermesh, 1993; Borjas, 2003; and Ottaviano and Peri,
2012), he is able to estimate the impact of immigration on TFP. His basic OLS estimate

If one splits employment between college and non-college educated one finds that the positive effect is
driven by the college educated group (elasticity of native college-educated wage to college-educated
immigrants share of 0.93, standard error 0.58) while immigration among non-college educated has no
significant effect on their wages (elasticity of -0.14 with standard error of 0.19).
39 That is, his “treatment” variable is F/Pop, where F is the change in the number of foreign-born residents
and Pop is population.
38

56

implies that TFP rises 8 percent for each 10 percentage-point increase in immigrationinduced population growth. This is confirmed in the 2SLS regression using distance from
Mexico interacted with national immigration flows as instruments: his IV estimates are
close to 14 percent. In short, states with a large increase in high school equivalents driven
by Mexican immigrants have experienced a very strong relative increase in the
productivity/efficiency of that factor in production. Note the critical role of imposing a
value of  to identify TFP impacts, which cannot be separately identified from a direct
effect of labor supply otherwise.

Reassuringly, although the estimates show some

sensitivity to the choice of elasticity, all of the estimates are positive. In addition, the
impact on the cruder GSP/worker is roughly the same magnitude (Table 2).
It is noteworthy that even the OLS estimates of the reduced from relationship between
immigration and average wages in Peri (2012) and in Ottaviano and Peri (2006) are an
order of magnitude larger than the simulated impact found in Ottaviano and Peri (2012).
While the potential of omitted variables bias is a concern in spite of the 2SLS estimation,
the larger measured effects suggest the potential presence of other mechanisms, besides
the mechanical changes in observed skill mix, at work in affecting the wages of native-born
workers.

One mechanism is the working of efficient specialization and upgrades

documented in Peri and Sparber (2009, 2011b), Foged and Peri (2013), D’Amuri and Peri
(2014) and Catteneo, Fiorio and Peri (2013). Indeed, Peri (2012) provides preliminary
support for such a mechanism: controlling for the “communication intensity” of the average
native’s job – the specialization measure used in Peri and Sparber (2009) – the productivity
impact of immigration because smaller and statistically insignificant.40

Another

mechanism is a price effect: using a similar cross-area approach and ethnic enclave
instrument, Cortes (2008) shows that immigration lowers the price of non-traded goods.41
As was discussed in section 3.5, firms may also respond to immigration by changing their
production technology, or, more narrowly, their capital intensity (e.g., Lewis, 2011; Peri,
Such evidence should only be taken as preliminary, as it attempts to partial out the impact of an
endogenous regressor.
41 See also Lach (2007).
40

57

2012). Peri (2012) shows that immigration (associated with a decrease in the collegeshare of workers) is associated with an increase in the efficiency of high school equivalents
in production.42 Going back to equation (15), this says that immigration lowers both
LCO/LHS, and ACO/AHS; as (15) shows, the latter attenuates any relative wage impacts of
immigration due to the shift in LCO/LHS. Equation (15) shows the identification problem:
impacts of relative labor supply on ACO/AHS are confounded with the direct of labor supply
on wages (second term of 15). As before, Peri breaks this endogeneity by imposing a value
of . So what Peri finds, in plainer terms, is that the cross-state impacts on the relative
wage of immigration-induced changes in labor mix are smaller than what external
estimates of the elasticity of substitution between college and non-college workers would
predict. Qualitatively similar findings are found in Lewis (2003) and Card and Lewis
(2007), both of which use variation across metropolitan areas and “ethnic enclave” style
instruments (the latter focuses on the impacts of Mexicans only) and find little relative
wage impact of immigration. One strength of the latter two studies is that they account for
shifts in industry mix that would occur in a multi-sector model. These are found to be
small, and so skill mix changes are nearly as large “within industry” as overall. A weakness
is that, unlike Peri (2012) they fail to focus on the college/non-college relative supply,
which newer research suggests is the main relative supply measure of interest.
In light of the identification challenge revealed by (15), are there some ways to get at the
productivity terms, or at least their determinants more directly? As was mentioned above,
Lewis (2011) looks at the use of automation and capital intensity in the manufacturing
sector, and finds that low-skill immigration reduces it. These changes in production
technology and investment might partially account for the impact of TFP that Peri (2012)
finds. However, Lewis did not find any significant association between low-skill
immigration and output per worker. The difference in estimated productivity response
between Peri (2012) and Lewis (2011) could either be a result of Lewis’s narrower focus

The finding that changes in skill mix are associated with changes in the skill intensity of production is
similar to a cross-country patterns found in Caselli and Coleman (2006) (which does not study immigration).

42

58

on the manufacturing sector or of his focus on the high school completion skill margin.43 A
nice direction for future work would be to repeat a study like Lewis (2011) with a focus on
the college completion margin.
Immigration may also affect productivity and wages through innovation and possibly
through entrepreneurship.

A couple of recent studies have focused on immigrants’

disproportionate role in patenting and innovation. Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010)
show that among college graduates, immigrants have much higher patenting rates, which
appears to be due to the fact that foreign college graduates have more education and they
specialize in larger proportions in scientific and technological fields. Similarly, Brunello et
al. (2007) show that in a regression across U.S. states over time, increases in foreign
science Ph.D. density is associated with a greater increase in patent counts than domestic
science Ph.D. density. Part of this finding may be due to a spillover from foreign scientists
to the innovative productivity of domestic ones: Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) find
that in a similar panel regression, an increase in foreign college share in a state is
associated with an increase in the patenting rate in a state that exceeds what one would
expect “mechanically” from the higher patenting rate of immigrants in cross-section data.
Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle can only speculate that this is due to “spillovers,” however,
because the patent count data are not broken out by nativity in their panel data. 44
To partly address this problem, Kerr and Lincoln (2010) linked the names of patent holders
to an ethnic names database, which allows them to divide patent counts, not by nativity,
but into “Indian,” “Chinese” and “Anglo Saxon” patents. They study specifically the role of
the U.S. high skill “H1-B” program, and they take advantage of the fact that most H1-B visa
holders are Indian and Chinese, making their ethnic groups a reasonable proxy for nativity.

Paserman (2013) also finds little sign of a positive association between immigration and productivity using
variation at the firm and industry level in Israel’s manufacturing sector. The immigrants in Paserman’s study
were largely “high skill” immigrants from the former soviet union, although many did not end up in high skill
positions.
44 The cross-section data are the National Survey of College Graduates, 2003 wave, while the panel data are
tabulations from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office from 1940-2000. Thus, the difference in the timing of
the two surveys is one confounder of the apparent difference in the association between immigrants and
patenting in the two surveys.
43

59

They use variation across U.S. labor markets. Though they cannot measure the quantity of
H1-B holders at a local level, they essentially estimate a “reduced form” version of the
ethnic enclave instrument: their right-hand side variable is the interaction of the stock of
H1-B visas issued nationally with a measure of local “dependence” on H1-B type workers,
which is a kind of imputed stock. They find that areas with more H1-B dependence have
moderately higher rates of Anglo-Saxon patenting.45
While higher patenting rates are associated with higher productivity at the country and
sector level (Eaton and Kortum 1996; Furman et al. 2002), patent counts are only
imperfectly related to productive innovations (e.g., Griliches 1990; Jaffe and Trajtenberg
2002) . So a complementary approach is to examine the direct relationship between local
high skill share and wages, as Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2014) do. Using variation across
219 U.S. metropolitan areas, these authors estimate the relationship between changes in
the STEM share of employment – that is, the share in high tech occupations that they take
to represent STEM – and wages. Their identification derives from a version of the ethnic
enclave instrument: it is the sum of national changes in the country composition of H1-B
immigrants interacted with the lagged size of the foreign STEM workforce in the area.
Both their OLS and IV estimates suggest that STEM share is associated with higher wages
for college graduates and, to a lower degree, for high school graduates, too.
These studies corroborate influential anecdotal evidence arguing a role for highly skilled
engineers and entrepreneurs, especially immigrants (Saxenian 2002a, 2002b), in
innovation and growth (Saxenian 1994). Indeed, in addition to producing more patents,
immigrants have significantly higher rates of entrepreneurship (Hunt 2011), and
immigration is associated with the creation of more small firms (Olney 2013). Whether
this matters for productivity growth is an open question; however, one tantalizing fact is
that immigrant-owned businesses seem to be about 12 percent more productive, on
average, than native-owned businesses (Garcia-Perez 2008).
A larger literature uses other (non-geographic) approaches to measuring the impact of immigration on
innovation, including the dismissal of Jewish scientists from Nazi Germany (Moser et al. 2012; Waldinger
2013). This broader literature is reviewed in Kerr (2013). This review also covers the impact of immigrant
entrepreneurship.

45

60

One final channel by which immigration may affect average productivity – which is related
to the trade diversity model described in section 3.5 -- is by increasing product diversity. Di
Giovanni, Levchenko, and Ortega (2013) simulate the impact of the increase in product
diversity that comes from an increase in the scale of the economy associated with
immigration. They find that it has a substantial positive impact on welfare in many
immigrant-receiving developed countries.

Empirically, immigration is associated with

greater product diversity (Mazzolari and Neumark 2012), though an increase in place of
birth diversity (Ottaviano and Peri 2005, 2006), rather than a pure scale effect may account
for this fact. Mazzolari and Neumark’s (2012) find the strongest association is between
immigration and an increase in restaurant diversity; other forms of retail diversity actually
decline.
5.4 Summarizing the Productivity Impacts
Though the number of studies of the direct association between immigration and
productivity or wages summarized in Table 2 is not large, some interesting patterns
emerge that may be helpful in charting a path for future research. The first pattern is that
the association seems to be larger for high skill (e.g., Peri, Shih, and Sparber 2014) than
low-skill immigrants (Lewi, 2011; Foged and Peri 2013). The second is that there seems to
be an additional impact of “origin diversity” separate from immigration’s impact generally
(Ottaviano and Peri 2006; Trax et al. 2013; Alesina et al. 2013). This combined with the
fact that the “mechanical” impacts of observed skill mix on the wage structure seem to be
small (Ottaviano and Peri 2012) suggests unmeasured skills of immigrants contribute to
their productivity impacts, perhaps in part through the sort of specialization directly
documented in Peri and Sparber (2009, 2011b). The association with the wages of more
educated natives also seems to be stronger (Foged and Peri 2013; Peri, Shih, and Sparber
2014), consistent with a directed technical change story (among others). Immigration may
also affect productivity through prices (Lach 2007; Cortes 2008), product diversity
(Mazzolari and Neumark 2012; Di Giovanni, Levchenko, and Ortega 2013), innovation
(Kerr and Lincoln 2010; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle 2010) or entrepreneurship (Hunt
2011).
61

Recently available and richer data – for example, covering firm-level outcomes – may be
helpful in uncovering the mechanisms which rationalize these patterns.46 We now turn to a
discussion of such data and how they are being used.

6

Recent Evolutions: employer-employee panel data and historical data

Two valuable recent developments in the research on the impact of immigration are the
use of individual-level panel data and, to be discussed later, the application of similar tools
to historical data. The panel data confer several advantages. First, by following individuals
over time, panel data allows controls for unobserved sources of heterogeneity. As may
have been indirectly evident from the discussion about “displacement effects” in section
5.1-5.2, most of the studies above which employ a cell-based approach do not literally track
the same individuals’ wages in a cell over time, but rather a representative sample of
whoever is in that cell at each point in time.47 While the potential for immigrants to affect
the aggregate quantity of natives in each cell is the first order concern with this approach
(the subject of sections 5.1-5.2), even after addressing this problem estimates could be
biased by more subtle changes in the composition of workers due to selection or attrition
from a cell; panel data addresses such concerns by tracking the same individuals over time.
Indeed – and second – such compositional changes may be of direct interest in
understanding the labor market dynamics, revealing the dynamics of individual workers’
adjustment to immigration.48 For example, one can estimate the benefits of the type of
immigrant-native specialization documented in Peri and Sparber (2009, 2011b) directly, by

For example, it is notable that the impacts in Table 2 seem to be external to the firm (Paserman, 2013; Trax
et al. 2013), though, as will be discussed below, firm-level impacts may so far not be as well identified.
47 The use of repeated, representative cross-section sample not necessarily including the same individuals is
also sometimes referred to as a “pseudo panel.” Note that this description applies to both area studies and
“national” approaches to the study of the labor market impact of immigration.
48 Other studies exist on the dynamics of the response to immigration, but observe the adjustment at the
aggregate, rather than individual level, including Bacellos (2010), Cohen-Goldner and Paserman(2011) and
Murray and Wozniak (2012).
46

62

tracking how individual native workers’ productivity changes as they shift across
occupations in response to immigration. Third, to the extent that workers are tracked
across firms, we can look at outcomes at the level of the firm for the first time. This is a
fortuitous feature of the fact that modern panel data often come from a sample of
administrative records (social security earnings records), which, for many European
countries, is the only reliable source of wage data over a long time frame.49
The study by Catteneo et al. (2013) was mentioned above. They use individual-level panel
data to study both the impact of immigration on the wages of native-born workers, and the
dynamics of adjustment – specifically, the movement of incumbent natives across
occupations over time – to immigration. Usefully, their data cover a number of European
countries, but are from survey data, not from administrative records which identify the
firm of employment.

They find significant occupation “upgrading” in response to

immigration, namely increased mobility of incumbent natives to jobs associated with
higher skills and higher pay. They also found small wage effects on natives. Foged and Peri
(2013) have access to a full panel of matched firm-worker data for Denmark from 1991 to
2008.

50

This allows them to study the dynamics of adjustment to immigration, and to

decompose any impacts into those which occur within a worker-firm match and those due
to movements across firms. The focus of that study is on the impact of the non-EU
immigration wave that swept over Denmark starting in the mid-1990s, largely due to
refugees flows. These immigrants were on average less-educated than the native-born
population, a trait they have in common with the flows analyzed in Peri (2012) and
Ottaviano and Peri (2006). Interestingly, the coefficients in all of these studies are a similar
order of magnitude despite the richer controls in Foged and Peri (2013) – see Table 2.
Until recently, European labor force surveys have tended to lack wage data, unlike in the U.S., which was a
challenge for research on the labor market impact of immigration. Interestingly, the willingness of many
European countries to share social security earnings records with researchers now means European data are
of higher quality than the U.S. for many cutting edge immigration-related research questions. While similar
data are now available in the U.S. in the form of the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics database,
access is more difficult, use is more cumbersome, coverage is not as complete, and records are not as detailed
when compared to the data available in many European countries. See Kerr et al. (2013) for a description of
these data.
50 Malchow-Moller et al (2011, 2012) use the same Danish data to analyze the impact of immigrants on firmspecific wages and productivity. However, they do not analyze other outcomes, they do not follow individuals
and their identification strategy is not as convincing.
49

63

Given the large differences between them, this may simply be a coincidence, but it is
nevertheless striking. It would be useful is to apply these methods to similar data in other
countries.
Trax et al. (2013) is an early attempt to use German social security data to separately
estimate the impact of immigrant diversity (measured in the same manner as in Ottaviano
and Peri, 2006) at the plant and region level, using lagged independent variables as
instruments. They find effects at both levels, though the effects at the metropolitan area
level are much larger in magnitude. At the metro level, they found a 0.1 unit increase in
diversity is associated with 16 percent higher wages in manufacturing and 18 percent in
services, which is about 50 percent larger than what Ottaviano and Peri (2006) found. One
caveat is that Trax et al.’s instrument set seems dubious, though their metropolitan area
results remain similar when adding a more standard ethnic enclave type instrument.
Paserman (2013) also uses variation at the firm level interacted with the large inflow of
highly educated Russian immigrants to Israel to study the relationship between
immigration and productivity at Israel manufacturing firms.

He finds little to no

association in OLS estimates.
Dustmann and Glitz (forthcoming) use German plant-level data from the same source to
ask how firms adjust to local immigration-driven changes in skill mix in the manufacturing
sector. They find – consistent with the adjustments in production technology that Peri
(2012) finds at an aggregate level – a surprising level of responsiveness of unit efficiency to
regional skill mix changes. In principle, Peri’s (2012) result on unit efficiency might have
been driven by the composition of firms and industries, rather than a change in production
technology per se. However, Dustmann and Glitz find that, at least for Germany between
1985 and 1995, 70% or more of the skill mix changes at the region level are passed through
to the plant level, despite there being no change in relative wages associated with
immigration.51 This is consistent with fully offsetting changes in unit efficiency (equation

This figure is for firms that exist over the whole ten year period. They find that net entry of firms also helps
to push the skill mix towards the new level in the region. The authors also find a modest role for changes in
51

64

6) due to the adoption of techniques appropriate to the type of skills available. They use
standard “ethnic enclave” type instruments for identification.
Data linking employee characteristics with establishments are harder to come by in the U.S.
One recent study uses the best available to study the impact of high-skill immigration at the
firm (not establishment) level. Kerr et al. (2013) use a subsample of 319 large firms in the
so-called “Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics” (LEHD) database, which is created
from unemployment insurance records from U.S. states, but which the authors supplement
with data from other firm databases (including Compustat).52 Using a panel regression,
the authors find that in response to an influx of young (under age 40), high wage (above
$50,000 in 2008 dollars) immigrants, firms hire more high-wage natives, but especially
young high-wage native workers. When they estimate using instrumental variables using,
among other things, a version of the “ethnic enclave” instrument applied to the firm level,
the effect for older native-born workers is often insignificant.53 Using a simple model of
production adapted from Desai et al. (2009), they show that under some assumptions this
finding is sufficient to show that young immigrants complement young natives.54 This is
not, however, sufficient to demonstrate that these immigrants actually substitute for older
workers, but the authors produce some additional inconclusive evidence that these
immigrants may actually displace older native-born STEM workers from the firm.55 If so,
the authors argue, this would be inconsistent with the way in which age categories are
nested in the CES production structure used in Borjas (2003).

product mix in absorbing skill mix changes, though larger than previous studies had found (including Lewis
2003).
52 In order to have their analysis go back to 1995, the authors are limited to firms with a significant presence
in 18 U.S. states.
53 Another instrument interacts the size of the H1-B “cap” with a measures of the firm’s H1-B “dependency,”
for example, the number of “labor conditions applications” (LCA) a firm filed in 2001 per high wage worker.
LCAs are a precursor to hiring a worker on an H1-B visa, among other visa program. Ghosh and Mayda
(2013) use LCA data linked to Compustat to study the impact of H1-B’s at the firm level.
54 Complementarities between factors is more clearly identified from the cross-elasticities of factor prices or
output shares (e.g., Lewis 2013a), but these authors only have data on employment.
55 If this result holds up, the interesting question would be what happens to these workers, which in principle
could be answered with the sort of data that Kerr et al. (2013) are using.

65

Another interesting recent development is the application of cutting edge methods to
historical data, which allows an investigation of the impact of immigration in the context of
much different set of production choices facing firms, and potentially differences in market
structure. History can thus potentially help reveal how the impact of immigration may
depend on context (such as the cultural factors and institutions that Saxenian, 1994,
discusses). An additional advantage of historical data is the relative ease of access to
business and individual-level data, compared to modern data, in light of the lack of
confidentiality concerns.56 A weakness is often there is less detail than modern data on
things like compensation (wages) and even occupation, and so researchers are left with the
usual challenge of historical research of deriving credible proxies for the desired measures.
Kim (2007) uses plant-level taken from the 1860-1880 (at that time, decennial) U.S.
Censuses of Manufactures and runs regressions similar to what are described in Table 2 -ln(output per worker) and ln(average wages) on immigrant share – using variation in
immigrant share across U.S. counties.57 The regressions control for industry and state
effects but, importantly, not for county fixed effects. In other words, unlike most of the
studies in Table 2, Kim’s results are cross sectional.

He finds consistent significant

relationships in OLS, with coefficients ranging from 0.5-1.5, which are not unlike the
estimates in Table 2.

IV estimates, which use the 1850 share foreign-born as an

instrument, are similar in magnitude. Kim also showed immigrant share was associated
with larger plants, a proxy for “factory production.” This was the important innovation of
the era, and it may be partly responsible for these productivity benefits.58 A serious caveat
is the cross-sectional nature of these results. In particular, the author shows that places
with more immigrants also were also closer to New York and had better water
transportation. These factors would have enabled access to larger markets, which is

The individual-level records for many historic population and industry censuses, for example, are publicly
available.
57 Note that the wage data are averaged at the plant level, so the more conceptually appropriate specification
average ln(wage) is simply unavailable.
58 Factory production is believed to be unskilled-labor-intensive compared to the predecessor technology of
“artisan” production. Thus, if immigrants raised the relative abundance of unskilled labor, they might have
induced adoption of factory production. This specification may oversimplify a bit the role of immigrants,
however, many of whom were high skill.
56

66

thought to be a prime driver of the adoption of factory production and productivity gains in
this era.59
Other recent history papers use variation across U.S. counties, but condition on county
effects, rather than relying on cross-sectional variation; two studies also use an “enclave”
style of instrument. Gonzales-Velosa et al. (2013) examine the impact on the agricultural
sector between 1900 and 1940, using data tabulated from the Census of Agriculture. They
find little evidence immigration affected agricultural productivity, but find that
immigration may have been mostly accommodated by shifts away from less labor-intensive
crops (e.g., wheat) in places where the land could accommodate multiple crops.60 In places
where it could not, immigration is associated with markers of a shift towards more laborintensive production techniques (from tractors to mules). The latter is consistent with
evidence from the natural experiment of the U.S. shutting down immigration in the 1920s
(Lew and Cater 2010).61
Lafortune et al. (2014) examine the impact of changes in skill ratios (share literate),
induced by immigration, on the manufacturing sector between 1860 and 1940, using data
tabulated from the Census of Manufactures to the county or city x industry level. They find
a positive association between immigration-induced increases in the skill ratio (that is,
using variation from an “enclave” instrument) and wages and productivity, a result which
may be compositional only.62 More interestingly, unskilled immigration is associated with
the adoption of more, not less, capital-intensive production techniques between 1860 and
1880. This contrasts sharply with twentieth century capital-skill complementarity (e.g.,
For example, see simulations in Donaldson and Hornbeck (2013) suggesting that market access via
waterways access significantly raised local land values. See also Chandler (1977).
60 The industry mix result contrasts with modern findings that industry mix adjustments plays a trivial role in
the absorption of immigration-driven skill mix changes (e.g., Lewis 2003; Card and Lewis 2007; Gonzales and
Ortega 2011; Dustmann and Glitz forthcoming).
61 Lew and Cater (2010) examine agricultural counties on opposite either side of the Canada-U.S. border
during the 1920s, when the U.S. shut down inflows of foreign workers. This is associated with a sharp uptick
in labor-saving tractor use on the U.S. side of the border relative to the Canadian side, on what should be very
similar agricultural land.
62 Their IV estimates are in the range 0.2-0.3, and their skill mix measure is ln(literate workers/illiterate
workers). Thus, if literate workers were on the order 20-30 percent more productive than illiterate workers,
these results could be fully accounted for with compositional change. Unfortunately, no data exist to measure
the productivity or wages by literacy status at the individual level in this era.
59

67

Griliches 1969; Goldin and Katz 1998; Lewis 2011), but is consistent with the view that
advances in nineteenth century manufacturing were “deskilling” (e.g., Atack et al. 2004).
Thus, the finding is – similar to what Kim (2007) found – unskilled immigration may have
induced faster adoption of new production methods in manufacturing in the nineteenth
century, though the productivity gains from this may have been much more modest than
what Kim found.

68

7

Conclusions

Across a wide range of settings and research approaches, immigration is associated with
higher wages for most native-born workers, and with higher productivity, especially when
analyzing immigration across geographic areas. This simple fact, which has been subject
to a large number of tests, but on average has survived, indicates that immigrants
represent more than a simple change in total labor supply at the local level. First of all, their
skills and occupations are crucial to understand their impact. Second, the response of
native workers, firms, sectors and potentially local consumers are also important margins
to understand the equilibrium effects of migration on local economies. A more careful
consideration of these aspects and the development of model-based ways of testing local
responses to immigration have been crucial parts of the recent developments in this area of
research. While framing the analysis of the effects of immigrants in a model that allows for
different skills is very important and allows for a better understanding of
complementarities and adjustment margins, it also important to allow for the possibility of
productivity effects of immigrants.
The productivity effects of immigration have been found in a variety of European countries
and in the U.S., and measured at the local level (cities or metropolitan areas) up to the
country level. The positive impact of immigration on “skill diversity,” broadly construed,
appears to be a key driving force behind this productivity impact. The adoption of new and
efficient technologies in response to this richer set of skills may also be another important
force underlying the adjustment. The exact mechanism underlying this impact, however, is
still not well pinned down, but evidence suggests that immigration induces natives to
specialization in more complex jobs which complement immigrants’ skills, and that it
induces higher levels of innovation, both of which may contribute to the observed
productivity impacts. More research taking advantage of plant- or firm-level data would
likely be helpful in achieving a deeper understanding of how the impact of immigration
materializes. At the same time, data that follow individuals and firms allow us to identify
how these productivity effects diffuse across firms, labor markets and how they interact
with firm and workers characteristics to determine winners and losers from these changes.
69

References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller (2010). “Synthetic Control Methods
for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105(490): June, pp. 493-505.
Abramitzky Ran, Leah Platt Boustan and Katherine Eriksson (2014). “A Nation of
Immigrants: Assimilation and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.”
Journal of Political Economy 122(3): June, pp. 467-506.
Acemoglu, Daron. (1998). “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed
Technical Change and Wage Inequality.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):
November, pp. 1055-89.
Acemoglu, Daron (2002). “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market." Journal of
Economic Literature 40(1): March, p. 7-72.
Alesina Alberto , Johann Harnoss and Hillel Rapoport (2013). “Birthplace Diversity and
Economic Prosperity.” NBER Working Paper 18699.
Altonji Joseph G., and David Card (1991). “The effects of immigration on the labor market
outcomes of less-skilled natives.” In JM Abowd, RB Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade,
and the Labor Market, pp. 201–34. Chicago: Univ. Chicago Press.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina and Sara de la Rica (2011). “Complements or substitutes? Task
specialization by gender and nativity in Spain.” Labour Economics 18(5): October, pp.
697-707.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Adriana D. Kugler (2003). “Protective or Counter-Productive?
Labour Market Institutions and the Effect of Immigration on EU Natives.” The Economic
Journal 113: 2003, pp. F302-F331.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1999). “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.”
In Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Econonomics, Volume 3.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 1277-1366.
Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman and Robert Margo (2004). “Skill Intensity and Rising Wage
Dispersion in Nineteenth-Century American Manufacturing,” Journal of Economic
History 64(1): March, pp. 172–192.
Autor David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan Krueger (1998). “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4):
November, pp. 1169–214.
Barcellos, Silvia (2010). “The Dynamics of Immigration and Wages.” RAND Working Paper
#WR-755.
Bartel, Ann (1989). “Where Do the New US Immigrants Live?” Journal of Labor Economics
7(4): October, pp. 371-391.
Bartik, Timothy (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, Michigan: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn (2012). “Immigration and the Distribution of
Incomes.” IZA Discussion Papers 6921.
Bohn, Sarah, Magnus Lofstrom, and Steven Raphael (2014). “Did the 2007 Legal Arizona
Workers Act Reduce the State’s Unauthorized Immigrant Population?” Review of
Economics and Statistics 96(2): May, pp. 258-269.
Borjas, George J. (1994). “The Economics of Immigration.” Journal of Economic Literature
32(4): December, pp. 1667-1717.
70

---- (1999). “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Ashenfelter, Orley, and David Card,
eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3A, pp. 1697-1760. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
---- (2001). “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1.
---- (2003). “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
Immigration on the Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4):
November, pp. 1335-1374.
----- (2006). “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.”
Journal of Human Resources 41(2): Spring, pp. 221-258.
Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence Katz (1997). “How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: pp. 1-67.
Borjas George J. and Lawrence F. Katz (2007). “The evolution of the Mexican-Born
workforce in the United States.” In G. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United
States. Cambridge Mass: NBER.
Borjas, George J. and Kirk B. Doran (2012). “The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the
Productivity of American Mathemeticians.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(3):
August, pp. 1143-1203.
---- (forthcoming). “Cognitive Mobility: Native Responses to Supply Shocks in the Space of
Ideas.” The Journal of Labor Economics.
Broda, Christina and David E. Weinstein, 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Variety,"
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2): May, pp. 541-585.
Brunello, G., P. Fredriksson, A. Lamo, J. Messina, and G. Peri (2007). “Higher Education,
Innovation and Growth.” In Brunello, G., P. Garibaldi, and E.
Wasmer,
eds.,
Education and Training in Europe, pp. 56-70. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cadena, Brian C. and Brian K. Kovak (2013). “Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets:
Evidence from the Great Recession.” NBER Working Paper 19272.
Card, David (1990). “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.”
Industrial & Labor Relations Review 43(2): January, pp. 245-257.
---- (2001). “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19(1): January, pp. 22-64.
---- (2005). “Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?" Economic Journal115(507): November,
pp. F300-F323.
---- (2009). “Immigration and Inequality.” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings
99(2): May, pp. 1-21.
Card, David, and John DiNardo (2000). “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?”
The American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90(2): May, pp. 360-367.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux (2001). “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to
College for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis.” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116(2): May, pp. 705-746.
Card, David, and Ethan Lewis (2007). “The diffusion of Mexican immigrants during the
1990s: explanations and impacts.” In Borjas, George J., ed., Mexican Immigration to the
United States, pp. 193–228. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Cascio, Elizabeth and Ethan Lewis (2012). “Cracks In the Melting Pot: Immigration, School
Choice, and Segregation.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(3): August, pp.
91-117.
71

Carrington, William J., and Pedro de Lima (1996). “The impact of 1970s repatriates from
Africa on the Portuguese Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 49(2):
pp. 330-347.
Caselli Francesco and Wilbur J. Coleman II (2006). “The World Technology Frontier.” The
American Economic Review 96(3): June, pp. 499-522.
Castillo, Federico, J. Keith Gilless, and Steven Raphael (2009). “Comparing the Domestic
Labor Market Impacts of a South-North and South-South Migration: The Cases of Costa
Rica and the United States.” Mimeo, UC Berkeley, September.
Cattaneo, Cristina, Fiorio, Carlo V., and Giovanni Peri (2013). “What Happens to the Careers
of European Workers When Immigrants ‘Take Their Jobs’?” IZA Discussion Papers
7282.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr. (1977). The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American
Business. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Chassamboulli Andri and Theodore Palivos (2014). “A Search-Equilibrium Approach To
The Effects Of Immigration On Labor Market Outcomes.” International Economic
Review 55(1): February, pp. 111-129.
Chassamboulli Andri and Giovanni Peri, 2014. “The Labor Market Effects of Reducing
Undocumented Immigrants.” NBER Working Paper 19932.
Ciccone, Antonio and Robert E. Hall (1996). “Productivity and the Density of Economic
Activity.” American Economic Review 86(1): March, pp. 54-70.
Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri (2006). “Identifying Human-Capital Externalities:
Theory with Applications.” Review of Economic Studies 73(2): April, pp. 381-412.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2007). “Explaining US
Immigration, 1971-98.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): May, pp. 359373.
Cohen-Goldner, Sarit, and M. Daniele Paserman (2011(. “The Dynamic Impact of
Immigration on Natives’ Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence From Israel.” European
Economic Review 55(8): 1027-1045.
Conley, Timothy G. and Christopher R. Taber (2011). “Inference with ‘Difference in
Differences’ with a Small Number of Policy Changes.” The Review of Economics and
Statistics 93(1): February, pp. 113-125.
Cortes, Patricia. “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence from CPI
Data.” Journal of Political Economy 116(3): June, pp. 381-422.
Desai, Mihir, C. Friz Foley, and James Hines (2009). “Domestic Effects of the Foreign
Activities of US Multinationals.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(1): pp.
181-203.
Damm, Anna Piil (2009). “Ethnic Enclaves and Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes: QuasiExperimental Evidence.” Journal of Labor Economics 27(2): April, pp. 281-314.
D’Amuri Francesco and Giovanni Peri (forthcoming). “Immigration, Jobs and Employment
Protection: Evidence from Europe before and during the Great Recession.” Journal of
the European Economic Association.
di Giovani, Julian, Andrei Levchenko, and Francesc Ortega (2013). “A Global View of CrossBorder Migration.” Mimeo, UPF.
Docquier, Frédéric, Ozden, Caglar and Peri, Giovanni (2011). "The Labor Market Effects of
Immigration and Emigration in OECD Countries," IZA Discussion Papers 6258.
72

Donald, Stephen G. and Kevin Lang (2007). “Inference with Difference-in-Differences and
Other Panel Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): May, pp. 221-233.
Donaldson, Dave and Richard Hornbeck (2013). “Railroads and Economic Growth: A
‘Market Access’ Approach.” NBER Working Paper 19213.
Dustmann Christian, Tommaso Frattini and Ian P. Preston (2013). “The Effect of
Immigration along the Distribution of Wages.” Review of Economic Studies 80(1):
January, pp. 145-173.
Dustmann, Christian and Albrecht Glitz (forthcoming) “How Do Industries and Firms
Respond to Changes in Local Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics.
Filer, Randall (1992). "The Effect of Immigrant Arrivals on Migratory Patterns of Native
Workers." In Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source Areas, pp. 245-270. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Foged, Mette, and Giovanni Peri (2013). “Immigrants and Native Workers: New Analysis
Using Longitudinal Employer-Employee Data.” NBER Working Paper 19315.
Friedberg, Rachel M. (2001). “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): November, pp. 1373-1408.
Frey, William H. (1995). “Immigration and Internal Migration ‘Flight’: A California Case
Study." Population and Environment 16(4): March, pp. 353-75.
Garcia-Perez, Monica (2008). “Does it Matter Who I Work For and Who I work With? The
Impact of Owners and Coworkers on Hiring and Wages.” Mimeo, University of
Maryland.
Ghosh, Anirban and Anna Maria Mayda (2013). “The Impact of skilled migration on firmlevel productivity: An investigation of publicly traded U.S. firms.” Mimeo, Georgetown
University, August.
Glitz, Albrecht (2012). “The Labor Market Impact of Immigration: A Quasi-Experiment
Exploiting Immigrant Location Rules in Germany.” Journal of Labor Economics 30(1):
January, pp. 175-213.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (1998). “The Origins of Technology-Skill
Complementarity.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3): August, pp. 693–732.
---- (2008). The Race Between Education and Technology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gonzales, Arturo (1998). “Mexican Enclaves and the Price of Culture.” Journal of Urban
Economics 43(2), March, pp. 273-291.
Gonzalez, Libertad and Francesc Ortega (2011). “How Do Very Open Economies Absorb
Large Immigration Flows? Evidence from Spanish Regions.” Labour Economics 18: pp
57–70.
Gonzalez-Velosa, Carolina, Jeanne Lafortune and Jose Tessada (2013). “More Hands, More
Power? The Impact of Immigration on Farming and Technology Choices in US
Agriculture in the Early Twentieth Century.” Mimeo, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de
Chile.
Greenstone, Michael,
Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti (2010). "Identifying
Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant
Openings." Journal of Political Economy 118(3): June, pp. 536-598.
Grossman Jean B (1982). “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 64(4): November, pp. 596-603.
73

Griliches, Zvi (1969). “Capital-Skill Complementarity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 51
(4): November, pp. 465–468.
---- (1990). “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey.” Journal of Economic
Literature 28(4): December, pp. 1661-1707.
Hamermesh, Daniel (1993). Labor Demand. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Hunt, Jennifer (1992). “The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French
labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 45(3): April, pp. 556-572.
---- (2011). “Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions by
Entry Visa.” Journal of Labor Economics 29(3): July, pp. 417–57.
---- (2012). “The Impact of Immigration on the Educational Attainment of Natives.” NBER
Working Paper 18047.
Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle (2010). “How Much Does Immigration
Boost Innovation?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2): April, pp. 31-56.
Iranzo, Susana and Giovanni Peri (2009). "Schooling Externalities, Technology, and
Productivity: Theory and Evidence from U.S. States." The Review of Economics and
Statistics 91(2): May, pp. 420-431.
Jaffe Adam and Manuel Trajtenberg (2002). Patents, Citations and Innovations: A Window on
the Knowledge Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jackson, Osbourne (2013). “Does Immigration Crowd Natives Into or Out of Higher
Education?” Mimeo, Northeastern University.
Jones, Chad. (2002). “Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas.” American
Economic Review 92(1): March, pp. 220-239.
Kato, Takao and Chad Sparber (2013). “Quotas and Quality: The Eﬀect of H-1B Visa
Restrictions on the Pool of Prospective Undergraduate Students from Abroad.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 95(1): March, pp. 109-126.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992). “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
Supply and Demand Factors.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): February, pp.
35-78.
Kerr, William (2013). “U.S. High-Skilled Immigration, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship:
Empirical Approaches and Evidence.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 19377.
Kerr, William and William F. Lincoln (2010). “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): July, pp. 473508.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala and William R. Kerr (2011). "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A
Survey," Finnish Economic Papers 24(1): Spring, pp. 1-32.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln (2013). “Skilled Immigration
and the Employment Structures of U.S. Firms.” NBER Working Paper 19658.
Kim, Sukkoo (2007). “Immigration, Industrial Revolution and Urban Growth in the United
States, 1820-1920: Factor Endowments, Technology and Geography.” NBER Working
Paper 12900.
Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, and Giovanni Violante (2000). “Capital-Skill
Complementarity and Inequality: a Macroeconomic Analysis.” Econometrica 68(5):
September, pp. 1029–53.
Kugler, Adriana D. and Mutlu Yuskel (2008). “Effects of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S.
Natives: Evidence from Hurricane Mitch.” NBER Working Paper 14293.
74

Lach, Saul (2007). “Immigration and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy 115(4): August,
pp. 548-587.
Lafortune, Jeanne and Jose Tessada (2013). “Smooth(er) Landing? The Role of Networks in
the Location and Occupational Choice of Immigrants.” Mimeo, Pontiﬁcia Universidad
Católica de Chile.
Lafortune, Jeanne, Ethan Lewis, and Jose Tessada (2014). “People and Machines: A Look at
the Evolving Relationship Between Capital and Skill in Manufacturing Using
Immigration Shocks.” Mimeo, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile. Febraury.
Lew, Byron and Bruce Cater (2010). “Farm Mechanization on an Otherwise ‘Featureless’
Plain: Tractors on the Great Plains and Immigration Policy in the 1920s.” Mimeo, Trent
University.
Lewis, Ethan (2003). “Local, open economies within the U.S.: how do industries respond to
immigration?” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Papers 04-1.
---- (2011). “Immigration, Skill Mix, and Capital-Skill Complementarity.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126(2): May, pp. 1029-1069.
---- (2013a). “Immigration and Production Technology” Annual Review of Economics 5: pp.
165-91.
---- (2013b). “Immigrant-Native Substitutability and the Role of Language.” In Card, David
and Steven Raphael eds., Immigration, Poverty and Socio-Economic Inequality. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot (2005). “A Meta-Analytic Assessment
of the Effects of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of Economic Surveys 19(3): July, pp.
451-477.
Manacorda, Marco, Alan Manning, Jonathan Wadsworth (2012). “The Impact of
Immigration on the Structure of Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain.” Journal of
the European Economic Association 10(1): pp. 120-151.
Malchow-Moller, Nikolaj, Jakob Roland Munch, and Jan Rose Skaksen. 2011. “Do Foreign
Experts Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms?" IZA Discussion Paper 6001.
----- (2012). “Do Immigrants Affect Firm-Specific Wages?" The Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 114(4): pp. 1267-1295.
Mayda, Anna Maria (2010). “International migration: A panel data analysis of the
determinants of bilateral flows.” Journal of Population Economics 23(4): October, pp.
1249-1274.
Mazzolari, Francesca and David Neumark (2012). “Immigration and Product Diversity.”
Journal of Population Economics 25(3): pp. 1107-1137.
Moretti, Enrico (2004a). “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from
Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2):
pp. 175-212.
Moretti, Enrico (2004b). “Workers' Education, Spillovers, and Productivity: Evidence from
Plant-Level Production Functions.” American Economic Review 94(3): June, pp. 656690.
Mortensen, Dale and Christopher Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job Destruction in
the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61(3): July, pp. 397-415.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger (2013). “German Jewish Émigrés
and U.S. Invention.” Mimeo, Stanford University.
75

Murray, Thomas J. and Abigail Wozniak (2012). “Timing is Everything: Short-run
Population Impacts of Immigration in U.S. Cities.” Journal of Urban Economics 72(1):
pp. 60-78.
Olney, Will (2013). “Immigration and Firm Expansion.” Journal of Regional Science 53(1):
pp. 142-157.
Ortega, Francesc and Peri, Giovanni (2014). “Openness and income: The Roles of Trade and
Migration.” Journal of International Economics 92(2), pp. 231-251.
Ottaviano Gianmarco I.P. and Giovanni Peri (2005). “Cities and Cultures.” Journal of Urban
Economics 58(2): September, pp. 304-337.
---- (2006). “The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence from US cities.” Journal of
Economic Geography 6(1): January, pp. 9-44.
---- (2012). “Rethinking the Effects of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of the European
Economic Association 10(1): pp. 152-197.
Ozden, Calgar, and Mathis Wagner (2013). “Immigrants vs. Natives: Displacement and Job
Creation.” Mimeo, Boston College.
Paserman, M. Daniele (2013). “Do high-skill immigrants raise productivity? Evidence from
Israeli manufacturing firms, 1990-1999.” IZA Journal of Migration 2(6): April.
Peri, Giovanni (2011). "Rethinking the area approach: Immigrants and the Labor Market in
California." Journal of International Economics 84(1): May, pp. 1-14.
---- (2012). “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence from U.S. States.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 94(1): February, pp. 348-358.
---- (2013). “Immigration, Native Poverty and the Labor Market.” In Card, David and Steve
Raphael, eds., Immigration, Poverty and Socio-Economic Inequality. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Peri Giovanni, Kevin Y. Shih and Chad Sparber (2014). "Foreign STEM Workers and Native
Wages and Employment in U.S. Cities," NBER Working Papers 20093.
Peri, Giovanni and Chad Sparber (2009). “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages.”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): July, pp. 135-169.
----, 2011a. “Assessing inherent model bias: An application to native displacement in
response to immigration." Journal of Urban Economics 69(1): January, pp. 82-91.
----, 2011b. "Highly-Educated Immigrants and Native Occupational Choice.” Industrial
Relations 50(3): July, pp. 385-411.
Pugatch, Todd and Dean Yang (2011). “The Impact of Mexican Immigration on U.S. Labor
Markets: Evidence from Migrant Flows Driven by Rainfall Shocks.” Mimeo, University
of Michigan.
Roy, A.D. (1951), "Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings." Oxford Economic Papers
3: pp. 135-146.
Saxenian, AnnaLee (1994). Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley
and Route 128. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---- (2002a). “Silicon Valley’s new immigrant high growth entrepreneurs.” Econ. Dev. Q. 16:
pp. 20–31.
---- (2002b). Local and Global Networks of Immigrant Professionals in Silicon Valley. Public
Policy Institute of California.
Saiz, Albert (2007). “Immigration and Housing Rents in American Cities,” Journal of Urban
Economics 61(2): March, pp.345-371.
76

Smith, Christopher L. (2012). “The Impact of Low-Skilled Immigration on the Youth Labor
Market.” Journal of Labor Economics 30(1): January, pp. 55-89.
Trax Michaela & Stephan Brunow & Jens Suedekum (2013). “Cultural diversity and plantlevel productivity.” Mimeo, Mercatur School of Management, University of DuisburgEssen, April.
Waldinger, Fabian (2012). “Peer Effects in Science – Evidence from the Dismissal of
Scientists in Nazi Germany.” The Review of Economic Studies 79(2): April, pp. 838-861.

77

Tables and Figures

Table 1: Measures of concentration and exposure Native-Immigrants for different cell structures
Cell

Metropolitan Areas

States

Occupations

Education cells Education-Age
Cells
Number
284
50
335
7
70
Measures of concentration across cells: relative values immigrant/native
Foreign/Native Herfindahl
3.42
2.76
0.87
0.93
0.99
Foreign/Native percentage of
2.48
2.74
1.09
1.03
0.98
population in top unit
Foreign/Native percentage of
1.86
2.07
0.92
n.a.
1.05
population in top 5% of units
Foreign/Native percentage of
1.60
1.85
0.88
0.94
1.06
population in top 10% of units
Measure of variation in native exposure to immigrants across cells
(Immigrant per resident),
11.1
6.6
4.3
2.6
5.2
Top10%/Bottom 10%
(Immigrant per resident),
17.2
10.3
7.3
n.a.
6.8
Top5%/Bottom 5%
(Immigrant per resident), ratio of
65.1
21.8
63.0
4.6
10.0
largest to smallest

Note: All statistics use all US resident individuals, not living in group quarters and working at least one week, aged 18-65. The data are from
ACS 2011.

78

Table 2: total productivity effects of immigrants, estimates from the literature

Peri (2012)

Ln(GSP/Worker)

Source of
Treatment;
Variation (Cells)
Instrument
Education x
Actual
Experience
immigration
1990-2006
(≈10% of pop);
N/A-simulation
U.S. Metropolitan Diversity
of
Areas
country of birth
index;
(shift-share
diversity index)
U.S. Metropolitan Share foreign
Areas
born; OLS only
U.S. States
imms/pop;
ethnic enclave
shift share
“”
“”

Lewis (2011)

Output/worker,
manufacturing

U.S. Metropolitan
Areas

Study
Outcome
Ottaviano and Native-born
Peri (2012)
average ln(wage)

Ottaviano and Native-born
Peri (2006)
average ln(wage)

Ottaviano and Native-born
Peri (2006)
average ln(wage)
Peri (2012)
TFP (residual
GSP/Worker)

Peri, Shih, and Native-born
Sparber (2014) College ln(wage)

Metropolitan
areas

Peri, Shih, and Native-born nonSparber (2014) college ln(wage)

“”

79

HS
dropouts
/HS graduate;
ethnic enclave
shift share
STEM share of
employment;
ethnic enclave x
change in H1-Bs
“”

OLS
0-0.007

IV

1.27
(0.27)

0.98
(0.50)

0.57
(0.11)
0.80
(0.39)

1.37
(0.27)

0.62
(0.43)
-0.14
(0.10)

0.88
(0.25)
-0.03
(0.24)

4.10
(1.86)

8.03
(3.02)

1.16
(1.24)

3.78
(1.75)

Table 2 Continued
Study
Outcome
Foged and Peri Native born
(2013)
college ln(hourly
wage)
Foged and Peri Native born non(2013)
college ln(hourly
wage)
Trax, Brunow TFP (Value added
and Suedekum residual)
(2013)

Source of
Variation (Cells)
Metropolitan
areas, but within
worker and firm
Metropolitan
areas, but within
worker and firm
Plant (conditional
on metro area)

Trax, Brunow TFP (Value added
and Suedekum residual)
(2013)

Region
(conditional
plant)

Paserman(2013)

Output/worker,
manufacturing

Plant

Paserman(2013)

Output/worker,
manufacturing

Three-digit
Industry

Treatment;
Instrument
Non-EU
imms/pop;
Ethnic enclave
Non-EU
imms/pop;
Ethnic enclave
Immigrant
diversity index;
lagged values of
inputs
Immigrant
on diversity index;
lagged values of
inputs
Share
Immigrant; OLS
only
Share
Immigrant;
shift-share

80

OLS
0.254
(0.121)

IV
0.864
(0.271)

0.236
(0.114)

0.460
(0.234)

Manufact:
0.046(.027)
Service:
0.090(.042)
Manufact:
0.193(.101)
Service:
0.613(.168)
-0.073
(0.030)

Manufact:
0.310(.142)
Service:
0.033(.280)
Manufact:
1.617(.705)
Service:
1.187(.829)

-0.028
(0.040)

0.216
(0.554)

Figure 1

Note: The share of employment in each metro area is calculated based on 2011 ACS data, excluding people in group quarters and including only
people 18-65 who worked at least one week. We consider as Urban population is the total population of the top 284 metro Areas in the US

81

Figure 2

Note: The share of employment in each state is calculated based on 2011 ACS data, excluding people in group quarters and including only
people 18-65 who worked at least one week. We consider 50 US states plus DC. (Hence 51 units)

82

Figure 3
General Scheme of the CES Nests and Relative Notation

Characteristics

Levels of Nesting
0
1

i

3





Education

i(1)
i

2



1

2

Age/Experience


i(2)

Foreign/Native


i(3)

83

Figure 4

Note: Authors’ calculations based on 2011 ACS data, excluding people in group quarters and including only people 18-65 who worked at least
one week.
84

Figure 5

10
0
-10

 = 0.639
Std. Err = 0.299

-20

% Average Annual
Earnings of U.S. Natives

20

Native Wages vs. Immigrant Share
U.S. Cities 2000-2010

-2

0

2

4

6

8

Share of Immigrants (%)
Note: Each circle represents one of 219 MSAs (cities). Data are calculated from the 2000 Census and 2008-2010 3 Year
combined American Community Survey. Beta coefficient is from an OLS regression of the percentage change in wages
against the change in the immigrant share, and standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity. All results are
weighted by initial city population in 2000, and thus the size of circles reflects the city size in 2000.

85

