NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNANCE AND COMOVEMENT UNDER COMMON OWNERSHIP
Alex Edmans
Doron Levit
Devin Reilly
Working Paper 20420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20420

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We thank Rui Albuquerque, Simon Gervais, Jean-Marie Meier, David Schoenherr, and conference
participants at the SFS Cavalcade, WFA, and Wharton for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Alex Edmans, Doron Levit, and Devin Reilly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Governance and Comovement Under Common Ownership
Alex Edmans, Doron Levit, and Devin Reilly
NBER Working Paper No. 20420
August 2014
JEL No. G34
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the corporate governance and asset pricing implications of investors owning blocks
in multiple firms. Common wisdom is that multi-firm ownership weakens governance because the
blockholder is spread too thinly. We show that this need not be the case. In a single-firm benchmark,
the blockholder governs through exit, selling her stake if the firm underperforms. With multiple firms,
the blockholder may sell even a value-maximizing firm, to disguise her exit from another underperforming
firm as being motivated by a portfolio-wide liquidity shock. This reduces the manager's effort incentives
and weakens governance. On the other hand, governance can be stronger, because selling one firm
and not the other is a powerful signal of underperformance. Common ownership leads to firms' stock
prices being correlated, even if their fundamentals are uncorrelated. We derive empirical predictions
for the direction of correlation and for whether governance is stronger or weaker with multiple firms.

Alex Edmans
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2460 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
aedmans@wharton.upenn.edu
Doron Levit
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
2457 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
dlevit@wharton.upenn.edu

Devin Reilly
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
reillyde@sas.upenn.edu

Most existing theories of blockholder governance consider a single firm. However, in
reality, many institutional investors hold blocks in multiple firms.1 This paper studies
the implications of common ownership for corporate governance and asset pricing. In
particular, we address two broad questions. First, does holding multiple blocks weaken
governance by spreading a blockholder too thinly, as commonly believed? If not, under
what conditions can multi-firm ownership improve governance? Second, can common
ownership lead to correlation between stocks with independent fundamentals, and if
so, in which direction?
In our model, the blockholder governs through “exit”, disciplining the manager
by selling shares if he shirks. Such sales reduce the value of the manager’s equity
compensation ex post, thus inducing him to maximize firm value ex ante. We model
governance through exit rather than “voice” (intervention) for three reasons. First,
McCahery, Sautner, and Starks (2011) report that exit is the main governance mechanism used by institutions.2 Second, if holding multiple blocks means that the investor
holds smaller stakes in each firm, she may lack sufficient control rights to intervene.
Third, exit has asset pricing implications, since it involves the blockholder trading the
firm’s stock.
As a benchmark against which to assess the effects of common ownership, we start
with a model in which the blockholder owns shares in a single firm. The manager can
take an action (such as shirking, cash flow diversion, or empire building) that yields a
fixed private benefit, but reduces firm value by a random amount privately known to
him. In equilibrium, the manager shirks if and only if the value loss is below a threshold;
a lower threshold corresponds to greater efficiency and thus superior governance. The
blockholder privately observes the manager’s action, and based on this information,
may either sell shares or retain them until firm value is realized. As in Admati and
Pfleiderer (2009), her trade is observed by the market maker, but not fully revealing
because she may also suffer a liquidity shock that forces her to sell half of her stake
(although she may choose to sell more). In equilibrium, the blockholder sells shares,
reducing the stock price, if she needs liquidity or the manager shirks. The threat of
selling disciplines the manager and lowers the threshold below which he shirks.
1

See Antón and Polk (2014), Bartram, Griffin, Lim, and Ng (2014), Gao, Moulton, and Ng (2014),
Hau and Lai (2013), and Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Ramadorai (2012)
2
See Parrino, Sias, and Starks (2003), Bharath, Jayaraman, and Nagar (2013), Edmans, Fang, and
Zur (2013), and Duan and Jiao (2014) for further evidence of governance through exit.

2

The core analysis is a model with two independent firms, where the blockholder
owns a stake in each firm. She can satisfy her liquidity need by selling either half of
her stake in each firm or her entire stake in one firm. Importantly, the decision to
sell is made at the portfolio rather than firm level. As we discuss below, this is a key
implication of common ownership.
If both managers work and there is no liquidity shock, the blockholder retains both
stakes. If there is a liquidity shock and both managers either work or shirk, she sells half
of her stake in each firm (“balanced exit”).3 The interesting case is when one manager
shirks and the other works. The blockholder has two options. First, she sells only the
underperforming firm (“imbalanced exit”). The disadvantage is that selling only one
firm fully reveals that its manager has shirked, and so the blockholder receives a low
price for the sold share. Second, the blockholder engages in balanced exit, to disguise
her trades as being driven by a liquidity shock. While selling the value-maximizing
firm leads to losses, they may be offset by the higher price received from selling the
underperforming firm.
The balanced exit strategy is more likely if the liquidity shock is more common,
so that selling both shares provides more camouflage. It is also more likely if agency
problems are weak (private benefits from shirking are lower, or the manager’s stock
price concerns are higher so that he is more concerned with exit), because then balanced
exit is more likely to result from a liquidity shock than both managers shirking. The
market maker thus sets high prices upon observing balanced exit, encouraging the
blockholder to choose it.
Our first main result is that the two-firm equilibrium is more efficient than the
single-firm benchmark if and only if the blockholder chooses imbalanced exit with
sufficient probability. As explained above, the probability of imbalanced exit depends
upon the severity of the agency problem. Thus, our model relates the efficiency of
multi-firm governance to the underlying characteristics of the portfolio companies.
The intuition is as follows. With one firm, if the manager works, his firm is sold
only if the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock. With two firms and balanced exit,
if the other manager shirks, then even if the first manager works and the blockholder
suffers no shock, his firm is still sold. Thus, the first manager’s incentives to work are
3

Balanced exit may also involve the blockholder selling a different proportion (not necessarily half)
of her stake in each firm. We show that the exact number of shares the blockholder sells in each firm,
under balanced exit, makes no difference to the manager’s strategy or to efficiency.

3

lower, reducing efficiency. In contrast, an equilibrium with imbalanced exit is more
efficient than the single-firm benchmark. This is because the existence of the second
firm gives the blockholder another channel to satisfy her liquidity needs, which has two
consequences. First, the reward for working is higher. In the single-firm model, if the
manager works and the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock, his firm is automatically
sold. In the two-firm model, a value-maximizing firm is not sold even if the blockholder
suffers a liquidity shock, since she can sell the other firm and will indeed do so if it
is underperforming. Second, the punishment for shirking is higher. With one firm,
being sold is not a severe punishment, since it is consistent with a liquidity shock
and thus leads only to a moderate price decline. With two firms, the blockholder can
severely punish an underperforming firm by selling it and retaining the other firm.
Selling only one firm is a particularly strong signal that it is underperforming, because
if the blockholder had instead suffered a liquidity shock, she would have sold both firms
equally. Thus, the price of the sold firm is very low, significantly deterring shirking.
In sum, when the agency problem is strong in a single-firm setting, because private
benefits are high or the manager’s stock price concerns are low, it is mitigated by common ownership. More generally, while empirical blockholder studies typically analyze
the size of the largest blockholder or the number of blockholders, our paper theoretically motivates a new measure of blockholder governance – the number of blocks owned
by an investor. Faccio, Marchica, and Mura (2011) and Ekholm and Maury (2014) empirically study a related measure, the concentration of a stock in an investor’s portfolio.
The former posit that concentration is negatively related with firm value, since a concentrated investor will turn down risky, positive-NPV projects. The latter hypothesize
that it is positively related with firm value, since firms will focus their monitoring on
their largest holdings. Our theory suggests a different channel through which portfolio concentration can affect firm value. Moreover, the effect of portfolio concentration
is nuanced: it is not universally positive or negative, but depends on the severity of
the agency problem and the probability of liquidity shocks. This may explain the
heterogeneity of cross-ownership structures between firms.
Our second main result is that common ownership leads to correlation between the
stock prices of portfolio companies, even with independent fundamentals. On the one
hand, liquidity shocks cause the blockholder to sell both firms, driving both prices
down. On the other hand, imbalanced exit depresses the price of the sold firm but
4

increases the price of the retained firm. Overall, the correlation is negative if and
only if the probability of imbalanced exit is sufficiently high. Hence, the severity of the
agency problem affects the direction of correlation, through determining the probability
of imbalanced exit. Comovement typically depend on the correlation between random
variables, e.g. firms’ business conditions. Here, it depends on non-random parameters. In addition, while comovement is an asset pricing concept that typically depends
on loadings on macroeconomic factors, here it is affected by corporate finance variables (e.g. the severity of agency problems) as these govern the blockholder’s trading
strategy.
We also show that common ownership creates strategic interactions between the
managers of otherwise unrelated firms. If the blockholder pursues balanced exit, a
working manager’s firm is sold if the other manager shirks. The greater the likelihood
that the other manager shirks, the lower the first manager’s incentive to work, and so
the managers’ actions are strategic complements. With imbalanced exit, the managers’
actions can be strategic substitutes. If one manager works and the blockholder suffers
a liquidity shock, he is not sold if the other manager shirks, as the blockholder will
sell only the other firm. The greater the likelihood that the other manager shirks, the
greater the first manager’s incentive to work. Overall, regardless of whether we have
strategic complements or substitutes, a novel implication is that common ownership
can give rise to governance externalities between firms – greater effort by one manager
affects the effort incentives of another manager.4
In the core analysis, we focus on “ex-post symmetric” equilibria, where the blockholder makes the same trade in each firm whenever the managers take the same action.
Indeed, investors (e.g., mutual funds) typically keep portfolio weights fixed unless firm
fundamentals change asymmetrically. For example, Coval and Stafford (2007) show
that liquidity shocks (due to investor outflows) do not cause mutual funds to sell
stakes more selectively than funds that do not experience a shock. For completeness,
we relax this focus in an extension, and characterize the broader set of equilibria that
emerge. We show that the most efficient two-firm equilibrium is not ex-post symmetric: when both managers work and the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock, she does
not automatically sell a half-share in each firm, but chooses imbalanced exit with posi4

Here, governance externalities arise from common ownership. In Acharya and Volpin (2010),
Dicks (2012), and Levit and Malenko (2014), they arise from labor market competition.

5

tive probability. Since imbalanced exit is now consistent with both managers working,
the price the blockholder receives for the sold firm is relatively high. As a result, the
blockholder has stronger incentives to choose imbalanced exit when one manager shirks.
This exerts stronger governance and creates negative price correlations due to the same
intuition as the core model. Moreover, under this equilibrium, the two-firm model is
always more efficient than the single-firm benchmark. This extension reinforces the
core model’s insight that common ownership exerts stronger governance if and only if
the blockholder chooses imbalanced exit.
This paper builds on a recent theoretical literature on governance through exit.
Admati and Pfleiderer (2009) and Edmans (2009) study a single firm and single blockholder, which Goldman and Strobl (2013) and Dasgupta and Piacentino (2014) extend
to the case in which the blockholder has career concerns. Levit (2013) analyzes the
interaction between exit and communication between investors and managers, in a
single-firm, single-blockholder framework. Edmans and Manso (2011) model both exit
and voice in a single-firm, multi-blockholder model. To our knowledge, the effectiveness
of exit in a multi-firm model has not been previously studied. Away from exit theories,
Gervais, Lynch, and Musto (2005) show that mutual fund families can add value by
monitoring multiple managers, since firing one manager increases investors’ perceived
skill of retained managers. This intuition is similar to why imbalanced exit strengthens
governance. In addition to the context, there are important differences between the
two models. First, our model studies moral hazard while Gervais et al. study adverse
selection. Second, Gervais et al. assume that the fund family can commit to a firing
policy; under this assumption, the fund family always creates value. Here, we do not
assume that commitment is possible. The blockholder will only engage in imbalanced
exit if she has incentives to do so; as discussed above, these incentives depend on the
nature of the agency problem. Therefore, the combination of these two departures
from Gervais et al. generates our first main result. Vayanos and Woolley (2012) study
how common ownership leads to positive price correlations. Here, correlations can be
negative and common ownership also affects real outcomes.
Empirically, Gao, Moulton, and Ng (2014) document return predictability across
economically unrelated stocks with common institutional ownership. Antón and Polk
(2014) show that common ownership led to stocks exhibiting excess comovement during
the 2003 mutual fund trading scandal, which caused implicated funds to suffer a liquid6

ity shock. Jotikasthira, Lundblad, and Ramadorai (2012) find that liquidity shocks to
mutual funds cause comovement between the markets they invest in. Bartram, Griffin,
Lim, and Ng (2014) find that a company’s stock return is higher when the returns to
foreign stocks held by its institutional investors are high. These asset pricing effects
can lead to common ownership having corporate finance implications (as in this paper),
due to the feedback effect from financial markets to real decisions: Hau and Lai (2013)
show that mutual funds exposed to bank stocks suffered large losses, which forced them
to sell unrelated stocks, reducing their prices and in turn investment and employment.
While the above papers study how the event of a liquidity shock (or unusual returns
in one sector) can propagate to other sectors through common ownership, we argue
that common ownership per se affects stock prices, even outside of liquidity events.
Moreover, it can also affect governance and managerial behavior: the mere threat of
selling one firm and retaining another can induce effort.5
Some of the model’s implications are both consistent with existing evidence and
at the same time yield new predictions. Scholes (1972), Mikkelson and Partch (1985),
Holthausen, Leftwich, and Mayers (1990), and Sias, Starks, and Titman (2006) show
that sales by large investors reduces the stock price; these declines are permanent and
thus likely result from the sale conveying negative information. While consistent with
our model, these results are also consistent with any exit theory. However, our model
yields an additional prediction that is, to our knowledge, untested – the price impact of
blockholder exit depends not only on how many shares she sells in the firm in question,
but also whether she sells her stakes in other, otherwise unrelated firms.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 1 presents the model setup. Section
2 presents a benchmark in which the blockholder owns a single firm and Section 3
considers the core multi-firm model. Section 4 analyzes ex-post asymmetric equilibria
and Section 5 concludes. Appendix A gives all proofs not in the main text, and the
Online Appendix considers supplemental analyses.
5

Away from return correlation, Lou (2012) empirically analyzes a different consequence of common
ownership: strong performance by one fund improves the performance of others holding the same stock,
by inducing inflows into the first fund which cause upward price pressure. Matvos and Ostrovsky (2008)
and Harford, Jenter, and Li (2011) study how common ownership of two firms affects the likelihood
of them merging.

7

1

The Model

The model consists of three periods and two public and symmetric firms, i and j.
A blockholder owns α shares in each firm, which we normalize to one to save on
notation. The remaining shares are owned by dispersed shareholders who play no
role in the model. The blockholder represents a mutual fund, hedge fund, or other
institutional investor who has superior information about firm value and thus can
engage in governance through exit.6
Each firm is run by a manager. At t = 1, manager i takes action ai ∈ {L, H},
which affects the fundamental value of the firm at t = 3. If ai = H, then firm value is
v > 0, which is common knowledge. Action ai = L yields the manager a private benefit
β > 0, where β is common knowledge, but reduces firm value by a random amount
θi ∈ [0, v]. Overall, firm value at t = 3 is given by:
v (θi , ai ) = v − θi 1ai =L .

(1)

The variable θi is privately known to manager i (but not manager j) when he chooses
his action, and independent of θj . The cumulative distribution function of θi is given
by F , which is continuous and has full support. We assume that
β ∈ (0, v) ,

(2)

which is a necessary condition for ai = L to reduce total surplus: the manager’s private
benefit is less than the maximum value erosion. Examples of such actions include
shirking, cash flow diversion, perk consumption, and empire building. For simplicity,
we will refer to ai = L as “shirking” and ai = H as “working”. We will abuse language
slightly by using the phrase “shirking firm” to refer to a firm run by a manager who
has shirked, and “working firm” analogously.
6

Edmans (2009) shows that, if there are short-sales constraints or non-trivial short-sales costs,
a blockholder will endogenously gather more information than small investors, even if she has no
superior access to information. Alternatively, the blockholder may be endowed with more information
if her large stake gives her improved access to management. Even though Regulation FD prohibits
managers from selectively disclosing material information, investors still talk to managers to learn
their views on market conditions, strategic choice, etc.

8

Manager i’s objective function is given by:
uM,i = v (θi , ai ) + ωpi + β1ai =L ,

(3)

where pi is firm i’s stock price at t = 2, set by a market maker as described below. The
variable ω > 0 captures the manager’s concern for the stock price, which is standard in
exit theories and can stem from a number of sources introduced in prior work: takeover
threat (Stein (1988)), termination threat (Edmans (2011)), concern for managerial
reputation (Narayanan (1985), Scharfstein and Stein (1990)), or the manager expecting
to sell his own shares at t = 2 (Stein (1989)). If the manager is indifferent between
working and shirking, we assume that he works.
The blockholder privately observes a = (ai , aj ) but is uninformed about θ = (θi , θj ).7
After doing so, she can trade at t = 2 with a competitive risk-neutral market maker
who does not observe a or θ. If the blockholder is not hit by a liquidity shock, she
is free to choose whether to retain or sell her stake in each firm. With probability
(“w.p.”) δ ∈ [0, 1), she is hit by a liquidity shock which forces her to sell half of her
combined holdings (i.e. 1 share in total), although she may choose to sell more. We use
χ = 1 (χ = 0) to denote the case where the blockholder is (is not) subject to a liquidity
shock. In addition, denote by si (ai , aj , χ) ∈ {0, 0.5, 1} her trade in firm i. Since there
are two ex-ante identical firms, we allow the blockholder to trade shares in half-units,
but the proofs of Sections 2 and 3 in Appendix A allow her to sell any fraction of
her portfolio and show that the results continue to hold. As in Admati and Pfleiderer
(2009) and Edmans (2009), the blockholder cannot buy additional shares; those papers
show that the exit governance mechanism is robust to allowing for purchases. We will
abuse language slightly by using the phrase “the manager will be sold” to refer to the
stock of the firm run by the manager being sold.
As in Admati and Pfleiderer (2009), the market maker observes the blockholder’s
trading decisions s = (si , sj ), but not whether she has suffered a liquidity shock. He
sets the stock price pi (s) to equal the firm’s expected value. Overall, conditional on s,
7

Our assumption that the blockholder observes (ai , aj ) but not (θi , θj ) is consistent with her being less informed than the manager. Her information advantage over the market maker (and other
investors) arises from observing whether firm value is v or less than v, i.e. when the firm is operating
below its potential. Allowing the blockholder to observe (θi , θj ) would lead to substantial complexity
as the blockholder’s trading decision (and thus the market maker’s inference) will now depend on the
value destroyed by any shirking, in addition to the act of shirking.

9

the blockholder’s utility is given by:
uB (s) =

X

[si pi (s) + (1 − si ) v (θi , ai )] .

(4)

i

The equilibrium concept we use is Perfect Bayesian Nash Equilibrium. Here, it is defined as follows: (i) A trading strategy by the blockholder that maximizes her expected
utility uB given the price-setting rule of the market maker, the strategy of each manager, and her information on a. (ii) A decision rule by each manager i that maximizes
his expected utility uM,i given his information on θi , the strategy of manager j, the
price-setting rule of the market maker, and the trading strategy of the blockholder.
(iii) A price-setting strategy by the market maker that allows him to break even in
expectation, given the strategy of the blockholder and managers. Moreover, (iv) the
market maker uses Bayes’ rule to update his beliefs from the blockholder’s trades, and
(v) all agents have rational expectations in that each player’s belief about the other
players’ strategies is correct in equilibrium.
We focus on symmetric equilibria, in which the managers follow the same strategy
and the market maker uses a symmetric pricing function.8 Moreover, in the core
analysis, we require that the equilibrium is ex-post symmetric as defined below.
Definition 1. An equilibrium is ex-post symmetric if on the equilibrium path, ai =
aj ⇒ si = sj w.p. 1.
An equilibrium is ex-post symmetric if, whenever the blockholder observes the same
action in both firms, she sells the same amount of shares in each firm. Ex-post symmetry is a stronger requirement than symmetry: for example, choosing s = (1, 0) and
s = (0, 1) with equal probability when a = (H, H) is a symmetric strategy that violates
ex-post symmetry. Ex-post symmetry is a reasonable selection criterion particularly
in the context of financial markets, since investors typically prefer to keep portfolio
weights fixed unless fundamentals have changed. Hereafter, unless otherwise noted,
8

Asymmetric equilibria may exist. We focus on symmetric equilibria since firms are symmetric.
Thus, if there is an asymmetric equilibrium, there exists another equilibrium in which firms switch
roles (since they are ex-ante identical). These equilibria are unattractive as it is indeterminate which
role each firm will play. Relatedly, in Lemma 4 in Appendix A, we show that if the managers follow
the same strategy and the market maker follows a symmetric pricing strategy, the blockholder’s best
response is a symmetric strategy as well.

10

references to an equilibrium are to an ex-post symmetric equilibrium.9 In Section 4,
we relax ex-post symmetry and discuss the additional equilibria that emerge.
We define efficiency as the maximization of firm value v, rather than total surplus (which includes the private benefit β), since governance is typically focused on
shareholder value maximization.

2

Single-Firm Benchmark

As a benchmark against which to compare the effects of multi-firm ownership, we
consider a variant of the baseline model in which the blockholder owns two shares
in firm i and zero in firm j.10 We denote the blockholder’s trading decision by si ∈
{0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2}. Her utility function is now:
uB (si ) = sp (si ) + (2 − si ) v (θi , ai ) .

(5)

The equilibrium is given in Proposition 1 below:
Proposition 1. (Single-firm benchmark): With a single firm, an equilibrium always
exists. There is a unique θ1∗ ∈ (0, v) such that, in any equilibrium, there exist s < 1
and s ≥ 1 and the following hold:
(i) If ai = H and χ = 0, then si = s.
(ii) If ai = L or χ = 1, then si = s.
(iii) Prices on the equilibrium path satisfy

p (si ) =



v

v −

if si = s
F(

θ1∗

F(

θ1∗

)

)+δ[1−F ( )]
θ1∗

E [θi |θi < θ∗ ] if si = s.

(6)

Prices off the equilibrium path satisfy p (si ) = v (θ1∗ ) ≡ v − E [θi |θi < θ1∗ ].
(iv) The manager shirks if and only if θi < θ1∗ , where θ1∗ is uniquely defined by ψ1 (θ1∗ ) =
9

Note that imposing ex-post symmetry as a selection criterion does not restrict the blockholder’s
strategy space. The blockholder is allowed to trade asymmetrically: our ex-post symmetric equilibria
must ensure that she will not wish to deviate to doing so.
10
This model also depicts a scenario in which there are two firms, each owned by a different blockholder. Since the firms are unrelated in both fundamentals and ownership, the analysis of each firm
can be conducted separately.

11

θ1∗ , where
ψ1 (y) = β − ω (1 − δ)

F (y)
E [θ|θ < y] .
F (y) + δ (1 − F (y))

(7)

When deciding his action, the manager trades off the private benefit from shirking
with both the expected price decline and the firm value erosion from doing so. Part (iv)
of Proposition 1 states that this trade-off gives rise to a threshold strategy: he shirks
if and only if the value erosion θi is sufficiently small – less than a threshold ψ1 (θ1∗ ),
which equals the private benefit minus the expected price decline (the subscript 1 refers
to a one-firm model). Therefore, ex-ante shareholder value in equilibrium is given by
V (θ1∗ ), where
V (y) ≡ v − Pr [θi < y] E [θi |θi < y] ,

(8)

which is decreasing in θ1∗ . A higher θ1∗ (more shirking) reduces firm value.
From part (iv), the threshold θ1∗ increases with β: when the private benefit from
shirking is higher, the manager is less likely to work. Part (iv) also shows that θ1∗
decreases with the manager’s stock price concern ω. From parts (i)-(iii), if the manager
shirks, the blockholder sells more shares and reduces the stock price.11 A higher ω
makes this price reduction more costly to the manager, and so θ1∗ falls. In addition, θ1∗
is increasing in δ: more frequent liquidity shocks encourage shirking. If the blockholder
suffers a liquidity shock, she exits even if the manager has worked, thus reducing his
incentives to do so. Put differently, with a liquidity shock, the blockholder’s trade is
less driven by firm fundamentals, and so the manager has a weaker incentive to improve
firm fundamentals by working.
Exit is most powerful when the blockholder has incentives to exit if and only if
the manager shirks. Proposition 1 states that, in a single-firm model, this is the
case if and only if the blockholder does not suffer a liquidity shock. In Section 3, we
show that the ability to make exit decisions at the portfolio level – an implication of
common ownership – affects real efficiency by changing the circumstances under which
the blockholder finds it optimal to exit in equilibrium.
11

Note that the manager does not care about how many shares the blockholder sells per se, but
only the price impact of the blockholder’s decision to sell. Thus, even though the equilibrium may not
be unique (s and s are not uniquely defined), the manager’s threshold is unique.

12

3

Multi-Firm Governance

3.1

Analysis of Equilibria

We now move to the main analysis where the blockholder owns one share in each firm.
To simplify exposition, we use the following notation: if s = (si , sj ) then sT = (sj , si ).
We use blockholder “type” to refer to her liquidity need and/or the actions she has
observed. For example, a “χ = 1 and a = (H, H)-type” blockholder is one who has
experienced a liquidity shock and observed that both managers have worked.
Given our focus on symmetric equilibria, if type a = (L, H) chooses s with positive
probability, type a = (H, L) chooses sT with the same probability. To keep the exposition concise, we omit the description of the strategy of type a = (H, L). Moreover,

since symmetry implies pi (s) = pj sT ∀ s, we omit the subscript i whenever there is
no risk of confusion.
We start with a number of useful results that hold for all symmetric equilibria.
Lemma 1. In any symmetric equilibrium, the following hold:
(i) There exists θ∗ ∈ (0, v) such that manager i chooses ai = L if and only if θi < θ∗ .
(ii) p (s) ≥ v (θ∗ ) for all s.
(iii) If a = (L, H), then si ≥ sj .
(iv) If a = (H, H) and χ = 0, then si + sj < 1.
(v) If a = (L, L), then si + sj ≥ 1.
(vi) If s = (1, 1) is played with positive probability, then s = (0.5, 0.5) is played w.p. 0.
Part (i) of Lemma 1 states that manager i follows a threshold strategy, as in Section
2. Part (ii) states that the lowest possible price is one that assumes that the manager
shirked with certainty. Part (iii) implies a working manager is never sold more than
a shirking manager. Part (iv) states that, if both managers work and the blockholder
does not suffer a liquidity shock, she sells at most half of her portfolio. Part (v) states
that if both managers shirk, the blockholder sells at least as much as if she suffered
a liquidity shock, i.e. at least half of her portfolio. Intuitively, doing so allows her to
disguise her sale as being motivated by a liquidity shock rather than shirking. Part
(vi) says that there is no equilibrium in which both s = (1, 1) and s = (0.5, 0.5) are
on the equilibrium path. Such an equilibrium can only be sustained if a blockholder
who observes a = (L, L) plays s = (1, 1) and a blockholder who observes a = (H, H)
13

plays s = (0.5, 0.5). However, this implies that p (0.5, 0.5) is high relative to p (1, 1),
encouraging a blockholder who observes a = (L, L) to deviate to it.
Lemma 1 applies to all symmetric equilibria, even those that are not ex-post symmetric. Ex-post symmetry, combined with part (iv) of Lemma 1, implies that the blockholder retains both shares if a = (H, H) and χ = 0. Parts (v) and (vi) of Lemma 1 imply
that in any ex-post symmetric equilibrium, there is a unique sBE ∈ {(0.5, 0.5) , (1, 1)}
such that the blockholder chooses sBE if a = (H, H) and χ = 1, or a = (L, L). The
abbreviation “BE” stands for balanced exit, i.e. the blockholder sells the same positive
amount of shares in each firm.
The most interesting case is when a = (L, H). We know from Lemma 1 part (iii)
that si ≥ sj . Thus, the blockholder has up to three options. First, she may choose
s such that si = sj , i.e., s = sBE . By selling the same quantity in both firms, the
blockholder can pretend that her sales are motivated by a liquidity shock rather than
shirking. On the one hand, she receives a higher price for stock i, since the market
maker is not certain that manager i has shirked: s = sBE is consistent with a = (H, H)
and χ = 1, and so p (sBE ) > v (θ∗ ). On the other hand, she suffers a loss on her
sale of firm j. Its true value is v, but the price she receives is strictly lower since it
incorporates the possibility that the sale was motivated by shirking: s = sBE is also
consistent with a = (L, L), and so p (sBE ) < v.
Second, the blockholder could choose si > sj , i.e. sell more shares in the shirking
firm. Such “imbalanced exit” (denoted “IE”) reveals that manager i has shirked and
manager j has worked, and so the blockholder receives the lowest price v (θ∗ ) for firm
i, and the highest price v for firm j. We use SIE to denote all trades such that si > sj .

If sIE ∈ SIE , then pi (sIE ) = v (θ∗ ) and pi sTIE = v. We will refer to manager i as
being “sold more” and manager j as being “sold less”.
Finally, if in addition to a = (L, H) we have χ = 0, the blockholder may choose s =
(0, 0). In Proposition 5 in Appendix B in the Online Appendix, we show that, if there
is an equilibrium in which the blockholder chooses s = (0, 0) with a strictly positive
probability when a = (L, H), then there is another equilibrium in which she never
chooses s = (0, 0) in this case, and this equilibrium is weakly more efficient. Intuitively,
by retaining a shirking manager, the blockholder exerts weaker governance, reducing
real efficiency. Moreover, s = (0, 0) implies that the blockholder is not exiting even
though one manager has shirked, inconsistent with our focus on governance through
14

exit. For these reasons, we focus on equilibria in which the blockholder never retains
both firms when a = (L, H).
Let γ be the probability that the blockholder chooses sBE in equilibrium when a =
(L, H). Given the discussion above, she chooses sIE ∈ SIE w.p. 1−γ. For any γ and θ∗
we calculate the price functions. If γ < 1, there is sIE ∈ SIE (not necessarily unique)

on the equilibrium path such that pi (sIE ) = v (θ∗ ). Moreover, if s ∈ sTIE , (0, 0) , then
pi (s) = v. Finally, from Bayes’ rule, p (sBE ) = π (θ∗ , γ) ∈ (v (θ∗ ) , v), where
π (y, γ) ≡ v −

F (y)2 + F (y) (1 − F (y)) γ
F (y)2 + 2F (y) (1 − F (y)) γ + (1 − F (y))2 δ

!
E [θi |θi < y] .

(9)

Using (9) and the above price functions, Lemma 2 shows how the value of γ in
equilibrium depends on the threshold θ∗ .
 √ 
Lemma 2. Let Y (δ) ≡ F −1 1+√δ δ . In any equilibrium,


{1} if θ∗ < Y (δ)



γ ∈ Γ (θ∗ ) ≡ [0, 1] if θ∗ = Y (δ)



{0} if θ∗ > Y (δ) .

(10)

To understand the intuition behind Lemma 2, recall that if type a = (L, H) chooses
imbalanced exit, her payoff is v (θ∗ ) + v. If she chooses balanced exit, her payoff is
2sBE,i p (sBE ) + (1 − sBE,i ) (v (θ∗ ) + v) .

(11)

Regardless of the value of sBE,i , the blockholder prefers balanced exit if and only if
p (sBE ) ≥

v (θ∗ ) + v
.
2

(12)

Based on (9), simple algebra shows that (12) holds if and only if θ∗ ≤ Y (δ).
The intuition is as follows. A fall in θ∗ has two effects: managers are less likely to
shirk and less value is destroyed by shirking. The second effect increases both the price
the blockholder receives upon balanced exit (see (9)) and the price she receives upon
imbalanced exit (v (θ∗ )). The first effect increases p (sBE ) only. Recall that the price
set by the market maker upon observing balanced exit incorporates the possibility of
15

a = (H, H) and χ = 1, a = (L, L), and a = (L, H). As θ∗ decreases, the market maker
attaches a higher probability to sBE arising from a = (H, H) and χ = 1. Thus, a fall
in θ∗ raises p (sBE ) more than p (sIE ), and the blockholder prefers sBE . Put differently,
when shirking is less likely, balanced exit is less revealing of shirking and more revealing
of a liquidity shock. Thus, the price received from balanced exit is higher, encouraging
this strategy. We will later discuss how changes in the underlying parameters β, ω,
and δ affect whether θ∗ ≶ Y (δ) and thus the frequency of balanced exit γ. We will
show that this frequency in turn affects the efficiency of the two-firm model compared
to the benchmark.
In equilibrium, each manager has rational expectations about the price functions,
the blockholder’s exit strategy, and the other manager’s threshold strategy. Then,
manager i shirks (ai = L) if and only if
"
v − θi + β + ω

F (θ∗ ) p (sBE )

+ (1 − F (θ∗ )) (γ ∗ p (sBE ) + (1 − γ ∗ ) v (θ∗ ))
"
#
F (θ∗ ) (γ ∗ p (sBE ) + (1 − γ ∗ ) v)
.
>v+ω
+ (1 − F (θ∗ )) (δp (sBE ) + (1 − δ) v)

#
(13)

As stated in Lemma 1, the manager follows a threshold strategy. Note that manager
i’s decision to shirk depends on how frequently he expects manager j to shirk. This
is reflected by the dependence of both the left-hand side (“LHS”) and right-hand side
(“RHS”) of (13) on F (θ∗ ), the probability that manager j shirks.
Lemma 3 studies whether the managers’ strategies are strategic complements or
substitutes. In our context, strategic complements (substitutes) arise if, given the
prices and blockholder strategies, the best response (that is, the threshold) of manager
i increases (decreases) with the threshold of manager j.
Lemma 3. Given the prices and the blockholder’s selling strategy, the managers’ decisions are strategic complements if and only if θ∗ < F −1 (0.5), where F −1 (0.5) > Y (δ).
From Lemma 2, if θ∗ < Y (δ), the blockholder chooses balanced exit when a =
(L, H). Thus, the reward for working decreases with the likelihood that the other
manager shirks, because if he does so, the working manager is still sold. The incentive to
shirk increases, and so the managers’ decisions are strategic complements. If θ∗ > Y (δ),
the blockholder chooses imbalanced exit when a = (L, H). Imbalanced exit generates
16

two forces that work in opposite directions. On the one hand, the reward for the
working manager increases with the likelihood that the other manager shirks, because
if the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock, the working manager is not sold if the other
manager shirks. This force tends to lead to strategic substitutes. On the other hand,
the punishment for shirking decreases with the likelihood that the other manager shirks:
if both managers shirk, the blockholder engages in balanced exit which only leads to
a small price decline; if only manager i shirks, he is sold more and suffers the lowest
possible price of v (θ∗ ). This force tends to lead to strategic complements. In the proof
of Lemma 3 we show that if θ∗ is sufficiently high, that is, θ∗ > F −1 (0.5) (> Y (δ)),
the former effect dominates and so managers’ decisions are strategic substitutes.12
Regardless of whether managers’ decisions are strategic substitutes or complements,
the model highlights a source of governance externalities between firms. A greater
tendency for one manager to work affects the effort incentives of the manager of an
unrelated firm. While the parameters affecting the severity of the agency problem
(β and ω) are deliberately independent, so that the firms are related only through
common ownership, the model can be extended to the case in which β and ω are firmspecific. Thus, a strengthening in corporate governance in one firm, that manifests in a
reduction in private benefits or an increase in stock price concerns, will create spillovers
in another firm. This echoes the literature on corporate governance externalities (e.g.,
Acharya and Volpin (2010), Dicks (2012), and Levit and Malenko (2014)). In those
papers, the externalities arise from firms competing for CEOs or directors in the same
labor market; here they arise from common ownership.
The next result characterizes the threshold θ2∗ and the probability γ2∗ that arise in
equilibrium (where the subscript 2 refers to the two-firm model).
Proposition 2. (Ex-post symmetric equilibrium): An ex-post symmetric equilibrium
always exists. There exist unique θ2∗ and γ2∗ ∈ Γ (θ2∗ ) such that, in any ex-post symmetric
equilibrium, there is a unique s∗BE ∈ {(0.5, 0.5) , (1, 1)} and the following hold:
The intuition is as follows. When θ∗ is very high, balanced exit is more likely to result from
shirking than a liquidity shock, so p (sBE ) is low. Thus, an increased probability of j shirking only
slightly reduces the punishment to i shirking – even though i is more likely to suffer balanced rather
than imbalanced exit, the former is a reasonably severe punishment since p (sBE ) is low. Similarly,
when θ∗ is very high and p (sBE ) is low, an increased probability of j shirking significantly increases
the reward to i working – if the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock, manager i avoids balanced exit
if he works and j shirks, and thus avoids the low price p (sBE ). Thus, when θ > F −1 (0.5), a greater
probability of j shirking significantly increases the reward to i working, and only slightly reduces the
punishment to i shirking. Overall, the manager’s actions are strategic substitutes.
12

17

(i) If a = (H, H) and χ = 0, the blockholder chooses s = (0, 0) w.p. 1.
(ii) If a = (H, H) and χ = 1, or a = (L, L), the blockholder chooses s∗BE w.p. 1.
(iii) If a = (L, H), the blockholder chooses s∗BE w.p. γ2∗ and sIE ∈ SIE w.p. 1 − γ2∗ ,
where
γ2∗




√
β − Y (δ)
2
= max 0, 1 + min 0, 1 − δ −
.
ω
E [θi |θi < Y (δ)]

(14)

(iv) Prices on the equilibrium path satisfy:


v



p∗ (s) = π (θ2∗ , γ2∗ )



v (θ∗ )
2

T
if s ∈ SIE
∪ {(0, 0)}

if s = s∗BE
if s ∈ SIE .

Prices off the equilibrium path satisfy: p∗ (s) = v (θ2∗ ).
(v) Manager i shirks if and only if θi < θ2∗ , where θ2∗ is uniquely defined by ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) =
θ2∗ , where
"
ψ2 (y, γ) = β − ω

[(1 − F (y)) (γ − δ) + (1 − γ) F (y)] (v − π (y, γ))
+ (1 − γ) (1 − F (y)) (v − v (y))

#
.

(15)

Except from the expression for γ2∗ , parts (i)-(iv) of Proposition 2 follow from Lemma
1 and the discussion in the text. If both managers work and the blockholder does not
suffer a liquidity shock, she retains both shares and both firms are priced at v. If both
managers work and she suffers a liquidity shock, or if both managers shirk, she engages
in balanced exit. Regardless of whether balanced exit involves selling half a share or
one share in each firm, both firms are priced at π (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) ∈ (v, v). If only manager i
shirks, she engages in balanced exit w.p. γ2∗ , and otherwise in imbalanced exit, in which

case p (sIE ) = v (θ2∗ ) and p sTIE = v (regardless of whether sIE = (0.5, 0), (1, 0), or
(1, 0.5)). Part (iv) yields the empirical implication that the price impact of blockholder
exit depends on her trades in other firms that she owns. Finally, part (v) shows that,
as in the single-firm benchmark, θ2∗ is lower (governance is stronger) when β and δ are
lower, and ω is higher.
The equilibrium in Proposition 2 need not be unique. In particular, it is indeterminate whether sIE = (0.5, 0), (1, 0), or (1, 0.5), and while there is always an equilibrium
18

where sBE = (0.5, 0.5), there is also another equilibrium with sBE = (1, 1) if the agency
problem is sufficiently weak.13 However, managers are sensitive only to the price impact of blockholder exit, and not to the number of shares sold per se. Therefore, while
multiple ex-post symmetric equilibria exist, all equilibria have the same managerial
threshold θ2∗ and probability of balanced exit γ2∗ . The invariance of θ2∗ and γ2∗ means
that we do not need to consider these different equilibria separately when studying the
model’s comparative statics and the efficiency comparison with the benchmark.
We now turn to these comparative statics. We study γ2∗ (β, ω, δ), the frequency of
balanced exit. As we will explain later, this frequency has important implications for
efficiency and comovement.
Corollary 1. (i) γ2∗ decreases with β and increases with ω. (ii) There exists δ > 0
such that if δ < δ then γ2∗ = 0.
Corollary 1 follows directly from (14) and its intuition is as follows. Recall from
Lemma 2 that γ2∗ = 1 (0) if θ2∗ < (>) Y (δ). From Proposition 2, the threshold θ2∗
is increasing in β and decreasing in ω, but Y (δ) in Lemma 2 is independent of these
parameters. Thus, a rise in β and a fall in ω make it more likely that θ2∗ > Y (δ), and
so γ2∗ rises. As per the discussion below Lemma 2, when shirking is more likely, selling
is more revealing of shirking and leads to a lower price, reducing the attractiveness
of balanced exit. The effect of δ on γ2∗ is more complicated since both θ2∗ and Y (δ)
increase with δ. The blockholder’s incentive to engage in balanced exit, if manager i
has shirked, arises from the possibility of disguising the sale of firm i as stemming from
a liquidity shock. This disguise is more plausible if the frequency of liquidity shocks δ
is higher, and so Y (δ) increases in δ. However, θ2∗ also increases in δ: more frequent
shocks encourage shirking. If δ is sufficiently low (δ < δ), the former effect dominates
and the blockholder chooses imbalanced exit if a = (L, H), i.e. γ2∗ = 0.

3.2

Efficiency and Comovement

Having analyzed the equilibria in both the benchmark and the two-firm models, we
now compare their efficiency. Theorem 1 gives a condition under which the multiple
√ 
The required condition is β − 0.5ω 1 − δ E [θi |θi < Y (δ)] ≤ Y (δ); the full analysis is available
on request.
13

19

firm model is more efficient than the single-firm benchmark (θ2∗ < θ1∗ ), and so holding
stakes in multiple firms strengthens governance. It is the first core result of the paper.
Theorem 1. (Efficiency comparison): A two-firm equilibrium is strictly more efficient
√
(θ2∗ < θ1∗ ) than the single-firm benchmark if and only if γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) < δ.
Theorem 1 states that multi-firm governance is more efficient if and only if balanced
√
exit is sufficiently infrequent. If γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) > δ, the blockholder engages in balanced
exit often. Based on Corollary 1, γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) is high when the agency problem is mild
(low β and high ω). Balanced exit leads to weak governance, because even if manager
i works and there is no liquidity shock, he will be sold if manager j shirks. Thus, his
incentives to work are lower relative to the single-firm benchmark. As a result, θ1∗ < θ2∗ ,
i.e. the single-firm benchmark is more efficient.
√
In contrast, if γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) < δ, then imbalanced exit is common, which leads to
stronger governance for two reasons, both of which arise from the blockholder’s ability
to choose which firm to sell if she suffers a liquidity shock. First, the reward for working
is higher in the two-firm equilibrium. If the blockholder suffers a liquidity shock in the
benchmark, the manager is sold even if he works. If the blockholder suffers a liquidity
shock in the two-firm model, a working manager is not sold if the other manager shirks,
since the blockholder can sell the second firm. Second, the punishment for shirking is
higher in the two-firm equilibrium. If the firm is sold in the benchmark, the price is
not too low since the sale is consistent with a liquidity shock. If a firm is sold more
in the two-firm model, it fully reveals shirking, leading to the lowest possible price of
v (θ∗ ). This is because being sold more is not consistent with a liquidity need, since the
blockholder can satisfy such a need by selling both firms. Overall, both forces increase
the incentive to work in the two-firm equilibrium, and so θ1∗ > θ2∗ .
In sum, whether governance is stronger or weaker under common ownership depends on the frequency with which the blockholder engages in balanced exit when one
manager shirks, which in turn depends on the severity of the agency problem. Thus,
we are able to relate the efficiency of multi-firm governance to the underlying characteristics of the portfolio firms. When agency problems are strong (weak) to begin with,
they are mitigated (exacerbated) under common ownership. The model generates the
empirical prediction that blockholders are more likely to hold multiple stakes if they
own firms with weak governance, but fewer stakes if they own well-governed firms. The
20

efficiency of multi-firm governance also depends on the probability of liquidity shocks.
If δ < δ, then γ2∗ = 0: since it is harder to disguise exit as being motivated by a liquidity
shock, the blockholder engages in imbalanced exit and so we have superior governance
under common ownership.
Theorem 1 also implies that if the blockholder could commit to imbalanced exit –
punishing a shirking manager to the greatest extent possible – then multi-firm governance is always more efficient, and so it is in her interest to make such a commitment.14
However, the blockholder cannot commit to this strategy, and so it is only credible if
she has incentives to execute it ex post. The severe punishment under imbalanced
exit arises because the shirking firm receives the lowest possible price – but this also
dissuades the blockholder from selling such a firm and may render the strategy not
incentive-compatible. Thus, she must have incentives to choose imbalanced exit, which
is the case if agency problems are strong, as then she receives a low stock price for both
firms upon balanced exit.
Theorem 2 studies the correlation between the stock prices of the two firms, and
represents the second main result of the paper.
Theorem 2. (Price correlations): The equilibrium correlation between the stock price
√
of the two firms is negative if and only if γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) < δ.
Theorem 2 delivers the interesting result that, even though firm fundamentals are
independent (θi and θj are uncorrelated), stock prices comove. Typically, comovement
arises from exposure to a common factor, such as a macroeconomic variable; here, it
arises because the firms share a common blockholder. Moreover, the direction of such
comovement is nuanced. Intuitively, it may seem that the correlation should be positive,
since a liquidity shock causes the blockholder to sell both stocks equally. Indeed, this
force leads to a positive correlation as in the theory of Vayanos and Woolley (2012).
However, this is not the only force in the model, and so the overall correlation can be
negative. The other important force is the blockholder’s decision when one manager
14

Prior to observing (ai , aj ) and χ, the expected value of each firm in the blockholder’s portfolio
equals expected shareholder value,
V (θ2∗ ) = v − Pr [θi < θ2∗ ] E [θi |θi < θ2∗ ] .
Ex post, her profits from trading on information are exactly offset by her losses if she is forced to trade
due to a liquidity shock. Thus, ex ante, the blockholder fully internalizes the governance implications
of common ownership, and so would wish to commit to engage in imbalanced exit if efficient.

21

shirks. If she chooses imbalanced exit, this drives down the price of the shirking firm
(to the lowest possible value of v) and drives up the price of the working firm (to
the highest possible value of v). This “tournament” aspect tends the model towards
a negative correlation. If the frequency of imbalanced exit is sufficiently strong, i.e.
√
if γ2∗ (β, ω, δ) < δ, then this force outweighs the first effect and leads to a negative
correlation overall. Interestingly, the condition for the price correlation to be negative
is exactly the same as the condition for the two-firm equilibrium to be more efficient.
This is intuitive, since imbalanced exit both moves stock prices in different directions
and exerts strong discipline on a shirking manager.
In sum, whether the correlation is positive or negative depends on the frequency of
balanced exit, which in turn depends on the severity of the agency problem. Thus, just
like the effectiveness of governance, we are able to relate the direction of correlation
to the underlying characteristics of the portfolio firms. When the agency problem is
weak (i.e. β is low and ω is high) and the frequency of shocks δ is low, the correlation
is negative. Typically, stock price correlations depend on the direction of correlation
between random variables (e.g. business conditions) that affect each firm, but not fixed
parameters: for example, changing the maximum fundamental value v will have no
effect on correlation. Here, even though the parameters δ, β, and ω are fixed parameters
rather than random variables, they affect the direction of correlation. Similarly, while
stock price correlation (an asset pricing concept) typically depends on exposures to
macroeconomic variables (another asset pricing concept), here we show that it depends
on agency problems (a corporate finance concept), as they endogenously affect the
blockholder’s trading strategy. Thus, asset pricing studies of correlation should control
for common ownership and agency variables.
More generally, while empirical studies of blockholder governance typically analyze
the size of the largest blockholder or the number of blockholders, our theory highlights
a new measure – the number of blocks owned by an investor – that affects both corporate governance and asset pricing. The direction of the effect of multi-firm ownership
is nuanced, and so simply regressing (say) firm performance or comovement on this
measure may not lead to clear results. The model provides precise conditions on the
situations under which multi-firm ownership will strengthen or weaken governance, or
lead to negative or positive correlations.

22

4

Additional Equilibria

In this section we extend the core model and consider equilibria that are not expost symmetric. Our focus on ex-post symmetric equilibria was motivated by the
idea that investors typically prefer to keep their portfolio weights constant, unless the
fundamentals of their portfolio companies change asymmetrically. However, if we relax
this restriction, we may have equilibria in which the blockholder trades asymmetrically
even when the managers’ actions are the same, i.e. when both managers shirk or both
work. In Appendix B, we characterize all the equilibria that emerge when ex-post
symmetry is not required. Proposition 3 characterizes the most efficient equilibrium
with two firms, and shows that it is generally not ex-post symmetric.15
Proposition 3. (Most efficient equilibrium): There exist υ ∗∗ ∈ (0, 1], θ∗∗ ∈ (0, v) and
s∗∗
BE ∈ {(1, 1) , (0.5, 0.5)} such that the most efficient equilibrium satisfies the following
properties:
(i) If a = (H, H) and χ = 0, the blockholder chooses s = (0, 0) w.p. 1.
(ii) If a = (L, L), the blockholder chooses s∗∗
BE w.p. 1.
(iii) If a = (L, H), the blockholder chooses s = (1, 0) w.p. 1.
∗∗
∗∗
(iv) If a = (H, H) and χ = 1, the blockholder chooses s∗∗
she
BE w.p. υ ; w.p. 1 − υ

chooses between s = (1, 0) and s = (0, 1) at random.
(v) Manager i shirks if and only if θi < θ∗∗ , where θ∗∗ is uniquely defined by ψEF (θ∗∗ ) =
θ∗∗ , where
ψEF (y) = β − ω

1 + (1 − δ) (1 − F (y))
F (y) E [θ|θ < y] .
1 − (1 − δ) (1 − F (y))2

(16)

Similar to the equilibrium in Proposition 2, in Proposition 3 the blockholder retains
both firms if a = (H, H) and χ = 0, and engages in balanced exit if a = (L, L). The
key difference is that in Proposition 2, the blockholder always engages in balanced exit
when a = (H, H) and χ = 1. In Proposition 3, because she is not restricted to a
symmetric trade, she sometimes engages in imbalanced exit in this scenario (see part
(iv)). Since a firm that is sold more may still be value-maximizing, its price p (1, 0) is
relatively high – in fact the proof of Proposition 3 shows that it equals p (0.5, 0.5). Since
15

For simplicity, the analysis in the Online Appendix restricts attention to trades in half units.
However, allowing for trades in all quantities does not affect the existence and characterization of the
equilibria in Proposition 3.

23

p (1, 0) is high, the blockholder always engages in imbalanced exit when a = (L, H).
In contrast, in Proposition 2, if θ∗ < Y (δ) the blockholder engages in balanced exit,
which leads to weaker governance as discussed previously.
If θ∗ > Y (δ), the blockholder always engages in imbalanced exit in Proposition
2, just as in Proposition 3, and so the above advantage does not apply. Even in this
case, the equilibrium in Proposition 3 remains strictly more efficient. The intuition
is intricate, and is as follows. That type a = (H, H) and χ = 1 sometimes engages
in imbalanced exit leads to two additional differences. First, it reduces the payoff to
shirking. When θ∗ > Y (δ), manager j is likely to shirk, and so if manager i shirks,
he is likely to experience balanced exit. In Proposition 2, balanced exit occurs with
certainty if a = (H, H) and χ = 1, and so p (sBE ) is relatively high. In Proposition
3, balanced exit does not occur with certainty if a = (H, H) and χ = 1, because the
blockholder sometimes engages in imbalanced exit in this scenario. Thus, p (sBE ) is
relatively low, reducing the payoff to shirking. Second, it increases the payoff to working. In Proposition 2, even if manager i works, he is sold with certainty if manager
j also works and χ = 1, because the blockholder engages in balanced exit in this scenario. Since balanced exit also reflects the possibility that the manager shirks, the
lower share price reduces the payoff to working. In Proposition 3, with probability
1 − υ ∗∗ the blockholder engages in imbalanced exit in this scenario. Thus, with probability

1−υ ∗∗
,
2

the working manager is not sold, which fully reveals to the market maker

that the manager has worked, and so the firm is priced at v. This increases the payoff
to working.16 Overall, under the equilibrium in Proposition 3, the manager’s payoff to
working is higher, and his payoff to shirking is lower, leading to stronger governance.
Theorem 3 compares the most efficient two-firm equilibrium, as described in Proposition 3, with the single-firm benchmark.17
Theorem 3. (Efficiency comparison of most efficient equilibrium): The most efficient
two-firm equilibrium is always more efficient than the single-firm benchmark.
Since the most efficient two-firm equilibrium always involves imbalanced exit when
∗∗

Note that imbalanced exit also yields a probability 1−υ
that a working manager is the only firm
2
sold, which never occurs under Proposition 2, and so the overall effect is seemingly unclear. However,
when θ∗ > Y (δ) (shirking destroys significant value), the benefit of being revealed as not having
shirked, and being priced at v, is particularly strong and so dominates this other consideration.
17
Since both Propositions 2 and 3 continue to hold if trades different from half units are allowed,
Theorem 3 also continues to hold in these cases.
16

24

a = (L, H), it is more efficient than the single-firm benchmark. The intuition is the
same for why the two-firm equilibrium in the core model is more efficient if imbalanced
exit is sufficiently frequent.
We finally consider the stock price correlations.
Proposition 4. (Price correlations in most efficient equilibrium): The correlation
between the stock price of the two firms under the most efficient equilibrium is always
negative.
Unlike Theorem 2, here the correlation between the stock prices is always negative.
This is intuitive, because imbalanced exit is frequent. Not only does it occur with
certainty when a = (L, H) (which was sufficient for the correlation to be negative in
the core model) but it also occurs with probability 1 − υ ∗∗ if a = (H, H) and χ = 1.

5

Conclusion

This paper has studied how common ownership affects the effectiveness of corporate
governance and leads to stock price correlations between economically unrelated firms.
Under common ownership, the blockholder’s decision to sell is made at the portfolio level rather than the firm level. Whether governance is stronger under common
ownership than a single-firm benchmark depends on the blockholder’s trading strategy
when one manager shirks and the other works. If she pursues balanced exit (sells both
firms), governance is weaker because the manager’s effort incentives are lower – even
if he works, he will still be sold if the other manager shirks. If she pursues imbalanced
exit, governance is stronger because the blockholder has a choice of which firm to sell if
she suffers a liquidity shock. This has two implications. First, if a manager works, he
is not necessarily sold if the blockholder requires liquidity – she may sell the other firm.
Second, if a manager is the only one sold, this is a strong signal that he has shirked
rather than that the blockholder has suffered a liquidity shock, since she could have
sold a half-share in both firms in the latter case. For both reasons, the link between
managerial effort and the blockholder’s exit decision is stronger. While the model of
multi-firm governance considers two firms, the advantages of being able to make exit
decisions at the portfolio level likely hold with three or more firms. It remains the case
that a blockholder need not sell a value-maximizing firm if she suffers a liquidity shock,
25

as she can sell another firm in her portfolio. In addition, it remains the case that, if
a blockholder sells only one firm and retains the others, this is a powerful signal of
underperformance.
We show that the blockholder is more likely to pursue imbalanced exit, and thus
governance under common ownership is stronger, when the agency problem is severe
(private benefits are high and stock price concerns are low), or liquidity shocks are
infrequent. Moreover, by encouraging the blockholder to choose imbalanced exit, severe
agency problems lead to the portfolio firms’ stock prices being negatively correlated,
even though their fundamentals are uncorrelated. Common ownership also leads to
strategic interactions between firms, thus giving rise to governance externalities.
Over and above these specific comparative statics, the paper has broader implications for governance and comovement. First, we introduce a new determinant of a
blockholder’s effectiveness in exerting corporate governance – the number of blocks that
she owns – that gives rise to new empirical predictions. Second, allowing a blockholder
to own stakes in multiple firms need not weaken governance by spreading the blockholder too thinly, as commonly argued. Third, common ownership between stocks can
lead to negative correlation by introducing a “tournament” aspect in the blockholder’s
exit decision, rather than only the positive correlation commonly believed. Fourth,
comovement between stocks is driven not only by asset pricing variables such as loadings on macroeconomic factors, but also corporate finance variables such as common
ownership and the severity of agency problems. Fifth, the price impact of blockholder
depends not only on how many shares she sells of the firm in question, but also her
trades in otherwise unrelated firms.

26

References
[1] Acharya, Viral V. and Paolo F. Volpin (2010): “Corporate Governance Externalities.” Review of Finance 14, 1-33.
[2] Admati, Anat R. and Paul Pfleiderer (2009): “The “Wall Street Walk” and Shareholder Activism: Exit as a Form of Voice.” Review of Financial Studies 22, 2645–
2685.
[3] Antón, Miguel and Christopher Polk (2014): “Connected Stocks.” Journal of Finance 69, 1099–1127.
[4] Bartram, Söhnke M., John Griffin, Tae-Hoon Lim, and David T. Ng (2014): “How
Important are Foreign Ownership Linkages for International Stock Returns?”
Working Paper, University of Warwick.
[5] Bharath, Sreedhar T., Sudarshan Jayaraman, and Venky Nagar (2013): “Exit as
Governance: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Finance 68, 2515–2547.
[6] Coval, Joshua and Erik Stafford (2007): “Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in
Equity Markets.” Journal of Financial Economics 86, 479–512.
[7] Dasgupta, Amil and Giorgia Piacentino (2014): “The Wall Street Walk When
Blockholders Compete For Flows.” Working Paper, London School of Economics.
[8] Dicks, David (2012): “Executive Compensation and the Role for Corporate Governance Regulation.” Review of Financial Studies 25, 1971–2004.
[9] Duan, Ying and Yawek Jiao (2014): “The Role of Mutual Funds in Corporate
Governance: Evidence from Mutual Funds Proxy Voting and Trading Behavior.”
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
[10] Ekholm, Anders and Benjamin Maury (2014): “Portfolio Concentration and Firm
Performance.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
[11] Edmans, Alex (2009): “Blockholder Trading, Market Efficiency, and Managerial
Myopia”. Journal of Finance 64, 2481–2513.

27

[12] Edmans, Alex (2011): “Short-Term Termination Without Deterring Long-Term
Investment: A Theory of Debt and Buyouts.” Journal of Financial Economics
102, 81–101.
[13] Edmans, Alex, Vivian W. Fang, and Emanuel Zur (2013): “The Effect of Liquidity
on Governance.” Review of Financial Studies 26, 1443–1482.
[14] Edmans, Alex and Gustavo Manso (2011): “Governance Through Trading and
Intervention: A Theory of Multiple Blockholders.” Review of Financial Studies
24, 2395–2428.
[15] Faccio, Mara, Maria-Theresa Marchica, and Roberto Mura (2011): “Large Shareholder Diversification and Corporate Risk-Taking.” Review of Financial Studies
24, 3601–3641.
[16] Gao, George P., Pamela C. Moulton, and David T. Ng (2014): “Institutional Ownership and Return Predictability Across Economically Unrelated Stocks.” Working
Paper, Cornell University.
[17] Gervais, Simon, Anthony W. Lynch and David K. Musto (2005): “Fund Families
as Delegated Monitors of Money Managers.” Review of Financial Studies 18, 1139–
1169.
[18] Goldman, Eitan and Günter Strobl (2013): “Large Shareholder Trading and the
Complexity of Corporate Investments.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 22,
106–122.
[19] Harford, Jarrad, Dirk Jenter, and Kai Li (2011): “Institutional Cross-Holdings
and Their Effect on Acquisition Decisions.” Journal of Financial Economics 99,
27–39.
[20] Hau, Harald and Sandy Lai (2013): “Real Effects of Stock Underpricing.” Journal
of Financial Economics 2013, 392–408.
[21] Holthausen, Robert W., Richard W. Leftwich, and David Mayers (1990): “LargeBlock Transactions, the Speed of Response and Temporary and Permanent StockPrice Effects.” Journal of Financial Economics 26, 71–95.

28

[22] Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai (2012): “Asset Fire Sales and Purchases and the International Transmission of Funding
Shocks.” Journal of Finance 67, 2015–2050.
[23] Levit, Doron (2013): “Soft Shareholder Activism.” Working Paper, University of
Pennsylvania.
[24] Levit, Doron and Nadya Malenko (2014): “The Labor Market for Directors and
Externalities in Corporate Governance.” Working Paper, University of Pennsylvania.
[25] Lou, Dong (2012): “A Flow-Based Explanation for Return Predictability.” Review
of Financial Studies 25, 3457–3489.
[26] Matvos, Gregor and Michael Ostrovsky (2008): “Cross-Ownership, Returns, and
Voting in Mergers.” Journal of Financial Economics 89, 391–403.
[27] McCahery, Joseph, Zacharias Sautner, and Laura T. Starks (2011): “Behind the
Scenes: The Corporate Governance Preferences of Institutional Investors.” Working Paper, University of Amsterdam.
[28] Mikkelson, Wayne H. and Megan M. Partch (1985): “Stock Price Effects and Costs
of Secondary Distributions.” Journal of Financial Economics 14, 165–94.
[29] Narayanan, M. P. (1985): “Managerial Incentives for Short-Term Results”. Journal of Finance 40, 1469–1484.
[30] Parrino, Robert, Richard Sias, and Laura T. Starks (2003): “Voting With Their
Feet: Institutional Ownership Changes Around Forced CEO Turnover.” Journal
of Financial Economics 68, 3–46.
[31] Scharfstein, David and Jeremy Stein (1990): “Herd Behavior and Investment”.
American Economic Review 80, 465–479.
[32] Scholes, Myron S. (1972): “The Market for Securities: Substitution Versus Price
Pressure and the Effects of Information on Share Prices.” Journal of Business 45,
179–211.

29

[33] Sias, Richard, W., Laura T. Starks and Sheridan Titman (2006): “Changes in Institutional Ownership and Stock Returns: Assessment and Methodology.” Journal
of Business 79, 2869–2910.
[34] Stein, Jeremy C. (1988): “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia”. Journal of
Political Economy 46, 61–80.
[35] Stein, Jeremy C. (1989): “Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model
of Myopic Corporate Behavior”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 655–669.
[36] Vayanos, Dimitri and Paul Woolley (2013): “An Institutional Theory of Momentum and Reversal.” Review of Financial Studies 26, 1087–1145.

30

A

Proofs

We start with a Lemma that justifies our focus on symmetric equilibria (see footnote
8).
Lemma 4. If the managers follow the same strategy and the market maker follows a
symmetric pricing strategy, the blockholder’s best response is a symmetric strategy as
well.
Proof of Lemma 4. To show that it is weakly optimal for the blockholder to respond
with a symmetric strategy, it is sufficient to show that ∀ âi ∈ {L, H}, âj ∈ {L, H},
si ∈ [0, 1], and sj ∈ [0, 1]:
E [uB (si , sj ) |a = (âi , âj )] = E [uB (sj , si ) |a = (âj , âi )] .

(17)

Since both managers follow the same strategy, E [v (θj , aj ) |aj = âj ] = E [v (θj , ai ) |ai = âj ]
and E [v (θi , ai ) |ai = âi ] = E [v (θi , aj ) |aj = âi ]. Since the market maker follows a symmetric strategy, pi (si , sj ) = pj (sj , si ). Thus, (17) holds ∀ s ∈ [0, 1]2 .
Proof of Proposition 1. We prove the proposition in several steps. To simplify
notation we set v = v (θ∗ ). First, we argue that if ai = L, then si > 0 for sure.
Suppose that, on the contrary, the blockholder chooses s = 0 with positive probability.
Since ai = L implies v = v, this requires
2v ≥ max sp (si ) + (2 − si ) v.
si >0

Since p (si ) ≥ v ∀ s, it follows that p (si ) = v ∀ s. However, since δ > 0, there is a
strictly positive probability that s > 0 when ai = H. This implies maxs>0 p (si ) > v,
a contradiction. Second, we prove that, if ai = L, then si ≥ 1 for sure. From the
previous step we know that si > 0. Suppose that, on the contrary, the blockholder
chooses s0i ∈ (0, 1) with positive probability. Therefore, p (s0i ) < v. We argue, if that is
the case, then whenever ai = H, we must have si 6= s0i . Indeed, if ai = H and χ = 0, the
blockholder is strictly better off choosing si = 0. If ai = H and χ = 1, the blockholder
must choose si ≥ 1 to meet her liquidity needs. Either way, if ai = H, the blockholder
never chooses s0i . Therefore, p (s0i ) = v. However, since δ > 0, there is a strictly
positive probability that si ≥ 1 when ai = H. Therefore, maxsi ≥1 p (si ) > v, and
31

whenever ai = L, the blockholder is strictly better off choosing si ≥ 1, a contradiction.
Third, we argue that, if ai = H and χ = 0, then si < 1. Suppose that, on the contrary,
the blockholder chooses si ≥ 1 with positive probability. Let s̄i be the highest trade
that type ai = H and χ = 0 chooses with positive probability. By revealed preference,
since ai = H implies v = v, then p (s̄i ) = v. Therefore, if ai = L then either the
blockholder chooses s̄i w.p. 0, or p (s̄i ) < v. Moreover, since p (s̄i ) = v, then if ai = L
and χ = 0, the blockholder never chooses si < s̄i (she would be strictly better off by
instead choosing si = s̄i ). We conclude that type ai = L chooses si > s̄i for sure.
Therefore, we must have s̄i < 2. Suppose that, if ai = L and χ = 0, the blockholder
chooses ŝi ∈ (s̄i , 2] with positive probability, and so p (ŝi ) < v. Since ŝi > s̄i , then by
revealed preference,
s̄i p (s̄i ) + (2 − s̄i ) v ≤ ŝi p (ŝi ) + (2 − ŝi ) v ⇔
s̄i (v − v) ≤ ŝi (p (ŝi ) − v) ,
since p (s̄i ) = v. Therefore, we must have p (ŝi ) > v. Since ŝi > s̄i , this condition can
be met only if the blockholder chooses ŝi with strictly positive probability when ai = H
and χ = 1. However, since p (s̄i ) = v > p (ŝi ) and (by the contradicting assumption)
s̄i ≥ 1, when ai = H and χ = 1 the blockholder is strictly better off choosing s̄i instead
of ŝi . Indeed, since ŝi > s̄ and p (ŝi ) < p (s̄i ), then
s̄i p (s̄i ) + (2 − s̄i ) v > ŝi p (ŝi ) + (2 − ŝi ) v.
Therefore, we must have p (ŝi ) = v, a contradiction. Fourth, let s̄i ≥ 1 be the highest
trade that type ai = H and χ = 1 chooses with positive probability, and note that
p (s̄i ) > v. We argue that, when ai = L, the blockholder chooses s̄i with positive
probability. If this were not the case, then p (s̄i ) = v and so choosing s̄i strictly
dominates any si < s̄i . In addition, si > s̄i implies ai = L and thus p (si ) = v . It
follows that the blockholder has strict incentives to choose si = s̄i , a contradiction. We
also argue that, when ai = L, the blockholder chooses si > s̄i w.p. 0. If this were not
the case, by definition of s̄i and given the previous steps, si > s̄i implies ai = L and
thus p (s̄i ) = v . It follows that the blockholder has strict incentives to choose si = s̄i , a
contradiction. Fifth, we argue, that if ai = L, the blockholder chooses s̄i w.p. 1, where

32

s̄i is the highest trade that type ai = H and χ = 1 chooses with positive probability.
Note that s̄i ≥ 1. By revealed preference,
s̄i p (s̄i ) + (2 − s̄i ) v ≥ ŝi p (ŝi ) + (2 − ŝi ) v
∀ ŝi ∈ [1, s̄i ). Therefore,
s̄i p (s̄i ) + (2 − s̄i ) v > ŝi p (ŝi ) + (2 − ŝi ) v
∀ ŝi ∈ [1, s̄i ). This means that if ai = L, the blockholder is strictly better off choosing
s̄i over ŝi , as required. Sixth, we argue that if ai = H and χ = 1, the blockholder
chooses s̄i w.p. 1. By definition, the blockholder does not choose si > s̄i with positive
probability. Based on step five, if ai = L, the blockholder does not choose si < s̄i with
positive probability. Therefore, if instead the blockholder who observes ai = H chooses
ŝi ∈ [1, s̄i ) with positive probability, then p (ŝi ) = v. However, since the blockholder
chooses s̄i with positive probability when ai = L, then p (s̄i ) < v. For this reason,
ŝi p (ŝi ) + (2 − ŝi ) v = v
> s̄i p (ŝi ) + (2 − s̄i ) v,
which contradicts the assumption that the blockholder chooses s̄i with positive probability when ai = H and χ = 1. We conclude that, if an equilibrium exists, there is
s̄i ≥ 1 s.t., if ai = L or χ = 1, the blockholder chooses s̄i w.p. 1. Steps 1-6 above
conclude parts (i) and (ii). Seventh, we argue that if ai = L, then si = s̄i ≥ 1 and the
price is p (s̄i ). If ai = H, then w.p. δ we have χ = 1 and so si = s̄i ≥ 1, in which case
the price is p (s̄i ), and w.p. (1 − δ) we have χ = 0 and so si = si < 1, in which case
the price is p (si ) = v. Thus, the manager chooses ai = L if and only if
v − θi + ωp (s̄i ) + β > v + ω (δp (s̄i ) + (1 − δ) v) .

(18)

Therefore, in any equilibrium, there is θ∗ such that ai = L if and only if θi ≤ θ∗ . Given
parts (i) and (ii), the prices on the equilibrium path follow from Bayes’ rule, and so are
given by the terms in part (iii). Given these prices, (18) is equivalent to ψ1 (θ∗ ) > θi .
Therefore, an equilibrium must be the fixed point of ψ1 . Since β ∈ (0, v) (equation
33

(2)), we have ψ1 (0) > 0 and ψ1 (v) < v. The Intermediate Value Theorem (“IVT”)
implies that a fixed point of ψ1 (·) always exists, and lies in the interval (0, β). Since
ψ1 (y) is decreasing in y, it has a unique fixed point, we denote it by θ1∗ .
While Sections 2 and 3 allow the blockholder to trade shares in half-units, the proofs
here are more general and allow the blockholder to sell any number of shares.
Proof of Lemma 1. Consider part (i). If manager i chooses ai = H, his utility is
v + ωE [pi (s) |ai = H], which is independent of θi . If he chooses ai = L, his utility is
v − θi + ωE [pi (s) |ai = L] + β, which is decreasing in θi . Thus, he chooses ai = L if
and only if
β − ω (E [pi (s) |ai = H] − E [pi (s) |ai = L]) ≥ θi ,
i.e. θi is below a threshold θi∗ . We argue that θi∗ ∈ (0, v). Suppose that, in contrast,
θi∗ = 0 (θi∗ = v). The market maker knows that ai = H (ai = L) for sure, and so
E [pi (s) |ai = H] = E [pi (s) |ai = L] .
Thus, the market maker does not learn about ai from s. It follows that the manager
has incentives to choose ai = L whenever β ≥ θi and ai = H whenever β < θi . From
(2), β > 0 and β < v̄, which yields a contradiction. We conclude if an equilibrium
exists, then θi∗ ∈ (0, v). Part (ii) follows from the observation that, based on the
blockholder’s information, the lowest valuation that firm i can have is when manager i
has shirked with certainty, i.e. E [v − θi 1ai =L |ai = H]. Since θi and θj are independent,
this term is given by v (θ∗ ). Consider part (iii). Suppose that, contrary to the lemma,
a = (L, H) but si < sj . By symmetry, the blockholder could sell sj shares of firm
i and si shares of firm j and obtain the same price for the sold shares, and retain
more of the higher valued firm (i.e., firm j). Therefore, this strategy must be strictly
preferred, contradicting si < sj . Consider part (iv). Suppose that, contrary to the
lemma, there is s0 = (s0i , s0j ) such that s0i + s0j ≥ 1 and the blockholder chooses s0 with
positive probability when a = (H, H) and χ = 0. We let s0 be the trade with highest
s0i + s0j with these properties. From symmetry, the blockholder chooses s0T with the
same positive probability. Note that if the blockholder chooses s = (0, 0), her payoff
is 2v, the highest possible. Since s0i + s0j > 0, it must be that pi (s0i , s0j ) = v if s0i > 0
and pi (s0i , s0j ) = v if s0j > 0. Otherwise, the blockholder strictly prefers s = (0, 0)
34

over (s0i , s0j ) and (s0j , s0i ). Next, we argue that type a = (L, L) has strict incentives to
choose s0 , contradicting the observation that pi (s0i , s0j ) = v. Suppose on the contrary
that type a = (L, L) chooses s0 w.p. 0. Therefore, there is s00 such that s00i + s00j > 1
and type a = (L, L) chooses s00 with positive probability (at least when χ = 1). Since


type a = (L, L) chooses s00 with positive probability, pi s00i , s00j < v and pj s00i , s00j < v.
Therefore, type a = (H, H) never chooses s00 (since she is strictly better off choosing s0
and obtaining a payoff of 2v, even if χ = 1). Note that type a = (L, L) weakly prefers
s00 over s0 if and only if





2 − s00i − s00j v + s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j ≥ 2 − s0j − s0i v + s0j + s0i v ⇔





s00i pi s00i , s00j − v + s00j pj s00i , s00j − v ≥ s0j + s0i (v − v) .
There are two cases to consider:
1. Suppose s00i > s00j . Based on part (iii), if s00i > s00j , then type a = (H, L) never
chooses s00 as well. This implies that s00 is chosen either by a = (L, L) or a =

(L, H), or both. Either way, pi s00i , s00j = v. The above inequality becomes



s00j pj s00i , s00j − v ≥ s0j + s0i (v − v) .

Since s00j ≤ 1 ≤ s0j + s0i and pj s00i , s00j < v, the above inequality never holds,
contradicting the assumption that type a = (L, L) chooses s00 with positive probability.



2. Suppose s00i = s00j . From symmetry, pi s00i , s00j = pj s00i , s00j . Moreover, pi s00i , s00j >
v if and only if type a = (H, L) chooses s00 with positive probability. Thus, type
a = (L, L) weakly prefers s00 over s0 only if type a = (H, L) chooses s00 with
positive probability.
Type a = (H, L) prefers s00 over s0 if and only if





(1 − s00i ) v + 1 − s00j v + s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j ≥ (1 − s0i ) v + 1 − s0j v + s0j + s0i v ⇔


 v+v
00
00 00
≥ s0j (v − v) .
2si pi si , sj −
2
Thus, we must have pi (s00i , s00i ) ≥

v+v
.
2

Let γ be the probability that a = (H, L) and
35

a = (L, H) chooses s00 (from symmetry, type a = (L, H) chooses s00 with the same
positive probability as type a = (H, L)). Similarly, let η be the probability that
a = (L, L) chooses s00 . By assumption, γ and η are strictly positive. According to
Bayes’ rule, the market maker sets
pi

s00i , s00j



=



γF (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + ηF (θ∗ )2 v + γ (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) v
γF (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + γ (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) + ηF (θ∗ )2

and note that this term is always strictly smaller than

v+v
.
2
00

,

We conclude that type

a = (H, L) strictly prefers s0 over s00 , and so chooses s w.p. 0. As argued above,
this implies that type a = (L, L) plays s00 w.p. 0, a contradiction. We conclude, if
a = (H, H) and χ = 0, then si + sj < 1. Consider part (v). Suppose that, contrary to
the lemma, type a = (L, L) chooses with positive probability s0 such that s0i + s0j < 1.
From symmetry, type a = (L, L) also chooses s0T with the same positive probability.
Without loss of generality, suppose s0i ≥ s0j . Since s0i + s0j < 1, if type a 6= (L, L)
chooses s0 , then it has to be χ = 0. Note that, since type a = (L, L) chooses s0 ,


then pi s0i , s0j < v and pj s0i , s0j < v. Therefore, type a = (H, H) strictly prefers

s = (0, 0) over s0 , and does not choose s0 with positive probability. If pi s0i , s0j > v,
type a = (H, L) must choose s0 with positive probability. However, based on part (iii),


this requires s0i = s0j , and so pi s0i , s0j = pj s0i , s0j . Note that type a = (H, L) can
obtain a payoff of v + v by choosing s = (0, 0). The payoff of type a = (H, L) from
choosing s0 exceeds v + v if and only if



 v+v
(1 − s0i ) v + 1 − s0j v + s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0i , s0j ≥ v + v ⇔ pi s0i , s0j ≥
.
2

However, similar to the argument in the proof of part (iv), we have pi s0i , s0j < v+v
.
2

0
0 0
Therefore, type a = (H, L) must choose s w.p. 0. This implies pi si , sj = v. If


s0i = s0j , then from symmetry, pj s0i , s0j = v as well. We argue pj s0i , s0j = v even

if s0i > s0j . Suppose that, on the contrary, pj s0i , s0j > v and s0i > s0j . Then, type
a = (L, H) must choose s0 with positive probability. Type a = (L, H) can secure a
payoff of v + v by choosing s = (0, 0). The payoff of type a = (L, H) from choosing s0
exceeds v + v if and only if




(1 − s0i ) v + 1 − s0j v + s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0i , s0j ≥ v + v ⇔ pj s0i , s0j ≥ v.

36

However, since pj s0i , s0j


< v, we have a contradiction. Therefore, pj s0i , s0j = v


even if s0i > s0j . We conclude that, since pi s0i , s0j = pj s0i , s0j = v, by choosing s0


type a = (L, L) obtains the lowest possible payoff of 2v. However, since δ > 0, if
a = (H, H), the blockholder is forced to choose some s00 such that s00i + s00j ≥ 1 with
positive probability. Therefore, there exists s00 such that s00i + s00j ≥ 1 and p (s00 ) > v.
Thus, if type a = (L, L) chooses s00 , her payoff strictly exceeds 2v. This contradicts
the assumption that, with positive probability, type a = (L, L) chooses s0 such that
s0i + s0j < 1. Finally, we consider part (vi). The extension of part (vi) to the case
in which the blockholder can sell any number of shares is the statement that there
exist no 0 < s1 < s2 ≤ 1 such that both (s1 , s1 ) and (s2 , s2 ) are played with positive
probability. We now prove this statement. Suppose that, on the contrary, there exist
0 < s1 < s2 ≤ 1 such that both (s1 , s1 ) and (s2 , s2 ) are played with positive probability.
Without loss of generality, let s1 be the lowest trade and s2 be the highest trade with
these properties. Type a = (L, L) prefers (s2 , s2 ) over (s1 , s1 ) if and only if
2 (s1 p (s1 , s1 ) + (1 − s1 ) v) ≤ 2 (s2 p (s2 , s2 ) + (1 − s2 ) v) ⇔
v≤

s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
.
s2 − s1

Similarly, types a = (L, H) and a = (H, L) prefer (s2 , s2 ) over (s1 , s1 ) if and only if
v+v
s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
≤
,
2
s2 − s1
and type a = (H, H) prefers (s2 , s2 ) over (s1 , s1 ) if and only if
v≤

s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
.
s2 − s1

Therefore, if both (s1 , s1 ) and (s2 , s2 ) are played with positive probability, we must
have
v≤

s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
≤ v.
s2 − s1

There are three cases to consider:
1. Suppose
v≤

s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
v+v
<
.
s2 − s1
2
37

Then, type a = (L, L) is the only type who chooses (s2 , s2 ) with positive probability. Therefore, p (s2 , s2 ) = v, and by choosing (s2 , s2 ), type a = (L, L) obtains
a payoff of 2v. However, since δ > 0, if a = (H, H), the blockholder is forced to
choose some s00 such that s00i +s00j ≥ 1 with positive probability. Therefore, there is
s00 such that s00i + s00j ≥ 1 and p (s00 ) > v. Therefore, if type a = (L, L) chooses s00 ,
she obtains a payoff strictly greater than 2v, and so has no incentives to choose
s = (s2 , s2 ). This contradicts the assumption that (s2 , s2 ) is chosen with positive
probability.
2. Suppose
v+v
s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
<
≤ v.
2
s2 − s1
Then, (s1 , s1 ) is chosen with positive probability only if a = (H, H). For this
reason, p (s1 , s1 ) = v. Let γ be the probability that types a = (L, H) and
a = (H, L) choose (s2 , s2 ), and let η be the probability that type a = (L, L)
chooses (s2 , s2 ). According to Bayes’ rule,
p (s2 , s2 ) =



γF (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + ηF (θ∗ )2 v + γ (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) v
γF (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + γ (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) + ηF

However, if p (s1 , s1 ) = v and p (s2 , s2 ) ≤

v+v
2

then

(θ∗ )2

s2 p(s2 ,s2 )−s1 p(s1 ,s1 )
s2 −s1

≤

v+v
.
2

<

v+v
,
2

a

contradiction.
3. Suppose
v+v
s2 p (s2 , s2 ) − s1 p (s1 , s1 )
=
.
2
s2 − s1
Then, type a = (H, H) chooses (s2 , s2 ) w.p. 0, and type a = (L, L) chooses
(s1 , s1 ) w.p. 0. Let γ2 and γ1 be the probabilities that types a = (L, H) and
a = (H, L) choose (s2 , s2 ) and (s1 , s1 ), respectively. Also, let η be the probability
that type a = (L, L) chooses (s2 , s2 ), and let φ be the probability that type
a = (H, H) chooses (s1 , s1 ). By the contradicting assumption, η + γ1 > 0 and

38

φ + γ2 > 0. According to Bayes’ rule,
p (s1 , s1 ) =



γ1 F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) v + γ1 (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) + φ (1 − F (θ∗ ))2 v
2

≥

γ1 F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + γ1 (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) + φ (1 − F (θ∗ ))

γ2 F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + ηF (θ∗ )2 v + γ2 (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) v
v+v
≤
.
p (s2 , s2 ) =
2
2
γ2 F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ )) + γ2 (1 − F (θ∗ )) F (θ∗ ) + ηF (θ∗ )

v+v
2



Note that p (s1 , s1 ) ≥

v+v
2

and p (s2 , s2 ) ≤

v+v
2

satisfy

v+v
2

=

s2 p(s2 ,s2 )−s1 p(s1 ,s1 )
s2 −s1

only

if p (s1 , s1 ) = p (s2 , s2 ) = v+v
. This is feasible only if η = φ = 0. Therefore, there
2



exist s0i , s0j and s00i , s00j such that type a = (H, H) chooses s0i , s0j with positive

probability, and hence weakly prefers s0i , s0j over (s1 , s1 ), and type a = (L, L)


chooses s00i , s00j with positive probability, and hence weakly prefers s00i , s00j over
(s2 , s2 ). That is,



2 (s1 p (s1 , s1 ) + (1 − s1 ) v) ≤ s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0j , s0j + 2 − s0i − s0j v ⇔



−s1 (v − v) + s0i + s0j v ≤ s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0j , s0j
and



2 (s2 p (s2 , s2 ) + (1 − s2 ) v) ≤ s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j + 2 − s00i − s00j v ⇔



s2 (v − v) + s00i + s00j v ≤ s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j
Note that the payoff of types a = (L, H) and a = (H, L) from choosing (s1 , s1 )
or (s2 , s2 ) is v + v. Thus, (s1 , s1 ) and (s2 , s2 ) are played with positive probability
only if both a = (L, H) and a = (H, L) weakly prefer (s1 , s1 ) or (s2 , s2 ) over


s0i , s0j and s00i , s00j . This would be the case if and only if
(


v + v ≥ s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0j , s0j + max



min s0i v + s0j v, s0i v + s0j v ≥ s0i pi s0i , s0j + s0j pj s0j , s0j ,

39

 )
(1 − s0i ) v + 1 − s0j v,
⇔

(1 − s0i ) v + 1 − s0j v

and
(


v + v ≥ s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j + max

 )
(1 − s00i ) v + 1 − s00j v,
⇔

(1 − s00i ) v + 1 − s00j v




min s00i v + s00j v, s00i v + s00j v ≥ s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j .
Combined, we require



−s1 (v − v) + s0i + s0j v ≤ min s0i v + s0j v, s0i v + s0j v ⇔ max s0i , s0j ≤ s1 ,
and



s2 (v − v) + s00i + s00j v ≤ min s00i v + s00j v, s00i v + s00j v ⇔ s2 ≤ min s00i , s00j .
Since s1 is the lowest trade and s2 is the highest trade with the properties that


satisfy the contradicting assumption, max s0i , s0j ≤ s1 < s2 ≤ min s00i , s00j
implies that s00i 6= s00j and s0i =
6 s0j . In particular, it implies that type a = (H, H)
T

with positive probability (since any s0 that
never chooses s00i , s00j and s00i , s00j
type a = (H, H) prefers over (s1 , s1 ) must be smaller than (s1 , s1 ), while any
s00 that type a = (L, L) prefers over (s2 , s2 ) must be greater than (s2 , s2 ), and
s1 < s2 ). From symmetry, type a = (L, L) chooses with positive probability both

T
s00i , s00j and s00i , s00j . Without loss of generality, suppose s00i > s00j . Based on part


(iii), type a = (H, L) never chooses s00i , s00j . Therefore, s00i , s00j is chosen either


by a = (L, L) or a = (L, H). Hence, pi s00i , s00j = v and pj s00i , s00j < v. There
are two sub-cases to consider:


(a) Suppose type a = (L, H) chooses s00i , s00j w.p. 0. Then, pj s00i , s00j = v.
Therefore, the payoff type a = (L, L) from choosing s00 is 2v. However,
since δ > 0, if a = (H, H), the blockholder is forced to choose some s000
000
000
such that s000
i + sj ≥ 1 with positive probability. Therefore, there is s
000
000
000
such that s000
i + sj ≥ 1 and p (s ) > v. If type a = (L, L) chooses s , her

payoff is strictly higher than 2v. This contradicts the assumption that type
a = (L, L) chooses s00 with positive probability.

(b) Suppose type a = (L, H) chooses s00i , s00j with positive probability. Then,

40


she must be indifferent between s00i , s00j and (s2 , s2 ), since only types a =
(L, H) and a = (H, L) choose (s2 , s2 ) with positive probability. That is,


s00i v + s00j v = s00i pi s00i , s00j + s00j pj s00i , s00j ,
Since pi s00i , s00j



= v, the indifference condition above is satisfied if and

only if pj s00i , s00j = v, a contradiction. Either way, we conclude that type
a = (L, L) has no incentives to choose s00 with positive probability, a contradiction.

Proof of Lemma 3. Note that (13) can be rewritten as
"
β−ω

#

F (θ∗ ) (1 − γ ∗ ) (v − p (sBE ))
− (1 − F (θ∗ )) [(γ ∗ − δ) p (sBE ) + (1 − γ ∗ ) v − (1 − δ) v]

> θi

The derivative of the LHS with respect to F (θ∗ ) is proportional to
∆ = (γ ∗ − δ) v + (1 + δ − 2γ ∗ ) p (sBE ) − (1 − γ ∗ ) v.
If γ ∗ = 1 then ∆ = (1 − δ) (v − p (sBE )) > 0. If γ ∗ ∈ (0, 1), then from (12), p (sBE ) =
v+v
2

and ∆ = (1 − δ) v−v
> 0. If γ ∗ = 0 then ∆ > 0 ⇔ p (sBE ) >
2

v+δv
.
1+δ

Based on (9),

this condition holds if and only if F (θ∗ ) ≤ 21 . Finally, based on Lemma 2, if γ ∗ = 0
then F (θ∗ ) ≥

√
δ
√
,
1+ δ
∗

and if γ ∗ > 0 then F (θ∗ ) ≤

√
δ
√
.
1+ δ

Since

√
δ
√
1+ δ

< 12 , we conclude

that ∆ < 0 ⇔ F (θ ) > 21 .
Proof of Proposition 2. Suppose an ex-post symmetric equilibrium exists. Part (i)
follows from Lemma 1, part (iv), and ex-post symmetry. Part (ii) follows from Lemma
1, parts (v) and (vi), and ex-post symmetry. Part (iii), except for the explicit term
of γ2∗ (which we will prove later), follows from Lemma 1, part (iii), and the discussion
in the main text. Part (iv) follows from Lemma 1, parts (i), (ii) and (iii), and the
discussion in the main text. We now consider part (v). Given γ ∗ , manager i chooses
ai = L if and only if (13) holds. Using the explicit expressions for p (sBE ), (13) becomes
ψ2 (θ∗ , γ ∗ ) > θi , where ψ2 (y, γ) is given by (15). If θ2∗ is the threshold in equilibrium,
then it must satisfy ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) = θ2∗ . Overall, parts (i)-(v) of the proposition are all
41

necessary in any ex-post symmetric equilibrium. We now argue that ψ2 (y, γ) = y has
a unique solution. Recall that it is necessary that γ ∗ ∈ Γ (θ∗ ). Therefore, ψ2 (y, γ ∗ ) can
be rewritten as

(1−δ)(1−F (y))


h1 (y) ≡ 1−F
(y)


1+ F (y) (F (y)(1−δ)+δ)

√
ψ2 (y, γ ∗ ) = β − ωE [θi |θi < y] × 1 − γ ∗ + δ
2




δF (y)(1−F (y))

h0 (y) ≡ 1 − F (y)
2
+(1−F (y))2 δ

if y < Y (δ)
if y = Y (δ)

(19)

if y > Y (δ) ,

and note that δ ∈ (0, 1) implies Y (δ) ∈ (0, v). We proceed in several steps. First,
ψ2 (y, γ) ≤ β ∀ γ ∈ [0, 1] and y ≤ β. From (2), the solution of ψ2 (θ∗ , γ ∗ ) = θ∗ , if
it exists, is in (0, v). Second, it can be verified that y < Y (δ) ⇒
y > Y (δ) ⇒

∂h0 (y)
∂y

∂h1 (y)
∂y

> 0 and

> 0. Moreover, h1 (y) < h0 (y) ∀ y. Combining these results,

ψ2 (y, γ ∗ ) is decreasing in y. Therefore, the solution of ψ2 (θ∗ , γ ∗ ) = θ∗ , if it exists,
is unique. Third, if ψ2 (Y (δ) , 1) ≤ Y (δ), then the unique solution satisfies γ ∗ = 1.
If Y (δ) ≤ ψ2 (Y (δ) , 0) then the unique solution satisfies γ ∗ = 0. If ψ2 (Y (δ) , 0) <
Y (δ) < ψ2 (Y (δ) , 1), then ψ2 (Y (δ) , γ) is strictly increasing and continuous in γ, and
ψ2 (Y (δ) , γ ∗ ) = Y (δ) has a unique solution γ ∗ = γ ∗∗ where
γ ∗∗ = 2 −

√
β − Y (δ)
2
∈ (0, 1) .
δ−
ω
E [θi |θi < Y (δ)]

Overall, a solution for ψ2 (θ∗ , γ ∗ ) = θ∗ , s.t. γ ∗ ∈ Γ (θ∗ ), always exists and is unique. We
now verify the explicit expression for γ2∗ in part (iii). Note that if ψ2 (Y (δ) , 1) ≤ Y (δ)
then γ ∗∗ ≥ 1, if Y (δ) ≤ ψ2 (Y (δ) , 0) then γ ∗∗ ≤ 0, and if ψ2 (Y (δ) , 0) < Y (δ) <
ψ2 (Y (δ) , 1) then γ ∗∗ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, γ ∗ = max {0, min {1, γ ∗∗ }}, which yields
expression (14). We conclude that, if an ex-post symmetric equilibrium exists, we must
have θ∗ = θ2∗ and γ ∗ = γ2∗ , where θ2∗ and γ2∗ are unique and satisfy ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) = θ2∗ . To
show that an ex-post symmetric equilibrium with the properties in the the proposition
indeed exists, let sBE = (0.5, 0.5) and sIE = (1, 0), and the prices be as in part (iv).
If the blockholder follows this strategy, then prices indeed are as given by part (iv),
and θ∗ = θ2∗ and γ ∗ = γ2∗ . Moreover, it is trivial to see from Definition 1 that this
equilibrium is ex-post symmetric. To complete the existence proof, we show that the
trading strategies are incentive-compatible. There are three cases to consider:
1. Suppose a = (H, H) and χ = 0. If s = (0, 0) the blockholder obtains the highest
42

payoff possible, 2v, and so has weak incentives to choose s = (0, 0). Suppose
a = (L, L). If the blockholder chooses sBE , her payoff is p∗ (sBE ) + v, where
p∗ (sBE ) > v. If the blockholder chooses s 6= sBE , her payoff is 2v. Therefore,
the blockholder is strictly better off choosing sBE .
2. Suppose a = (H, H) and χ = 1. If the blockholder chooses sBE , her payoff is
p∗ (sBE ) + v. If s = (1, 1), her payoff is 2v, and if s ∈ {(1, 0) , (1, 0.5)}, her payoff
is v + v. Either way, she is strictly better off choosing sBE .
3. Finally, suppose a = (L, H). If the blockholder chooses s ∈ {sIE , (0, 0)}, her
payoff is v + v, and if she chooses sBE , her payoff is p∗ (sBE ) + v+v
. Based on Part
2
(iii) of Lemma 1, the blockholder never chooses s such that si < sj . She is better
v+v
. Since p∗ (sBE ) ≥ v+v
⇔ θ2∗ > Y (δ),
2
2
γ2∗ = 1, and if p∗ (sBE ) < v+v
then γ2∗ = 0.
2

off choosing sBE if and only if p∗ (sBE ) ≥
from Lemma 2, if p∗ (sBE ) >

v+v
2

then

Therefore, the blockholder’s strategy is incentive-compatible.

Proof of Theorem 1. We start with several observations. First, based on (7) and
(15), lengthy algebra shows that, ∀ y,
ψ2 (y, 0) < ψ1 (y) < ψ2 (y, 1).
Second, recall y > Y (δ) ⇒

∂ψ2 (y,0)
∂y

< 0, y < Y (δ) ⇒

(20)

∂ψ2 (y,1)
∂y

< 0, and

∂ψ1 (y)
∂y

< 0 ∀ y.

Third, lengthy algebra shows that
ψ1 (Y (δ)) < ψ2 (Y (δ) , γ) ⇔ γ >

√
δ.

(21)

Fourth, θ2∗ satisfies ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) = θ2∗ , where γ2∗ ∈ Γ (θ2∗ ), and θ1∗ satisfies ψ1 (θ1∗ ) = θ1∗ . We
√
now argue that argue θ2∗ < θ1∗ ⇔ γ2∗ < δ. We proceed in two steps. First, suppose
θ2∗ = θ1∗ = y ∗ . Therefore, ψ2 (y ∗ , γ2∗ ) = ψ1 (y ∗ ), and based on (10) and (20), y ∗ =
√
Y (δ) and γ2∗ ∈ (0, 1). Therefore, ψ2 (Y (δ) , γ2∗ ) = ψ1 (Y (δ)). Based on (21), γ2∗ = δ.
Second, suppose θ2∗ > (<) θ1∗ . Therefore,
ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) = θ2∗ > (<) θ1∗ = ψ1 (θ1∗ )

43

Since

∂ψ1 (y)
∂y

< 0 ∀ y, ψ1 (θ1∗ ) ≥ (≤) ψ1 (θ2∗ ). Therefore, ψ2 (θ2∗ , γ2∗ ) > (<) ψ1 (θ2∗ ). Based

on (10), (20), (21), either γ2∗ = 1 (γ2∗ = 0) , or γ2∗ ∈ (0, 1) and θ2∗ = Y (δ). In the
√
latter case, ψ2 (Y (δ) , γ2∗ ) > (<) ψ1 (Y (δ)), and based on (21), δ < (>) γ. Either
√
way, δ < (>) γ.
Proof of Theorem 2. First note that, if γ2∗ = 1, then in equilibrium si = sj w.p.
1, and so pi = pj w.p. 1. The correlation is equal to one. We turn to γ2∗ < 1. The
correlation is positive if and only if the covariance is positive. The covariance is given
by:
σij = E [pi × pj ] − E [pi ] × E [pj ] ,
where E [pi ] = E [pj ] = (1 − F (θ2∗ )) v + F (θ2∗ ) v. Based on Proposition 2,


E [pi × pj ] = F (θ2∗ )2 + 2γ2∗ F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ )) + (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ × p (sBE )2
+ (1 − δ) (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 p (0, 0)2

+ 2 (1 − γ2∗ ) F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ )) p (sIE ) p sTIE .

Recall p (sIE ) = v and p sTIE = v. Thus,
σij = F (θ2∗ )2 × p (sBE )2 − v 2



+ 2γ2∗ F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ )) × p (sBE )2 − v × v

+ (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ × p (sBE )2 − v 2 .



In addition, note that p (sBE ) = (1 − H) v + Hv where
H=

F (θ2∗ )2 + γ2∗ F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ ))
F (θ2∗ )2 + 2γ2∗ F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ )) + (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ

Then σij can be rewritten as
σij = (1 − H) F (θ2∗ )2 × (v − v) (p (sBE ) + v)
+ 2γ2∗ F (θ2∗ ) (1 − F (θ2∗ )) × p (sBE )2 − v × v
− H (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ × (v − v) (p (sBE ) + v) .
Consider two cases:
44



1. Suppose γ2∗ = 0. Then σij can be rewritten as
σij = (1 − H) F (θ2∗ )2 × (v − v) (p (sBE ) + v)
− H (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ × (v − v) (p (sBE ) + v) .
Note that (1 − H) F (θ2∗ )2 = H (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ. Therefore, σij < 0.
2. Suppose γ2∗ ∈ (0, 1). Then, θ2∗ = Y (δ) ⇔ F (θ2∗ ) =
H=

1
2

√
δ
√
1+ δ

, F (θ2∗ )2 = (1 − F (θ2∗ ))2 δ,

and σij can be rewritten as
1
σij = F (θ2∗ ) (v − v)2 [γ2∗ (1 − F (θ2∗ )) − F (θ2∗ )] .
2

Therefore, σij < 0 ⇔ γ2∗ <

F (θ2∗ )
1−F (

θ2∗

)

. Since, F (θ2∗ ) =

√
δ
√
1+ δ

then

F (θ2∗ )
1−F (

θ2∗

)

=

√
δ.

Proof of Proposition 3. Based on the analysis in Appendix B, Propositions 2, 6, 7,
and 8 describe the entire set of equilibria. First, consider the equilibria in Proposition
8. Based on (35), ψSE (y, τ ) is decreasing in τ . Therefore, among all the equilibria described in Proposition 8, the one with τ = 1 is the most efficient. Note that
ψEF (y) = ψSE (y, 1) ∀ y, where ψEF (y) is given by (16). Second, consider the equilibria in Proposition 6, when they exist. Based on (31), ψF E (y, γ) is increasing with γ.
Therefore, among all the equilibria described in Proposition 6, the one with γ = 0 is
the most efficient. Note that ψEF (y) = ψF E (y, 0) ∀ y. Third, consider the equilibria
in Proposition 2. Based on the proof of Proposition 2, ψ2 (y, γ) given in (15) can be
rewritten as:

(1−δ)(1−F (y))


h1 (y) ≡ 1−F
(y)


1+
(F (y)(1−δ)+δ)
F (y)

√
∗
∗
ψ2 (y, γ ) = β − ωE [θi |θi < y] × 1 − γ + δ
2




h (y) ≡ 1 − δF 2(y)(1−F (y))2
0
F (y) +(1−F (y)) δ

if y < Y (δ)
if y = Y (δ)

(22)

if y > Y (δ) .

Lengthy algebra shows that ψ2 (y, γ ∗ ) > ψEF (y) ∀ y. Therefore, the equilibrium in
Proposition 2 is strictly less efficient than the most efficient equilibrium in Proposition
8. Fourth, consider the equilibria in Proposition 7, when they exist. Based on Proposition 7, an equilibrium must satisfy ψP E (θP∗ E , γP∗ E ) = θP∗ E , where ψP E (y, γ) is given by
45

(33). Lengthy algebra shows that ψP E (y, γ) is increasing in γ. Thus, the most efficient
equilibrium is one where γ = 0. Lengthy algebra shows that ψP E (y, 0) > ψEF (y) ∀
y. Therefore, the equilibrium in Proposition 7, if it exists, is strictly less efficient than
the most efficient equilibrium in Proposition 8. We conclude that the equilibrium in
Proposition 8 with τ = 1 is the most efficient equilibrium. Since ψSE (y, 1) = ψF E (y, 0)
∀ y, the equilibrium in Proposition 6 with γ = 0, when it exists, exhibit the same level
of efficiency. The properties of the equilibrium in Proposition 3 are shared by both
the equilibrium in Proposition 8 with τ = 1 and the equilibrium in Proposition 6 with
F (θ∗∗ )
> 0 for the equilib2−F (θ∗∗ )
(θ∗∗ ))2 δ−F (θ∗∗ )2
υ ∗∗ = 1− (1−F (1−F
>0
(θ∗∗ ))δ

γ = 0. In particular, note that sBE = (0.5, 0.5) and υ ∗∗ =
rium in Proposition 8 with τ = 1 , and sBE = (1, 1) and

for the equilibrium in Proposition 6 with γ = 0. Finally, note that ψEF (y) is a decreasing function, and so θ∗∗ is the unique fixed point of ψEF (y).
Proof of Theorem 3. A direct comparison between (16) and (7) shows that ψEF (y) <
ψ1 (y) ∀ y.
Proof of Proposition 4. Recall the covariance between the stock prices is given by:
σij = E [pi × pj ] − E [pi ] × E [pj ] ,
where, under the most efficient equilibrium, E [pi ] = E [pj ] = (1 − F (θ∗∗ )) v + F (θ∗∗ ) v.
There are two cases to consider:
1. Consider equilibria in Proposition 8 with τ = 1. In this equilibrium, sBE =
(0.5, 0.5). Note that τ = 1 implies υ ∗∗ =

F (θ∗∗ )
2−F (θ∗∗ )

< 1. Moreover, τ = 1 implies

p (0, 0) = p (0, 1) = v and p (1, 0) = p (0.5, 0.5) ≡ p∗∗ where
p∗∗ = v −

F (θ∗ ) (2 − F (θ∗∗ ))
E [θ|θ < θ∗∗ ] .
F (θ∗∗ ) (2 − F (θ∗∗ )) + (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 δ

46

(23)

Therefore,
σij = F (θ∗∗ )2 p∗∗2 + 2F (θ∗∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗∗ )) p∗∗ v


+ (1 − δ) (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 v 2 + δ (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 υ ∗∗ p∗∗2 + (1 − υ ∗∗ ) p∗∗ v
− [(1 − F (θ∗∗ )) v + F (θ∗∗ ) v]2
= F (θ∗∗ ) (p∗∗ − v) [F (θ∗∗ ) (p∗∗ + v) + 2 (1 − F (θ∗∗ )) v]
− δ (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 (p∗∗ υ ∗∗ + v) (v − p∗∗ )
Substituting for p∗∗ and υ ∗∗ yields
σij = −

F (θ∗∗ )2 (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 δ
∗∗ 2
2 E [θ|θ < θ ] < 0
∗∗
∗∗
∗∗
F (θ ) (2 − F (θ )) + (1 − F (θ )) δ

2. Consider the equilibrium in Proposition 6 with γ = 0, when it exists. In this
F (θ∗∗ )2
.
(1−F (θ∗∗ ))δ
∗∗

equilibrium, sBE = (1, 1). Note that γ = 0 implies υ ∗∗ = F (θ∗∗ ) +

Moreover, γ = 0 implies p (0, 0) = p (0, 1) = v, p (1, 1) = 0.5 (p + v) and
p (1, 0) = p∗∗ where
p∗∗ = v −

2F (θ∗∗ )
∗∗
2 E [θi |θi < θ ] .
∗∗
1 − (1 − δ) (1 − F (θ ))

Therefore,
σij = F (θ∗∗ )2 p (1, 1)2 + 2F (θ∗∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗∗ )) p (1, 0) v


+ (1 − δ) (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 v 2 + δ (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2 υ ∗∗ p (1, 1)2 + (1 − υ ∗∗ ) p (1, 0) v
− [(1 − F (θ∗∗ )) v + F (θ∗∗ ) v]2 .
Substituting for p (1, 1) , p∗∗ and υ ∗∗ yields
∗∗

∗∗

∗∗ 2

∗∗ ))

)(3−2F (θ ))
) (2−F (θ
δ 2 + δ F (θ(1−F
+ F (θ(1−F
(θ∗∗ ))2
(θ∗∗ ))3
∗∗ 2
∗∗ 4
σij = −F (θ ) (1 − F (θ ))

2
1 − (1 − δ) (1 − F (θ∗∗ ))2

E [θi |θi < θ∗∗ ]2 < 0.

Proposition 5. (Inefficiency of no-exit equilibrium): Consider an equilibrium in which
a blockholder who observes a = (L, H) plays s = (0, 0) with positive probability. Then,
47

an equilibrium in which this type of blockholder does not play s = (0, 0) exists and is
weakly more efficient.
Proof of Proposition 5. Here we show that if an equilibrium in which type a =
(L, H) and χ = 0 plays s = (0, 0) with positive probability (denoted ι) exists, then
one in which she plays s = (0, 0) w.p. 0 also exists and is more efficient. To prove
this, we first argue that allowing for ι∗ > 0 does not expand the potential set of
equilibria beyond those described in Propositions 2, 6, and 7. Given this result, we
then can go case by case and show that in any potential equilibrium θ∗ , the manager’s
relative benefit from shirking decreases as we decrease ι∗ and simultaneously increase
the probability that type a = (L, H) and χ = 0 plays s = (1, 0). Finally, using IVT
arguments, we can show that an equilibrium with ι∗ = 0 does exist when one with
ι∗ > 0 exists, and furthermore that the cutoff rule in the former equilibrium is weakly
smaller than the cutoff rule in the latter. Before proceeding, first note that in any
equilibrium with ι∗ > 0, it must be that p(1, 0) = v. Otherwise, type a = (L, H) and
χ = 0 would strictly prefer s = (1, 0) to s = (0, 0). Furthermore, it must be that
p(0, 1) = v if s = (1, 0) is on the equilibrium path. To see this, since p(1, 0) = v, a
blockholder observing a = (L, L) would obtain 2v from choosing s = (1, 0). Clearly
she could deviate to an alternative strategy and obtain a higher payoff. Based on part
(iii) of Lemma 1,18 type a = (L, H) never chooses s = (0, 1). Therefore, s = (0, 1)
implies ai = H, and so p(0, 1) = v. Without loss of generality, for the remainder of the
proof we assume that even if s = (0, 1) is off-equilibrium, p(0, 1) = v. We now argue
that allowing ι∗ > 0 does not introduce additional classes of equilibria beyond those
that are described by Propositions 2, 6, and 7.19 To see this, first note that in any
Note that the arguments to prove Lemma 1 did not assume that ι∗ = 0, so they continue to hold
when we allow for ι∗ > 0.
19
Note that the conditions p(1, 0) = v(θ∗ ) and p(0, 1) = v(θ∗ ) immediately rule out an ι∗ > 0
equilibrium of the same form as Proposition 8, except as a special case of Proposition 2. For such an
equilibrium to exist, it would require µ∗ = 1 and τ ∗ = 1. However, this then returns us to Proposition
2 with γ2∗ = 0.
18

48

equilibrium with ι∗ > 0, we require:
2p(1, 1) ≤ v + v(θ∗ )
1
p(1, 0.5) + 0.5p(0.5, 1) ≤ v + v(θ∗ )
2
1
p(0.5, 0.5) ≤ (v + v(θ∗ )),
2

(24)
(25)
(26)

since any violation of these inequalities would mean that s = (0, 0) is strictly dominated
for type a = (L, H) and χ = 0, contradicting ι∗ > 0. There are three cases to consider:
1. First, consider potential equilibria with ι∗ > 0 in which s = (1, 1) is on the
equilibrium path. Then, it must be that (24) holds with equality. To see this,
if 2p(1, 1) < v + v(θ∗ ), then a = (L, H) and a = (H, H) types strictly prefer
s = (1, 0) to s = (1, 1), so the only type possibly playing s = (1, 1) in equilibrium
is a = (L, L). However, then p(1, 1) = v(θ∗ ), in which case s = (1, 1) is a suboptimal strategy for a = (L, L). Therefore, since 2p(1, 1) = v + v(θ∗ ), and since
inequalities (25) and (26) also hold, type a = (L, L) strictly prefers s = (1, 1) to
all other strategies. Let γF∗ E and ζ ∗ denote the probabilities that type a = (L, H)
or a = (H, H) plays s = (1, 1), respectively. Then, in such an equilibrium we
have:
p(1, 1) = v −

F (θ∗ )2 + F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))γF∗ E
E[θ|θ < θ∗ ].
F (θ∗ )2 + (1 − F (θ∗ ))2 δζ ∗ + 2F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))γF∗ E

Simple algebra shows that, given this price, 2p(1, 1) = v + v(θ∗ ) holds if and only
if
∗

ζ =



F (θ∗ )
1 − F (θ∗ )

2

1
.
δ

This implies that, in any such equilibrium, it must be that F (θ∗ ) ≤

(27)
√
δ
√
,
1+ δ

since

otherwise ζ ∗ > 1. Lemma 1 implies that in any such equilibrium, it must be that
s = (0.5, 0.5) is off-equilibrium. Furthermore, type a = (H, H) and χ = 1 must
play s = (1, 0) w.p. 0, since otherwise p(1, 0) > v(θ∗ ). Therefore, the a = (H, H)
type must be mixing between s = (1, 0.5) or s = (0.5, 1), and s = (1, 1). Then,
since a = (L, H) is the only additional type (besides a = (H, H)) potentially
playing s = (1, 0.5), it would be the case that p(1, 0.5)+0.5p(0.5, 1) > v(θ∗ )+0.5v
unless ζ ∗ = 1. Therefore, in any equilibrium with ι∗ > 0 and s = (1, 1) on the
49

equilibrium path, it must be that ζ ∗ = 1, which implies that θ∗ = Y (δ) given
condition (27). Furthermore, it must be that a = (L, L) plays s = (1, 1) w.p. 1,
and a = (L, H) mixes between s = (1, 1), s = (1, 0), s = (1, 0.5), and s = (0, 0).
This is simply the type of equilibrium in Proposition 6 except that a = (L, H)
plays s = (0, 0) with positive probability.
2. Next, consider potential equilibria with ι∗ > 0 and s = (1, 1) off the equilibrium
path, but s = (1, 0.5) on the equilibrium path. This implies that (25) holds with
equality for the same reason as before. If it were a strict inequality, then only
a = (L, L) would potentially have incentives to play s = (1, 0.5), which would
mean p(1, 0.5) = p(0.5, 1) = v(θ∗ ), contradicting type a = (L, L) playing this
strategy. There are two cases to consider:
(a) Consider a candidate equilibrium where s = (0.5, 0.5) is also on the equilibrium path, in which case p(0.5, 0.5) =
p(0.5, 0.5) <

1
(v
2

1
(v
2

+ v(θ∗ )). To see this, if

+ v(θ∗ )), then only type a = (H, H) and χ = 1 will

have incentives to play s = (0.5, 0.5). This is because type a = (L, L)
would receive a payoff of p(0.5, 0.5) + v(θ∗ ), which is strictly smaller than
3
v
2

+ 21 v(θ∗ ), the payoff from s = (1, 0.5). Furthermore, type a = (L, H)

would strictly prefer s = (0, 0) or s = (1, 0), which yield payoff v + v(θ∗ ).
This implies that p(0.5, 0.5) = v in equilibrium, a contradiction. Therefore,
we can rule out such an equilibrium with p(0.5, 0.5) < 21 (v + v(θ∗ )). However, when p(0.5, 0.5) = 12 (v + v(θ∗ )), type a = (H, H) and χ = 1 will not
have incentives to play s = (1, 0.5) since she can obtain 21 v + 23 v(θ∗ ) from
s = (0.5, 0.5). This implies that only types a = (L, H) and a = (L, L) would
potentially play s = (1, 0.5). Then, condition (25) holds with equality only
if type a = (L, L) plays s = (1, 0.5) w.p. 0. That is, types a = (L, L) and
(a = (H, H), χ = 1) play s = (0.5, 0.5) w.p. 1, while type a = (L, H) mixes
between s = (0.5, 0.5), s = (1, 0), s = (1, 0.5), and s = (0, 0). This is simply
a special case of Proposition 2, with s = (0.5, 0.5) on the equilibrium path
(rather than s = (1, 1)) and with ι∗ > 0. Therefore, this again does not expand the potential set of equilibria. Note also that in such an equilibrium,
with κ∗ denoting the probability that type a = (L, H) plays s = (0.5, 0.5),

50

we have:
p(0.5, 0.5) = v −

F (θ∗ )2 + F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))κ∗
.
F (θ∗ )2 + 2F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))κ∗ + (1 − F (θ∗ ))2 δ

Since p(0.5, 0.5) = 12 (v + v(θ∗ )), this can only occur if θ∗ = Y (δ).
(b) Consider the case with s = (0.5, 0.5) off the equilibrium path but s =
(1, 0.5) on it. Then, with p(1, 0.5) + 0.5p(0.5, 1) = 0.5v + v(θ∗ ), type a =
(L, L) strictly prefers s = (1, 0.5) and s = (0.5, 1) to all other strategies.
Furthermore, type a = (H, H) and χ = 1 is indifferent between s = (1, 0.5)
and s = (1, 0), but as noted this type must play s = (1, 0) w.p. 0 in any
equilibrium with ι∗ > 0. Type a = (L, H) is indifferent between s = (1, 0),
s = (0, 0), and s = (1, 0.5), and so will mix between these. Note that this
is akin to the Proposition 7 equilibrium, with µ∗ = 1 and ι∗ > 0. Also note
that the form of µ∗ given in Proposition 7 implies that µ∗ = 1 only
 √if either

2δ
∗
∗
∗
−1
√
γP E = 1 (which is inconsistent with ι > 0), or if θ = F
≡
1+ 2δ
ZEX (δ). Therefore, an equilibrium of this form with ι∗ > 0 can only exist if
θ∗ = ZEX (δ).
3. Finally, consider potential equilibria with ι∗ > 0 and where s = (0.5, 0.5) is played
with positive probability, but s = (1, 0.5) and s = (1, 1) are off-equilibrium.
Condition (26) implies that p(0.5, 0.5) ≤ 12 (v + v(θ∗ )). Then types a = (L, L) and
(a = (H, H), χ = 1) have strict incentives to play s = (0.5, 0.5) (when p(1, 0.5) =
p(0.5, 1) = p(1, 1) = v, as they are off-equilibrium), while type a = (L, H) would
weakly prefer s = (0, 0) or s = (1, 0) to s = (0.5, 0.5). Denoting γ2∗ as the
probability that a = (L, H) plays s = (0.5, 0.5), this implies:
p(0.5, 0.5) = v −

F (θ∗ )2 + F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))γ2∗
E[θ|θ < θ∗ ].
F (θ∗ )2 + (1 − F (θ∗ ))2 δ + 2F (θ∗ )(1 − F (θ∗ ))γ2∗

This is consistent with p(0.5, 0.5) ≤ 21 (v + v(θ∗ )) only if θ∗ ≥ Y (δ). Furthermore,
if θ∗ > Y (δ), then it must be that γ2∗ = 0. This is simply the Proposition 2
equilibrium with θ∗ ≥ Y (δ) and ι∗ > 0.
The above analysis shows that allowing for ι∗ > 0 does not introduce new classes of
equilibria beyond those in Propositions 2, 6, and 7. Now, we consider the manager’s
51

objective function for each type of equilibrium with ι∗ > 0 and show that it is increasing
in ι∗ as we simultaneously decrease the probability that a = (L, H) and χ = 0 type
plays s = (1, 0). Then, we can argue that an equilibrium with ι∗ = 0 exists and is
more efficient. We consider each case in turn. In each case, we will denote θ0∗ as the
equilibrium cutoff with ι∗ = 0, and θ1∗ as the equilibrium cutoff with ι∗ > 0.
1. Consider the equilibrium with s = (1, 1) on the equilibrium path. As described
in point 1 above, it must be that type a = (L, L) as well as type a = (H, H)
and χ = 1 plays s = (1, 1) w.p. 1, while a = (L, H) mix between s = (1, 0),
s = (1, 0.5), s = (1, 1), and s = (0, 0). Furthermore, an equilibrium with ι∗ > 0
exists only if θ∗ = Y (δ). Then, it must be that:
1
p(0, 1) = p( , 1) = v
2
1
p(1, 0) = p(1, ) = v(θ∗ )
2
F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ ))ι∗
p(0, 0) = v −
E [θ|θ < θ∗ ]
∗
∗
∗
∗
2
2F (θ ) (1 − F (θ ))ι + (1 − F (θ ))
F (θ∗ )2 + F (θ∗ ) (1 − F (θ∗ ))γF∗ E
p(1, 1) = v −
E [θ|θ < θ∗ ] .
2
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
2
F (θ ) + 2F (θ ) (1 − F (θ ))γF E + δ(1 − F (θ ))
where γF∗ E is the probability that type a = (L, H) plays s = (1, 1). Then, the
manager’s condition (derived as usual) is:
h

ψ Inef f,DE (Y (δ), ι∗ , γF∗ E ) ≡ β + ω F (Y (δ)) p(1, 1) − γF∗ E p(1, 1) − ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)−


∗
∗
(1 − γF E − ι (1 − δ))v + (1 − F (Y (δ))) γF∗ E p(1, 1) + ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)+
i
(1 − γF∗ E − ι∗ (1 − δ))v − δp(1, 1) − (1 − δ)p(0, 0) = Y (δ),
where the last equality comes from the fact that in any such equilibrium, θ∗ =
Y (δ). Note that p(0, 0) is clearly decreasing in ι∗ , while all other prices are

52

invariant to changes in ι∗ . Therefore, we have
"
!
∂ψInef f,DE (Y (δ), ι∗ , γF∗ E )
∂p(0,
0)
= ω F (Y (δ)) (1 − δ)(v − p(0, 0) − ι∗
) +
∂ι∗
∂ι∗
!#
∂p(0,
0)
− v(θ∗ )) .
(1 − F (Y (δ))) (1 − δ)(p(0, 0) − (1 − ι∗ )
∂ι∗
(28)
Note that clearly this is positive, since

∂p(0,0)
∂ι∗

< 0 and v < p(0, 0) ≤ v. Therefore,

Y (δ) = ψInef f,DE (Y (δ), ι∗ , γF∗ E ) > ψInef f,DE (Y (δ), 0, γF∗ E ).
At θ∗ = Y (δ), we have p(0, 0) = v and p(1, 1) = 12 (v + v). Lengthy algebra shows
that this implies:
γF∗ E < 2 −

√

δ−

β − Y (δ)
2
,
ω
E[θ|θ < Y (δ)]

From equality (29) in Proposition 6, this implies that for this γF∗ E , an equilibrium
of the form in Proposition 6 exists. Furthermore, since ψInef f,DE (Y (δ), 0, γF∗ E ) =
ψF E (Y (δ), γF∗ E ) < Y (δ) and ψF E (0, γF∗ E ) = β > 0, the IVT implies that θ0∗ <
Y (δ) = θ1∗ . This shows that when a full exit equilibrium with ι∗ > 0 exists, one
with ι∗ = 0 exists and is strictly more efficient.
2. Now, consider an equilibrium with s = (1, 0.5) on the equilibrium path and with
ι∗ > 0. As described above, there are two cases two consider:
(a) First, suppose s = (0.5, 0.5) is also on the equilibrium path. Then, the above
analysis shows that such an equilibrium would consist of types a = (L, L)
and (a = (H, H), χ = 1) playing s = (0.5, 0.5) w.p. 1, while type a = (L, H)
mixes between s = (0.5, 0.5), s = (1, 0), s = (1, 0.5), and s = (0, 0). θ∗ =

53

Y (δ). In this case, the manager’s objective function satisfies:
h

ψ Inef f,P E,1 (Y (δ), ι∗ , γ2∗ ) ≡ β + ω F (Y (δ)) p(0.5, 0.5) − γ2∗ p(0.5, 0.5) − ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)−


(1 − γ2∗ − ι∗ (1 − δ))v + (1 − F (Y (δ))) γ2∗ p(0.5, 0.5) + ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)+
i
∗
∗
(1 − γ2 − ι (1 − δ))v − δp(0.5, 0.5) − (1 − δ)p(0, 0) = Y (δ),
with γ2∗ as the probability that type a = (L, H) plays s = (0.5, 0.5). Note
that, in this equilibrium we have p(0.5, 0.5) =

1
(v
2

+ v(θ∗ )), making this

identical to the analysis of the full exit equilibrium. Therefore, we again
have:
Y (δ) = ψInef f,P E,1 (Y (δ), ι∗ , γ2∗ ) > ψInef f,P E,1 (Y (δ), 0, γ2∗ ).
Finally, at the equilibrium prices, algebra shows:
ψInef f,P E,1 (Y (δ), 0, γ2∗ ) = ψ2 (Y (δ), γ2∗ ) < Y (δ).
Therefore, using the same analysis as in the proof of Proposition 2, there
exists either: (i) a γ0∗ > γ2∗ such that ψ2 (Y (δ), γ0∗ ) = Y (δ), implying that
θ0∗ = Y (δ) = θ1∗ , or (ii) a θ0∗ < θ1∗ such that ψ2 (θ0∗ , 1) = θ0∗ . In either case,
the equilibrium with ι∗ = 0 exists and is weakly more efficient than the
equilibrium with ι∗ > 0.
(b) If s = (0.5, 0.5) is off-equilibrium, the above analysis shows that θ∗ =
ZEX (δ), in which case both types a = (L, L) and (a = (H, H), χ = 1) play
s = (1, 0.5) or s = (0.5, 1) at random, and a = (L, H) mixes between
s = (1, 0), s = (1, 0.5), and s = (0, 0). Again, letting γP∗ E denote the probability that type a = (L, H) plays s = (1, 0.5), the manager’s objective

54

function must satisfy:
h
1
ψ Inef f,P E,2 (ZEX (δ), ι∗ , γP∗ E ) ≡ β + ω F (ZEX (δ)) (p(1, 0.5) + p(0.5, 1)) − γP∗ E p(0.5, 1)−
2


∗
∗
∗
ι (1 − δ)p(0, 0) − (1 − γP E − ι (1 − δ))v + (1 − F (ZEX (δ)) γP∗ E p(1, 0.5)+
i
1
ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0) + (1 − γP∗ E − ι∗ (1 − δ))v − δ (p(1, 0.5) + p(0.5, 1)) − (1 − δ)p(0, 0)
2
= ZEX (δ).
Now again, since p(1, 0.5) is invariant to changes in ι∗ , the derivative of this
function with respect to ι∗ is the same as in equation (28), and therefore it
is increasing in ι∗ . This yields:
ZEX (δ) = ψInef f,P E,2 (ZEX (δ), ι∗ , γP∗ E ) > ψInef f,P E,2 (ZEX (δ), 0, γP∗ E ).
Lengthy algebra also shows that:
ZEX (δ) > ψInef f,P E,2 (ZEX (δ), 0, γP∗ E ) = ψP E (ZEX (δ), γP∗ E ).
Since ψP E (θ, γP∗ E ) is continuous in θ, and since ψP E (0, γP∗ E ) > 0, by the
IVT there exists a θ0∗ < ZEX (δ) = θ1∗ such that ψP E (θ0∗ , γP∗ E ) = θ0∗ . That
is, an equilibrium with ι∗ = 0 exists and is strictly more efficient than the
equilibrium with ι∗ > 0.
3. Finally, consider the ι∗ > 0 equilibrium with s = (0.5, 0.5) on the equilibrium
path, but s = (1, 0.5) and s = (1, 1) off-equilibrium. In this case, types a = (L, L)
and (a = (H, H), χ = 1) play s = (0.5, 0.5) w.p. 1, and type a = (L, H) mixes
between s = (0, 0), s = (1, 0), and s = (0.5, 0.5). Let γ2∗ denote the probability
that a = (L, H) plays s = (0.5, 0.5). Then, the manager’s objective function is:
h

ψ Inef f,BE,1 (θ1∗ , ι∗ , γ2∗ ) ≡ β + ω F (θ1∗ ) p(0.5, 0.5) − γ2∗ p(0.5, 0.5) − ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)−


∗
∗
∗
(1 − γ2 − ι (1 − δ))v + (1 − F (θ1 )) γ2∗ p(0.5, 0.5) + ι∗ (1 − δ)p(0, 0)+
i
(1 − γ2∗ − ι∗ (1 − δ))v − δp(0.5, 0.5) − (1 − δ)p(0, 0) = θ1∗ .

55

Note that since:
p(0.5, 0.5) = v −

F (θ1∗ )2 + F (θ1∗ )(1 − F (θ1∗ ))γ2∗
E[θ|θ < θ1∗ ],
F (θ1∗ )2 + 2F (θ1∗ )(1 − F (θ1∗ ))γ2∗ + δ(1 − F (θ1∗ ))2

it is invariant to changes in ι∗ , yet again the derivative of ψInef f,BE,1 (θ1∗ , ι∗ , γ2∗ ) is
the same as in (28), and so this function is increasing in ι∗ . There are two cases
to consider:
(a) Suppose that θ1∗ = Y (δ). Then,
Y (δ) = ψInef f,BE,1 (Y (δ), ι∗ , γ2∗ ) > ψInef f,BE,1 (Y (δ), 0, γ2∗ ).
Furthermore, since in such an equilibrium we have p(0.5, 0.5) = 21 (v +v(θ∗ )),
algebra shows that:
Y (δ) > ψInef f,BE,1 (Y (δ), 0, γ2∗ ) = ψ2 (Y (δ), γ2∗ ).
The proof of Proposition 2 shows that ψ2 (Y (δ), γ2∗ ) is increasing in γ2∗ .
Therefore, either: (i) there exists a γ0∗ > γ2∗ such that ψ2 (Y (δ), γ0∗ ) = Y (δ),
in which case θ0∗ = θ1∗ = Y (δ), or (ii) ψ2 (Y (δ), 1) < Y (δ), in which case the
proof of Proposition 2 shows there exists a θ0∗ < θ1∗ such that ψ2 (θ0∗ , 1) = θ0∗ .
In either case, the equilibrium with ι∗ = 0 exists and is weakly more efficient
than the equilibrium with ι∗ > 0.
(b) Suppose that θ1∗ > Y (δ), implying that γ2∗ = 0. Then, we have
θ1∗ > ψInef f,BE,1 (θ1∗ , 0, 0) = ψ2 (θ1∗ , 0).
Therefore, either: (i) ψ2 (Y (δ), 0) ≥ Y (δ), which implies that by the IVT
there exists a θ0∗ ∈ [Y (δ), θ1∗ ) satisfying ψ2 (θ0∗ , 0) = θ0∗ , or (ii) ψ2 (Y (δ), 0) >
Y (δ) which, from the analysis of Proposition 2, implies that there is an
equilibrium with θ0∗ ≤ Y (δ) < θ1∗ . In either case, the equilibrium with ι∗ = 0
exists and is strictly more efficient than the equilibrium with ι∗ > 0.
This completes the proof that when an equilibrium with ι∗ > 0 exists, one with ι∗ = 0
also exists and is more efficient.
56

57

