                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TAX NEWS: THE RESPONSE OF HOUSEHOLD SPENDING TO CHANGES IN
                            EXPECTED TAXES

                                            Lorenz Kueng

                                        Working Paper 20437
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w20437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2014




I am grateful to Alan Auerbach and Yuriy Gorodnichenko for their encouragement and support throughout
this project. David Card, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Dwight Jaffee, Erik Hurst, Patrick Kline, Nick
Li, Brian Melzer, Dina Pomeranz, Demian Pouzo, Emmanuel Saez, Adam Szeidl, Mu-Jeung Yang
and seminar participants at numerous places all provided valuable feedback. I thank Daniel Feenberg
for support with mapping the CEX to TAXSIM, Kevin Moore for sharing his code for the SCF, and
Craig Kreisler for patiently answering all my questions about the CEX. All remaining errors are mine.The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Lorenz Kueng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Tax News: The Response of Household Spending to Changes in Expected Taxes
Lorenz Kueng
NBER Working Paper No. 20437
August 2014, Revised August 2016
JEL No. E21,E62,G12,H31,H74

                                              ABSTRACT

Although theoretical models of household behavior often emphasize fiscal foresight, empirical studies
of household consumption have yet to document the role of news about tax changes. Using novel high-frequency
bond data, I develop a model of the term structure of municipal yield spreads as a function of future
top income tax rates and a risk premium. Testing the model using the presidential elections of 1992
and 2000 as two quasi-natural experiments shows that financial markets forecast future tax rates remarkably
well in both the short and long run. Combining these market-based tax expectations with data from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey, I find that spending of higher-income households increases by
close to 1% in response to news of a 1% increase in expected after-tax lifetime (permanent) income.
These findings imply that by ignoring anticipation effects, previous estimates of the total effect of
a tax change could be substantially biased.


Lorenz Kueng
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
l-kueng@kellogg.northwestern.edu
    This paper addresses two related questions: How predictable are personal income tax rates in
the U.S., and does household spending respond to news about future taxes even before the rates
change? These are classic questions with broad implications both for policy makers and for applied
economists. For instance, our assessment of the effectiveness of fiscal policy as a tool to stabilize
business cycles depends crucially on our ability to capture all behavioral responses to a specific tax
reform, including any anticipation effects. Such anticipation effects in turn depend on whether the
tax policy is forecastable and whether and to what extent households take such information into
account in their decision making. A major source of disagreements among economists concerning
these issues has been the difficulty to credibly identify both the timing and the magnitude of changes
in expected taxes, and to estimate the household response to such fiscal news.
    This study tackles these issues as follows: First, I measure expected future taxes using novel
high-frequency data of municipal bond yields with different maturities. Second, I combine these
market-based expectations with micro-level data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to
quantify the degree of fiscal foresight by estimating the effect of the tax news shocks on household
spending.
    In order to identify news about future taxes, I exploit the differential tax treatment of two types
of bonds. Interest on municipal bonds is tax-exempt (including state bonds), while interest on
Treasury bonds is subject to federal income taxes. Thus, relative price changes between municipal
and Treasury bonds reflect changes in expected future tax rates, holding fixed other risk factors. I
go beyond identifying the timing of news to directly measure the entire path of expected tax rates
comparing pairs of bonds of different maturities. The tax news shocks used in this paper therefore
measure not only when households receive information, but also how much information they receive.
    Identifying the entire expected path of expected taxes in turn is important when assessing the
degree of forward-looking household spending behavior. Combining the market-based tax news with
data from the CEX, I calculate changes in expected after-tax lifetime income for each household in
the survey. Models with forward-looking households predict that consumption should respond to
news about all future after-tax income, not just current taxes or income.
    Focusing on the sample of higher-income households, for which the identified news shock is most
directly related to changes in expected after-tax lifetime income, I find that household spending
responds strongly to the bond-based tax news. The hypothesis that higher-income households are
not forward-looking is strongly rejected. Interpreting the estimated response through the lens of a
standard life-cycle consumption model, spending on nondurables and services increases by about
1% in response to news of a 1% increase in after-tax lifetime income, i.e., with changes in permanent
income.
   The idea behind the identification approach can be illustrated using a particular short-term and
long-term municipal yield spread, say a 2-year and a 15-year spread. All else equal, the 2-year
spread reflects the bond market’s expectation of marginal tax rates over the next 2 years, while
the 15-year spread contains tax expectations over the next 15 years. Suppose that new information


                                                  1
arrives about a potential tax change in 3 years from today. This would affect the 15-year but not
the 2-year yield spread. Hence, the two yield spreads are informative about when those tax changes
are expected to occur. Alternatively, suppose that market participants learn about a tax reform
that is expected to be implemented within a year from today. Such information would have a large
effect on the 2-year spread. However, the effect on the 15-year spread depends on the expected
persistence of the reform. If the reform is expected to be only temporary, then it would not affect
this long-run yield spread much. Hence, the term structure of municipal yield spreads allows us to
infer both the timing and the expected persistence of a tax shock. Using new data on high-quality
municipal bond yields going back to the late 1970s, I infer the entire path of expected tax rates over
a forecasting horizon of up to 30 years at any given point in time and compare it to the subsequent
evolution of the corresponding tax rate.
    Of course, there are other factors than expected tax rates that affect municipal yield spreads.
In fact, most models of the term structure of municipal yield spreads abstract from changes in
expected tax rates and instead focus on other determinants. I therefore begin by providing graph-
ical, non-parametric evidence that changes in expected tax rates are indeed an important deter-
minant of municipal yield spreads, especially at lower frequencies. I then use two quasi-natural
experiments—the presidential elections in 1992 and 2000—and daily election probabilities from a
political prediction market to formally estimate the degree of fiscal foresight in bond prices during
the elections and to identify which marginal tax rate is reflected in the yield spreads. Changes in
the election probabilities provide an alternative measure of changes in expected future tax rates
because each of the major presidential candidates had a very different tax reform proposal during
both elections, and tax reforms were a major part of the candidates’ election platforms. I show
that the municipal yield spreads indeed respond strongly to changes in the election probabilities
during both elections, both statistically and economically, and with the expected sign, positively
with Bill Clinton’s and negatively with George W. Bush’s betting contract, respectively. Moreover,
the quantitative response in both cases is consistent with differences in the candidates’ proposals
for the top personal income tax rate.
    These quasi-natural experiments allow the yield spreads to be decomposed into tax expectations
and other factors, but are not available over most of the sample period. As an alternative approach
to decomposing the yield spreads, I extend the traditional model of municipal yield spreads to allow
for changes in expected future tax rates. The model also takes into account factors other than tax
news that can affect the yield spread, such as liquidity and default risk or tax uncertainty. In order
to minimize the influence of these other factors in the empirical analysis, I use taxable and tax-
exempt bonds that are as similar as possible on all pricing dimensions other than their tax status.
For instance, I only use the most liquid municipal bonds with the lowest credit risk to measure
the tax-exempt yield curve, specifically AAA-rated general obligation state bonds. For the taxable
yield curve, I use the less liquid off-the-run Treasury bonds.
    I first use this model to interpret the reduced-form estimates of the two quasi-natural exper-
iments. The structural model shows that the reduced-form coefficients are remarkably consistent

                                                  2
with the evolution of the effective marginal tax rate of the top 1% of the income distribution over
the subsequent 30 years or so following the election, both in terms of the timing and persistence
of the path of top tax rates. Therefore, bond markets have strong fiscal foresight with respect to
both the timing and the magnitude of the shocks. I then use the model to decompose the term
structure into tax news and other risk factors for the entire sample. I show that the decomposition
performs well for the remaining large tax changes in the sample period for which we do not have
quasi-natural experiments, in particular the Reagan tax cuts in the early 1980s.
    I directly address concerns that these other risk factors that affect the yield spreads could also
affect household spending. First, I show graphically that the low-frequency component of the term
structure of yield spreads reflects changes in expected tax rates, while high-frequency movements
are driven by other risk factors such as liquidity and credit risk. Consistent with this fact I find that
spending of higher-income households only responds to low-frequency changes of the yields, but not
to the high-frequency component. Moreover, I show that failing to decompose the yield spreads into
low- and high-frequency components attenuates the spending response substantially. This attenu-
ation is consistent with the high-frequency component introducing noise from the econometrician’s
perspective, i.e., spending-irrelevant innovations in bond yields.
    Second, I show that the results are robust to directly controlling for such risk factors with
standard measures used in the literature. Both the results from the two quasi-natural experiments
and the household spending response are robust to directly controlling for such bond risk factors.
    Third, consistent with the hypothesis that those other risk factors introduce noise in the house-
hold spending analysis, I find that during periods of bond market stress, when the yield spreads are
dominated by other risk factors rather than expected taxes, household spending does not respond
to the fiscal news measure based on these bond yields. On the other hand, household spending
strongly responds to the yield-based tax news measure when restricting the sample only to periods
prior to large tax reforms.
    Fourth, I control flexibly for other factors that could simultaneously drive both household spend-
ing and expected tax rates or bond yields. In particular, I use time fixed effects (i.e., year-by-month
dummies) to flexibly control for macroeconomic shocks, and household income and demographics to
control for other factors such as life-cycle effects and intertemporal substitution. Moreover, I focus
on post-1980 tax reforms for which the extensive narrative analysis of historical records by Romer
and Romer (2010) reveals that they are not driven by countercyclical motives or by contemporaneous
changes in government spending.
    While Romer and Romer (2010) label these tax changes that are orthogonal to the current state
of the economy and to current government spending as exogenous, forward looking households might
also care about future changes in government spending, which in the extreme case of an infinitely-
lived or dynastic representative agent with rational expectations leads to Ricardian equivalence and
no effect on current consumption as shown by Barro (1974). However, note that the focus of this
paper is on higher-income households. It seems reasonable that many cuts in future government


                                                   3
spending or transfers, such as the welfare reforms in the 1990s which partially financed the tax cuts of
the 1980s, affected higher income households much less than the previous tax cuts. Consistent with
this hypothesis I find no difference in behavior between households with and without mortgages,
even though the former might fear a repeal of the mortgage interest deduction which mostly benefits
higher-income households. Similarly, I do not find a difference in the response of families with and
without children. Hence, higher-income parents do not factor in potentially lower government
services more than households without children even though their children would most likely be
affected by those changes. Finally I show that younger households tend to respond slightly more to
the tax changes than older households despite the fact that they are more likely to be affected by
any potential off-setting government spending changes in the future.
    Although I do not find empirical evidence in favor of Ricardian equivalence, it is possible that
the tax changes have effects on future pre-tax income, say through supply-side effects such as
higher economic growth, wages and labor supply. The tax reforms in the sample affected marginal
rates substantially and are not the lump-sum tax changes required to derive Ricardian equivalence.
Hence, higher-income households today might respond to the combined net effects of changes in
expected future tax rates on future after-tax income. Consistent with this possibility I find that the
tax reforms in the 1980s, which lowered marginal tax rates the most, elicit the largest consumption
response with an elasticity of −1.4, although the precision is too low to statistically reject that the
response is the same as over the entire sample period 1980-2001. Nevertheless, we can strongly
reject the hypothesis that higher-income households do not take into account the (net) effects of
expected future tax rates in their current consumption decisions.
    Finally, consistent with the hypothesis that the expected tax changes do affect higher- and lower-
income households differently, I show that only higher-income households that are substantially
affected by the expected tax changes captured in the municipal yield spreads do indeed respond to
the fiscal news. Specifically, households in the top income tax brackets strongly respond to news
about future top income tax rates, while households in lower tax brackets whose tax rates exhibit
low correlation with the top tax rate do not respond to the same measure of fiscal news.
    This paper touches on several strands of literature. To the best of my knowledge, it provides
the first direct evidence of the effect of news about future after-tax income on consumption at the
household-level. The household consumption response to a well identified news shock estimated in
this paper therefore fills an important gap in the large literature that estimates the life-cycle model
of consumption; see e.g., Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) for an excellent survey.
    This paper also relates to a more recent literature in macroeconomics, which uses aggregate time
series variation to quantify the role of news and uncertainty shocks in explaining business cycles;
see Lorenzoni (2011) for a survey of the macroeconomics of news shocks, and Bloom (2009) and
Baker, Bloom and Davis (2016) and the literature therein for studies of the effect of uncertainty
shocks on the macro economy. This study contributes to the news shock literature by identifying the
news component of an important observable shock—changes in top personal income tax rates. The


                                                   4
previous literature instead focuses mostly on news about future Total Factor Productivity (TFP),
which is not directly observable. Hence, a particular advantage of this approach is the fact that the
performance of the news measure can be visually assessed by comparing it to the evolution of the
corresponding realized tax rate.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 first provides non-parametric evidence of fiscal foresight
contained in bond prices and then extracts forward tax rates from a model of the term structure
of municipal yield spreads. Section 2 uses two quasi-natural experiments to quantify the degree of
fiscal foresight in bond prices and to assess the models ability to relate subsequent legislated tax
changes to the observed reduced-form responses of the yield spreads. Section 3 uses the identified
tax news shocks to estimate the spending response of higher-income households, and section 4
provides extensive robustness checks. Section 5 concludes.


1 Determinants of Municipal Yield Spreads
    This section extracts the path of expected tax rates from the term structure of municipal yield
spreads which are used in section 3 to estimate the response of high-income household to fiscal news.
I start by providing non-parametric evidence that future tax rates predict changes in relative yield
spreads well, especially at lower frequencies. I then analyze three other factors that could affect
the yield spread besides expected tax rates, namely default risk, state income taxes, and changes
in liquidity risk or tax uncertainty. I limit the effect of liquidity and default risk by using only a
subset of high-quality municipal bond yields, and matching them with taxable Treasury yields of
off-the-run bonds which are less liquid and hence resemble more closely the municipal bonds than
the typical on-the-run Treasury yields.1 However, these unobserved factors affect the yield spreads
at higher frequencies. I therefore extend the traditional model of municipal yield spreads to allow
for both changes in expected tax rates and for a latent factor that captures such unobserved risks.2
    In order for the implied tax rates—which I call break-even tax rates (BETR) because of the
similarity to the concept of the break-even inflation rate—to reflect expected tax rates, it is impor-
tant to identify who the marginal investor is and hence which tax parameter is identified by the
yield spread. Moreover, the marginal investor has to be stable over the sample period in order for
changes in break-even tax rates to reflect changes in expected tax rates rather than changes in the
marginal investor. Household-level data from the Survey of Consumer Finances and aggregate data
from the Flow of Funds suggest that the marginal investor during the sample period from 1977 to
2001 is indeed a high-income household. I formally test this hypothesis in the next section using
two presidential elections as quasi-natural experiments, and I estimate the degree of fiscal foresight
contained in the municipal yield spreads. While these tests do not rely on the model of the term
   1
     Treasury bonds that are issued before the most recently issued bond of a particular maturity are called off-the-
run, while the most recently issued bond is called on-the-run.
   2
      Interpreting the model more broadly as a linear approximation of a more general but potentially non-linear
model, such as the model proposed by Green (1993) for example, the latent factor also reflects higher-order terms of
the linear approximation.


                                                         5
structure of yield spreads developed in this section, I find that the model performs well in relat-
ing the reduced-form responses estimated during the two presidential elections to the subsequent
legislated tax changes.
    This section also relates to a large literature in empirical finance that analyzes the determinants
of the municipal yield spreads. Early studies such as Fama (1977), Poterba (1986), Kochin and Parks
(1988), Green (1993), or Fortune (1996) use different tax rates to model the municipal yield spread.
This paper contributes to this literature by identifying the marginal investor for an important class of
assets and shows that the disagreement about the fundamental determinants of the municipal yield
spread might be due to changes in the marginal investor over time, in particular before and after the
1970s. While high-income households appear to be the marginal investors since the late 1970s, bank
corporations were probably the marginal investors in the 1960s and early 1970s. Moreover, I show
that economic fundamentals explain most of the variation in the municipal yield spread over long
horizons, i.e., at lower frequencies, while liquidity, credit risk or discount rate shocks are important
for high frequency movements. Previous studies that found changes in tax rates to be important
determinants of changes in the municipal yield spread include Mankiw and Poterba (1996), Slemrod
and Greimel (1999), and Ayers, Cloyd and Robinson (2005).

1.1 Bond Data
    Municipal bond yields are taken from two sources. Weekly data of an index of AAA general-
obligation municipal bond yields between 1976 and 1983 come from Delphis Hanover. From 1983
on I use daily data provided by Thomson Municipal Market Monitor. I use the one year of overlap
between the two sources to verify that the two series are almost identical. The data reflect generic
yield curves of transactions of $2 million or more that are the general preference of institutional
investors and reflect the prices of the highest-grade AAA rated general obligations issued by states.
The bonds used to generate the yield curve are not subject to the alternative minimum tax (AMT).
    The Treasury term-structure is the off-the-run par yield curve taken from Gürkaynak, Sack and
Wright (2007). On-the-run Treasury yields and corporate bond yields are also used as controls for
credit and liquidity risk spreads in the quasi-natural experiments and are taken form the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Historical Data Table H.15. Additional data that reflect
bond market conditions include the 30-Day Visible Supply, which is the total dollar volume of new
municipal bonds carrying maturities of 13 months or more that are scheduled to reach the market
within 30 days and is taken from the Bond Buyer newspaper.

1.2 Non-Parametric Evidence of Fiscal Foresight in Bond Prices
  I define the break-even tax rate θt,m as the parameter that equalizes the yield of a tax-exempt
                 M
municipal bond, yt,m , with the after-tax yield of a taxable Treasury bond of the same maturity m




                                                   6
at date t as

                                                      T      M
                                       (1 − θt,m ) · yt,m = yt,m ,                                 (1)

        T
where yt,m   denotes the before-tax Treasury yield. If there was no uncertainty and if taxes were
constant over the maturity of the two bonds, then the break-even tax rate (BETR) would equal the
marginal tax rate of the marginal investor, i.e., θt,m = τ . (Below I show how to interpret the BETR
when allowing for non-constant expected tax rates and for unobserved risk factors.)
    Figure 1 provides non-parametric evidence that municipal yield spreads indeed reflect expec-
tations of future tax rates, especially at lower frequencies, by contrasting the 2- and the 15-year
BETR with the marginal tax rate of the top 1% of the income distribution, taken from Saez (2004).
The figure shows both the raw data as well as the trend component after applying a low-pass filter
explained in more detail in the next section. The 2-year BETR follows the effective marginal tax
rate of the top 1% closely, with the exception of the early 1990s, suggesting that the marginal
investor is a household in the top of the income distribution. This finding is consistent with the fact
that incentives to hold tax-exempt debt increase with the effective marginal tax rate. Importantly,
movements in the 2-year BETR anticipate movements in the top tax rate. Moreover, short-term
bonds are less affected by other risk factor such as credit risk or liquidity.
    The 15-year BETR on the other hand, which averages expected future tax rates over a longer
horizon, behaves differently. It sharply decreases during the early 1980s in anticipation of the
Reagan tax cuts and stays relatively constant until the late 1990s when it starts to decline again
in anticipation of the Bush tax cuts of the early 2000s. The fact that the time series of BETRs
with different maturities do not move one-for-one suggests that the bond market forecasts both the
timing of future income tax changes and the expected path or expected persistence of the tax changes
well. The two quasi-natural experiments discussed in the next section confirm this conjecture. In
particular, longer-term yield spreads respond strongly to changes in election probabilities and the
response is quantitatively consistent with long-term differences between the proposed tax reforms.
Hence, the lower level of the 15-year BETR in Figure 1 does not reflect a disconnect between
expected taxes and yields, but instead is consistent with a risk premium that is increasing in the
bond maturity.
    Figure 1 also shows that the 2-year and the 15-year break-even tax rates are generally below the
top marginal tax rate, reflecting a risk premium for other factors than expected tax rates, which
is more important for longer-term bonds than for short-term bonds. Hence, longer-term bonds
demand a larger compensation for such risks than short-term bonds. The finding that the relative
risk premium increases with the maturity of the yield spread is consistent with a large literature
on the so-called “muni puzzle,” the observation that the slope of the municipal bond yield curve
is almost always steeper than the slope of the Treasury yield curve. There is a large literature in
finance that tries to explain this fact, but it seems fair to say that so far no single explanation of
this puzzle has emerged.

                                                   7
1.3 Factors other than Expected Tax Rates Affecting Yield Spreads
   Of course, there are other factors than expected tax rates that affect municipal yield spreads,
especially at higher frequencies. I next discuss the three most important factors.

Credit risk: The first factor that comes to mind is probably default or credit risk. In order to
eliminate, or at least minimize, the effect of credit risk on the yield spreads, I use only the highest
quality municipal bonds available. In particular, the municipal yield curve used in this paper is
based on AAA-rated general-obligation state bonds. State bonds are a subset of all municipal bonds
and benefit from the same federal tax exemption. They are more liquid compared to other types
of municipal bonds; see e.g., Harris and Piwowar (2004). General-obligation bonds are backed by
the full faith and credit of the issuing state, similar to the backing of Treasury bonds. The last
default of any state general-obligation bond occurred in 1933 and was only temporary (Hempel
(1971)). Moreover, municipal bonds in general and general-obligation bonds in particular have a
high recovery rate. For instance, Fitch Ratings (2007) assumes that general-obligation bonds recover
100% of par within one year of default. The prime-grade general-obligation municipal bonds used
in this paper are therefore essentially free from default risk.
    While municipal bond defaults have been rare historically—especially for state general-obligation
bonds—it is nevertheless conceivable that such rare default events affect municipal bond prices.
Using pre-refunded municipal bonds, which are escrowed at the Treasury Department and bear the
same default risk as Treasury bonds, Chalmers (1998) shows that default risk cannot explain the
observed yield spread for such bonds.3

State income taxes: State personal income taxes are another factor that might confound the
relationship between the investor’s marginal federal tax rate and the municipal yield spreads. While
interest on municipal bonds is generally exempt from federal income taxes and interest on Treasury
bonds is exempt from state and local income taxes, nothing prevents states from taxing interest on
municipal bonds. Many states exempt municipal bond interest from state and local income taxes,
either for all or at least for in-state investors, and several states do not collect personal income
taxes at all. Moreover, investors have strong incentives to avoid paying state taxes on municipal
bonds, for instance by investing in municipal bonds of their state of residence (Babina, Jotikasthira,
Lundblad and Ramadorai (2015)).
    Using 10-year yields of four states,4 which span the spectrum of possible tax treatments of in-
state and out-of-state municipal bond investors, I find that the maximum yield spread between
   3
     Credit default swaps (CDS) data for municipal bonds becomes available only in 2005 and remains illiquid.
   4
     Pennsylvania exempts both in-state and out-of-state municipal bond investors; Massachusetts exempts in-state
investors from state taxes but taxes out-of-state investors; Illinois taxes both in-state and out-of-state investors; and
Texas has no personal income tax. All state bonds are AAA-rated general obligations, with the exception of Illinois,
for which there are no AAA general-obligation bonds available in the sample. Instead, I use AA-rated state bonds
that are insured against default risk so that they are comparable to the other AAA-rated general-obligation bonds.
The sample starts in 1996, the first year I have data on individual state bonds.


                                                           8
those state bonds is on average 7 basis points and hence an order of magnitude smaller than the
spread to similar 10-year Treasury bonds, which is on average 132 basis points over the same period.
This strongly suggests that state taxes are not an important determinant of municipal yield spreads
relative to federal income tax rates.

Liquidity and other risk factors: The main remaining factors that can affect municipal yield
spreads other than expected tax rates are therefore liquidity risk and potentially tax uncertainty.
To minimize the effect of liquidity shocks on the yield spread I use off-the-run Treasury bonds,
which are less liquid than on-the-run issues and are therefore more similar to municipal bonds, and
I use state bonds, which are the most liquid municipal bonds. However, the off-the-run Treasury
bond market is still much more liquid than the most liquid municipal bond market. To account for
such risk factors, I next extend the traditional model of municipal yield spreads to include a latent
risk factor and to allow for changes in the path of expected tax rates.

1.4 A Model of Break-Even Tax Rates (BETR)
    Interest income from Treasury bonds is exempt from state and local taxes, but is subject to
federal income taxes, while interest on municipal bonds is exempt from federal income taxes and
from state income taxes for most investors. In order to interpret the yield data it is important to
note that the relative municipal yield spread is different from the expected tax rate. Similarly, the
yield spread between nominal and real Treasury bonds—the so-called break-even inflation rate—
does not equal the expected rate of inflation. However, in both cases the yield spreads are related
to the underlying expectations. To formalize this relationship I start with the definition of the par
yield of a Treasury bond. Since Treasury bonds are taxed based on their imputed par yield, the par
bond is the natural concept when analyzing the effects of taxes on bond prices, while zero coupon
bonds are the starting point of most fixed-income models, which abstract from taxes; see Kueng
(2012) for more detail on the tax treatment of bonds since 1970.
                T
    The yield yt,m on a Treasury bond maturing in m years and selling at par at date t is implicitly
           5
defined by
                                    Xm
                                                         T
                                1=      Et [Ds (1 − τs )yt,m ] + Et [Dm ].                        (2)
                                         s=1


Ds is the stochastic discount factor of after-tax income s years ahead. In order to satisfy equation
(2), the Treasury par yield y T needs to increase in response to an increase in expected future tax
rates Et τs , holding fixed the discount factor D.
   5
     To simplify notation I abstract here from the fact that coupon payments are semi-annual rather than annual,
but I take this into account when analyzing the data. Moreover, whenever possible I use the first subscript—usually
t—to denote calendar or “household time” and the second subscript—usually m or s—to denote the forecast horizon
                          T
in years. For example, yt,m    is the yield at date t (today) on a Treasury bond (T ) that matures in m years. For
bond yields, calendar time t is daily or weekly before or after 1983, respectively. “Household time” t in the CEX
is quarterly such that ∆t xt is the quarterly change of xt . However, since the CEX is a monthly rotating panel, the
overall sampling frequency of the consumption data is monthly.

                                                         9
                                 M
       Similarly, the par yield yt,m of a similar tax-exempt municipal bond is given by

                                                 m
                                                 X
                                                                M
                                           1=          Et [Ds (yt,m − λs,m )] + Et [Dm ],                        (3)
                                                 s=1


where λ is a latent stochastic factor capturing such liquidity shocks and potentially any effects of
tax uncertainty. To satisfy equation (3), the municipal par yield y M has to increase to compensate
a positive liquidity shock λ, holding fixed the discount factor D.6
    The marginal investor is indifferent between investing one more dollar in a Treasury or a mu-
nicipal bond with the same maturity. Let M be the longest maturity available. Solving (2) and (3)
as a function of the relative municipal yield spread y M /y T results in7

                         M    m                      Pm                  Pm
                        yt,m       Et Ds                     Et Ds λs,m       Cov (D , τ )
                                                                           Pm t s s ,
                             X
                                                         s=1
              θt,m   ≡1− T =     Pm          ·Et τs − T Pm              + s=1                                    (4)
                        yt,m           Et Di         y        i=1 Et Di       i=1 Et Di
                             s=1 | i=1
                                     {z }            | t,m {z          } |      {z       }
                                           (m)
                                          wt,s                        Λλ                    Λτt,m
                                                                       t,m



                                                           (m)           (m)
which can be written in vector form as θt,m = wt 0 Et τ − Λt . The sum of the liquidity premium
                                       (m)
Λλ and the tax risk premium Λτ is Λt = Λλt,m − Λτt,m . The expected tax path over the horizon
M is given by the vector Et τ = (Et τ1 . . . Et τM )0 . wt = (wt,1 . . . wt,m 0 . . . 0)0 is the vector of
                                                         (m)      (m)      (m)

                              (m)                (m)
annuity weights such that wt 0 Et τ = m
                                        P
                                           s=1 wt,s Et τs is the annuity value of the path of expected
tax rates over the maturity m of the two bonds.8 Equation (4) reveals that the BETR is in general
a weighted average of expected future tax rates over the maturity of the bonds less a premium Λ.
    Since the market for Treasuries is more liquid than the most liquid municipal bond market, and
because liquidity demand is high in bad times, the liquidity premium Λλ is likely non-negative on
average. Moreover, marginal income tax rates are low in bad times because of the progressivity of
the income tax and the possibility of countercyclical tax policies. After an extensive analysis of the
narratives surrounding all major post-war tax changes, Romer and Romer (2010) conclude that all
income tax changes from 1980 to 2001—with one minor exception in 2001—are not countercyclical
policies or spending related but motivated by concerns about the long-run growth rate or the federal
debt. Hence, the tax risk premium Λτ is likely primarily due to the progressivity of the income
   6
      I add the latent shocks in a linear way to obtain an analytical expression that is linear in both the path of
expected tax rates as well as the risk premium; see equation (4) below. Adding the shock in a multiplicative way
does not change the conclusions. In an ideal setting we would have two identical bonds with the exception that one
is taxable and the other is tax-exempt. y M − λ is the risk-adjusted municipal yield that proxies for such an ideal
but unobserved tax-exempt Treasury bond.
    7
      Equating (2) and (3) implicitly assumes that both bonds are held to maturity, thereby abstracting from the
timing of capital gains and losses. However, unexpected capital gains on both municipal and Treasury bonds are
taxable at the capital gains tax rate. Therefore, the yield spread between the two bonds cancels out any first-order
effects of capital gains taxes.
    8
      When I calculate the weights in the empirical section below I take into account that coupon payments are
                                      M                                                                   (m)
semi-annual and use Et [Ds ] = (1 + yt,s /2)−2s . In the absence of discounting, the first m elements of wt are equal
                                                                                   (m)
to 1/m. With discounting, the weights are generally decreasing in m such that wt,m < 1/m. If the tax-exempt yield
curve steepens, then future income is discounted more heavily, leading the weights on future tax rates to decrease.


                                                           10
tax over the period 1977-2001. The progressivity induces an insurance mechanism by paying larger
after-tax interest in bad times and lower after-tax income in good times. The tax premium is
therefore likely non-positive. In this paper I do not attempt to separate these two risk factors, and
I refer to them jointly as the (liquidity) risk premium.9
    Stacking equation (4) for the entire term structure of length M I obtain a system of equations
that provides a mapping between the M break-even tax rates θt and the underlying path of expected
forward tax rates Et τ over the forecasting horizon of 1 to M years at any point in time t,

                                                  θt = Wt Et τ − Λt .                                                  (5)

                                                                                (1)       (M ) 0
Wt is the M -by-M lower triangular annuity weighting matrix [wt . . . wt                      ] and the vector of risk
                          (1)      (M )
premia is given by Λt = (Λt . . . Λt )0 .

Identity and stability of the marginal investor: In order to recover the underlying path of
expected tax rates Et τ , one needs to know the marginal tax rate of the marginal investor and correct
for the risk premium Λt . Moreover, as mentioned above, for the analysis of the response of current
household consumption to expected future tax rates in the next section it is important to identify
the entire path of expected tax rates Et τ from the term structure of break-even tax rates θt . Two
tax reforms that affect the expected after-tax lifetime income by the same amount should have the
same effect on current consumption independent of the timing of the tax changes, abstracting from
credit constraints and precautionary saving.
    Using Flow of Funds data, Ang, Bhansali and Xing (2007) show that starting in the 1970s,
households hold the vast majority of municipal bonds, both directly and through mutual funds,
suggesting that a household is the marginal investor and hence that expected personal income tax
rates are reflected in the relative bond prices. However, we need to know which households own
municipal bonds in order to determine the marginal tax rate identified by the relative bond spread.
Equally important, this marginal investor has to be stable in the income distribution in order for
changes in break-even tax rates to reflect changes in expected tax rates rather than changes in the
marginal investor holding fixed expected tax rates and any risk premium.
    Since equations (2) and (3) are first-order conditions of the marginal investor’s portfolio choice
problem, they should apply to all households holding both types of bonds. To analyze this claim
I use data from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is described in more detail in the
online appendix. I define the marginal tax rate of the marginal investor as the asset-weighted average
of the effective marginal tax rate over all households that own both taxable and tax-exempt bonds.
Figure 2 compares the estimates of the marginal investor’s marginal tax rate with the marginal tax
    9
P     To quantify Λτ I estimate the following population moments: mins {Cov(Ds , τ )}, maxs {Cov(Ds , τ )}, and
  s Et Ds . The estimates are −0.0013, 0.00128, and 13.80, the latter with a standard deviation of 2.02. Since
Λτ is only of order 1/1000, this calculation suggests that the tax risk premium is non-positive and negligible. How-
ever, this is only suggestive since I use the current yields to calculate Ds . For a recent study that separately estimates
the liquidity and tax uncertainty premium, see Longstaff (2011).


                                                            11
rates of different percentiles of the income distribution taken from Saez (2004). The marginal tax
rate of the marginal investor identified in the SCF is close to the tax rate of the top 1%. Since the
top two tax brackets move very closely during the sample period it is not important whether the
marginal investor is in fact in the top bracket or one bracket below that. The identification of the
household spending response to tax news shocks in the next section relies on changes in the path
of expected tax rates, not the level.


2 Identifying the Path of Expected Tax Rates
    In this section I first formally estimate the degree of fiscal foresight contained in municipal yield
spreads using two quasi-natural experiments. I then use the model of the term structure of municipal
yield spreads derived in the previous section to interpret the reduced-form coefficients obtained from
the experiments. Finally, having validated the model using the quasi-natural experiments, I use
it to measure expected tax rates over the entire sample period in order to estimate the household
spending response to future tax changes in the next section.

2.1 Two Presidential Elections as Natural Experiments
    The presidential elections of 1992 and 2000 are close to ideal quasi-natural experiments for
testing the model. During both elections the nominees from the Democratic and the Republican
Party campaigned on very different proposals concerning the top income tax rates. Furthermore,
these tax proposals received extensive coverage by the media and featured prominently in both the
primary and presidential debates; see Seib and Murray (1992) and Calmes (2000) for a comparison
of the campaign proposals.
    In 1992 Bill Clinton proposed to increase the top tax rate by 10% to deal with the high level of
government debt. His victory ultimately lead to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (OBRA
1993), which increased the top rate by 8.6% retroactively back to January 1, 1993. Importantly,
OBRA 1993 left the dividend and the long-term capital gains tax rates unchanged.10 President
George H.W. Bush, having broken his tax pledge from the 1988 election campaign, promised not
to raise any taxes.
    Similarly, during the presidential election of 2000 George W. Bush proposed to cut taxes across
the board—including the top rate—by about 5%, using the budget surplus that accumulated under
President Clinton. Incumbent Vice President Al Gore proposed tax breaks for low and middle
income taxpayers while leaving the top rates unchanged. Bush’s victory in 2000 ultimately lead
to the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA) and the Jobs and
Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA) which lowered the top income tax rate
by 4.6% over three years. Importantly, EGTRRA 2001 leaves the top corporate income, capital
  10
     OBRA 1993 also increased the top corporate tax rates, but only by 1% from 34% to 35%. George H.W. Bush
also proposed to cut long-term capital gains tax rates from 31% to 15.4%; see Seib and Murray (1992). However,
the estimates discussed below are inconsistent with both of those tax rate changes and instead strongly support top
personal income tax rates as the main driver of yield spread changes.

                                                        12
gains, and dividend tax rates unchanged.11 Hence, the combination of both elections also tests
whether it is indeed changes in the top personal income tax rate that drives changes in municipal
yield spreads during periods of fiscal news, rather than other tax rates such as capital gains taxes,
dividend income taxes, corporate income taxes, or personal income tax rates in lower tax brackets.
    I use data from the Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM), a political prediction market, which provides
daily prices of a winner-takes-all contract during the last few months of the presidential races of
1992 and 2000. Those contracts pay $1 if the specific candidate wins the popular vote and $0
otherwise. In the following I abstract from the difference between winning the popular vote and
winning the election. I checked the robustness of the results for the 2000 election to such differences
by dropping the last week of daily election data when such considerations became relevant, and
I obtained very similar results. Furthermore, since bets are limited to $500, market participants
cannot use the prediction markets to hedge their income tax risk. Therefore, changes in the prices
of such contracts can be interpreted as measuring daily changes in the election probability of the
presidential candidates; see Snowberg, Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2011) for a more extensive discussion
of the use of prediction markets for economic inference.
    Let pt be the price of a contract that pays $1 if George W. Bush wins the popular vote in 2000
and 0 otherwise. In the following I use the presidential election of 2000 to explain the analysis,
but the same applies for the election of 1992 substituting “Clinton” for “Bush.” Changes in these
contracts represent an alternative measure of changes in expected tax rates due to the difference
in the candidates’ tax proposals under the assumption that other factors, such as liquidity shocks
in the betting and bond markets, are uncorrelated conditional on observables. To address concerns
that shocks unrelated to tax expectations are correlated between the betting and bond markets, I
include additional variables zt that control for such factors like default and liquidity risk. I therefore
regress the BETR of each maturity θm,t on the election probability pt , while controlling for other
factors zt as well as maturity fixed effects αm ,12

                                                             0
                                      θt,m = βm · pt + αm + γm zt + εt,m .                                        (6)

    Table 1 reports the estimated response β̂m of the BETRs to changes in the election probability
in 2000 and 1992 for the eight most commonly traded maturities. Most coefficients are statistically
significantly different from zero and have the expected sign, positive for Bill Clinton’s and negative
for George W. Bush’s betting contract. Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) show the response of the entire
term-structure of the 30 break-even tax rates during the two elections. Importantly, we see that
the entire term-structure of BETRs responds to changes in the election probability. In fact, the
  11
     Later in his first term, President George W. Bush lowered the dividend tax rate and the long-term capital gains
tax rate to 15%, 5%, and 0% (JGTRRA 2003). However, these cuts were not part of his campaign platform; see
Calmes (2000).
  12
     The controls include measures of (il)liquidity such as the number of repeated prices, muni supply (negotiated and
competitive offers), on-the-run/off-the-run Treasury spread, prediction market volume and units traded; measures of
credit risk such as the pre-refunded spread, spreads between lower-grade municipal bonds; and the weekly standard
deviation of long-term treasuries to control for the effect of call options.

                                                         13
response of long-term rates is typically more precisely estimated than the response at the short end.
This shows that the lower level of long-term BETRs shown in Figure 1 does not reflect a disconnect
between expected taxes and yields, but instead is consistent with the presence of a risk premium
that is increasing in the maturity. The results here show that changes in BETRs strongly respond
to changes in expected tax rates at all maturities as predicted by the theory.
    To interpret the magnitudes of the estimated coefficients, note that the contracts pay 100 cents if
the candidate wins the popular vote and zero otherwise. Therefore, an increase of the price by 1 cent
corresponds to a 1% increase in the perceived probability of the candidate winning. Multiplying the
coefficients by 100 yields the predicted change in the BETRs if George W. Bush (Bill Clinton) wins
in 2000 (1992) relative to the counter-factual that Al Gore (George H.W. Bush) or the third-party
candidate wins.

Interpretation of the regression coefficients: The sign of the coefficients reported in Table 1
and shown Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) is consistent with the difference between the tax proposals
of the two major presidential candidates in both elections. In order to interpret the magnitudes of
the coefficients, it is important to remember that the break-even tax rate responses do not reflect
changes in expected tax rates, but instead are weighted averages of differences in the expected
path of tax rates under different presidents. However, we can use the model of the term structure
of municipal yield spreads derived in the previous section to give the reduced-form coefficients a
structural interpretation.
    Let Prt (Bush) denote the probability of Bush winning the election conditional on all information
available at time t. I assume that the price corresponds to the rational conditional probability
measure, i.e., pt = Prt (Bush). Using the law of iterated expectations, I decompose the conditional
expectation of the path of future tax rates Et τ as Et τ = (Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore]) · pt + Et [τ |Gore].
Substituting in (5) yields a structural interpretation of the system of the 30 regression equations

                        θt = Wt (Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore]) · pt + (Wt Et [τ |Gore] − Λt ) ,                           (7)

and in particular of the regression coefficient of interest, β = E[Wt ] (Et [τ |Bush]−Et [τ |Gore]).13 This
shows that the vector of population regressions β represents the annuity values of the difference in
the paths of expected tax rates (Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore]) between a world in which Bush wins the
election in 2000 and the counter-factual world in which Gore or the third-party candidate wins.
    Letting τtpf = (τt,1 . . . τt,M )0 denote the perfect-foresight path of realized tax rates at date t
over the horizon of 1 to M = 30 years, I calculate the hypothetical regression coefficients one would
  13
      E[·] without a subscript is defined as the average of the conditional expectations over the election sample, i.e.
           PT
E[x] ≡ T1 t=1 Et [x]. I searched the archives of The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal for articles that
would indicate a change in the tax proposal of the candidates during the sample period but did not find any. Hence
I assume that the relative difference between the tax proposals (Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore]) remains constant during
the final months of the election, i.e. Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore] = E[τ |Bush] − E[τ |Gore] ∀ t. Otherwise, β identifies the
average value of the relative difference between the two proposals during the final months of the presidential election,
i.e. β = E [Wt (Et [τ |Bush] − Et [τ |Gore])].

                                                             14
obtain under perfect foresight, β pf = E[Wt ](τtpf −τt ). Here I assume that the level of the unobserved
counter-factual tax path—Et [τ |Gore] in 2000 and Et [τ |H.Bush] in 1992 which is not identified by
the regression—is the status quo tax rate during the election year, i.e. τt = 39.6% in 2000 and
τt = 31% in 1992, respectively. Moreover, I show two scenarios for the tax path of future tax rates
beyond 2011, one in which the Bush tax cuts expire in 2011 as scheduled and one in which they
become permanent.
    Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) show the term-structure of the perfect-foresight coefficients, β pf .
While the regressions do not impose any restrictions on the sign, size, or the shape of the estimated
response β̂, the regression coefficients correspond closely to the perfect-foresight coefficients derived
from the model. Hence, the model does a good job at relating current changes in break-even tax
rates to the subsequent legislated tax changes.

Inferring the entire path of expected tax rates: Ultimately we are interested in the inverse
mapping of equations (5) and (7), i.e., E[τ |Bush] − E[τ |Gore] as a function of β, respectively Et τ
as a function of θt . These market-based expected tax rates can be interpreted as forward tax rates,
similar to forward interest rates derived from the term structure of spot rates. Recall that Wt is a
                                                                                      (M )
lower triangular annuity matrix with its last column vector given by (0 . . . 0 wt,M )0 . In the data,
  (M )
wt,M has a mean of 0.01 with a standard deviation of 0.003 and a minimum of 0.003, so Wt can
be close to singular. Inverting this matrix makes the solution sensitive to small perturbations of
β or θt that are unrelated to tax news. Instead of a direct inverse I use a robust inverse of Wt ,
known as a first-order ridge regression in the statistics literature.14 I impose that the expected tax
path is a smooth function across maturities m = 1, . . . , 30, since it is implausible that the expected
tax rate e.g. in 20 years is very different from the expected tax rate in 19 or 21 years. The robust
inverse penalizes such non-smooth solutions with a factor µ, called the regularization parameter.
The online appendix shows that the parameter µ only significantly affects long-run expectations
and discusses how to optimally choose µ.
    Figure 3(c) shows the path of expected tax rates during the presidential election of 2000 obtained
by inverting the regression coefficients β̂. The top tax rate is expected to decrease to 35% by the
year 2002 and to return quickly back to the initial level of 39.6%. Moreover, the bond markets
expect the initial tax cuts to be off-set by later tax increases above the initial level of 39.6%. One
interpretation is that the bond markets expect the tax cuts to be unsustainable. Compared to the
perfect-foresight tax path, the path of the expected tax rates returns quickly back to rates around
40%. The expected tax rate starts to increase sharply after four years, consistent for example with
expectations that President George W. Bush will serve only one term. Turning to the presidential
election of 1992, Figure 3(d) graphs the path of expected tax rates against the perfect-foresight path.
The bond markets correctly anticipate the new level of the top tax rate induced by the Clinton tax
  14
     The word regression can be misleading in this context since I do not perform statistical inference in the traditional
sense of projecting a vector from a larger onto a smaller space. Instead, the first-order ridge “regression” calculates
M forward tax rates Et τ from M observed break-even tax rates θt . The constraint on the first-derivative of the
solution is matched by the additional regularization penalty parameter µ. See the online appendix for more details.

                                                           15
increase in 1993. The path of expected tax rates slightly underestimates the duration of the Clinton
tax increase. The path also shows that the bond markets in 1992 expect the tax rates to return
back to the initial level in the long run. However, the tax cuts enacted under President W. Bush
“only” lowered the top rate to 35% instead of 31%, the level in 1992, or 33%, George W. Bush’s
initial campaign proposal.
    The two natural experiments show that the model of the BETRs given by equation (5) explains
changes in the relative municipal yield spread well in times of large fiscal news. They show that
the expected tax rates that underlie the BETRs forecast future top personal income tax rates
surprisingly well. The experiments also highlight the necessity of imposing some restrictions on the
solution to the inverse problem in order to obtain a smooth and hence reasonable path of expected
forward tax rates.

2.2 Deriving Expected Tax Rates from Break-Even Tax Rates
    Unfortunately, the additional source of variation provided by the election probabilities is not
available for the entire sample period from 1977 to 2001. Instead, I impose two identifying assump-
tions to recover Et τ from θt , and I check the robustness of the household spending response to those
assumptions extensively in section 4. The first assumption requires that the bond spreads reflect
rational-expectations, i.e., that the BETR forecast error is unbiased,
                                       E[Wt (Et τ − τtpf )] = 0 .                                 (8)
                                         |      {z      }
                                          BETR forecast error


The two natural experiments show that the marginal tax rate of the top 1% of the income dis-
tribution is the tax parameter that determines the municipal yield spreads (in the absence of any
shocks to the relative risk premium). Rearranging (5) and imposing (8) yields a measure of the
average risk premium, E[Λt ] = E[Wt τtpf − θt ]. Figure A1 in the online appendix shows the average
risk premium as a function of the maturity m, estimated globally over the entire sample from 1977
to 2001. Consistent with the muni puzzle, the average risk premium is monotonically increasing in
the maturity of the BETR. Adjusting for this average risk premium changes the relative level of
the BETRs, but does not affect changes and hence the estimated response of household spending
in the next section.
    The second identification assumption deals with temporary shocks to the risk premium. I assume
that households and the marginal investors form tax expectations independently of the municipal
yield spread. For instance, households read newspapers or follow political campaigns and use all
these sources of information to form expectations about future tax rates. The econometrician does
not directly observe those news sources, but can infer the aggregate information set by looking at
municipal yield spreads and interpret the data through the lens of the BETR model. For instance,
suppose the break-even tax rates decrease at date t but immediately rebound the next day, at t + 1.
The econometrician can use this fact to estimate the tax expectations at date t. He will conclude
that this change in break-even tax rates was most likely due to say a liquidity shock instead of

                                                    16
tax news. If he uses only past and current prices he will underestimate the rational information
set. This way of modeling tax news implies that the econometrician wants to use all prices—past,
current, and future—to infer the path of expected tax rates Et τ at any point in time.
    Filtering the tax news shocks from the “noise” shocks—i.e., the risk premium shocks—is impor-
tant since the tax news shocks form the regressor in the consumption analysis in the next section.
Liquidity shocks and other shocks that are unrelated to tax news introduce noise and therefore
potential attenuation bias of the household spending response coefficient, a fact I demonstrate in
the robustness section 4. Not dealing with this attenuation bias would lead to the conclusion that
households do not respond to news even if they in fact are forward-looking. To obtain a more
precise measure of the expected tax rates I use the two-sided low-pass filter proposed by Baxter
and King (1999) that passes all frequencies below two years. While the filter may remove some
tax news shocks in addition to risk premium shocks, it reduces potential attenuation bias in the
analysis of household consumption. Importantly, when estimating the household spending response
to tax news, I always include both the filtered news shock and the residual in the regression. Hence,
if the residual did contain information that is relevant to consumers, then we would expect it to
have a significant effect on household spending. The two-year low pass filter is motivated both by
visual inspection of the time series and by the fact that two years is the shortest period between two
income tax reforms in the sample (OBRA 1990 and OBRA 1993). Below I therefore also preform
extensive robustness checks of the household spending response to different thresholds as well as
different filters (see Figure 6).

2.3 The Bond Markets Anticipation of the Reagan Tax Cuts
    By far the largest change in top marginal rates during the sample period is the first Reagan
tax cut, the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which was part of President Regan’s election
platform. Since there does not exist a political prediction market for the election in 1980, I use
the methodology derived in the previous section to extract the path of expected tax rates from the
municipal yield spreads. Note that while Figure 1 already suggests that the Reagan tax cuts were
well anticipated, this is only a conjecture since the time series shown in Figure 1 are break-even tax
rates θt and not forward tax rates Et τ .
   Figure 4 shows the path of expected tax rates Et τ at the beginning of each year against the
perfect-foresight tax path τtpf for each month of January from 1977 to 1982.15 These paths of
expected tax rates are obtained by inverting the break-even tax rates of all available maturities.
They confirm the conjecture that the Reagan tax cuts were anticipated well before they were
implemented. The sequence of forward tax rates shows that taxes were expected to remain high
during Jimmy Carter’s presidency (1977-1980) and to even increase over the foreseeable future.
  15
     The web appendix of this paper (www.lorenzkueng.com) contains an animation of the evolution of Et [τ ] from
January 1977 to August 1982 that shows monthly changes in the path of expected tax rates over a 15-year forecasting
horizon. The forecast horizon for this period is 15 years because Treasury yields are not available at longer maturities
before 1983.


                                                          17
In fact, the upward sloping path of expected tax rates reflects proposals during the late 1970s by
President Carter to raise top income tax rates; see Poterba (1986). The increase is also consistent
with expected bracket creep due to rampant inflation during this time when tax brackets were not
yet indexed to inflation. Since the marginal tax rate of the marginal investor was well below the
top statutory rate (see Figure 2), expected increases in nominal income would push high-income
investors in even higher brackets.
    The long-run expectations decreased sharply during the presidential election of 1980 as it became
increasingly clear that Ronald Reagan would become the next president and would implement the
promised tax cuts. Between 1980 and 1982 as Reagan passed his first tax cut the bond market
also started to anticipate the second tax reform, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA 1986). This
figure reveals an astonishing degree of fiscal foresight contained in the municipal yield spreads. In
the next section I use these changes in the paths of expected tax rates to estimate the household
spending response to tax news as a first case study.
    The results in this section show that the time series of market-based tax expectations imply a
considerable amount of fiscal foresight. Moreover, the path of expected tax rates Et τ derived from
municipal yield spreads does a good job of recovering the underlying rational tax expectations.
However, while the wealthy households that invest in municipal bonds have a high degree of fiscal
foresight, their expectations may not be representative of (wealthy) consumers as a whole. In the
next section I quantify the degree of fiscal foresight of higher-income households by estimating the
household consumption response to tax news in order to learn more about consumer behavior and
the transmission of tax news shocks in the real economy.


3 Household Spending Response to Tax News
    To the best of my knowledge, this study is the first to test the standard life-cycle consumption
theory by estimating the spending response to changes in expected life-time resources at the house-
hold level before these income changes have been realized. It therefore fills an important gap in the
large empirical literature that tests the life-cycle model and its various extensions. Previous studies
in this literature have mostly focused on anticipated income shocks, for which the frictionless model
predicts no consumption responses (so called excess sensitivity tests), or they estimate the response
to unanticipated income shocks for which the model’s predicted response depends on the expected
persistence of the shock; see Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010). This paper is more closely related to
the latter as the tax news shock extracts the persistent component of a tax reform. However, an
important distinction of this study is that it estimates the response to a shock that is only expected
to be realized in the future and hence represents the present value of future anticipated tax changes.

3.1 Household-Specific Tax News Shocks
   The time series of tax expectations described above affects households differently depending
on how much of their future taxable income is affected by the expected tax changes. In an ideal

                                                  18
setting I would observe news shocks for each tax rate in each tax bracket as well as news about
changes of those tax brackets. Expected tax liabilities for each household could then be computed
by integrating over expected brackets and rates. In practice I only observe a time series of paths
of expected top tax rates. To take into account the cross-sectional heterogeneity in the exposure
of different households to the tax news shock I adopt an approach that combines a research design
similar to Bartik (1991) with the traditional Euler equation approach pioneered by Hall (1978).
Specifically, to estimate the effect β of changes in expected tax rates, summarized by ∆τtE , on
changes in nondurable and service consumption of household i, ∆cit , we would like to estimate a
regression equation of the following form,16

                                        ∆cit = β · ωi × ∆τtE + αt + εit ,                                       (9)

where ωi is a predetermined measure of the household’s exposure to the tax news shock, and αt is
a full set of time fixed effects (i.e., year-by-month dummies).17

A theory-based measure of household-level tax news: In the case of tax news shocks, we
have to deal with an entire vector of time series of expected future tax rates and we have to find
household-specific “importance” weights ωi that map this vector into a scalar household-specific tax
news shock. I use the standard life-cycle model to guide the analysis and I then preform extensive
robustness checks of the results to the different assumptions that I have to make in order to derive
these household-specific tax news shocks.
    To be as transparent as possible and in order to obtain an closed-form solution for the weights
ωi I use the certainty-equivalent version of the standard life-cycle model with quadratic preferences,
but a similar interpretation can be derived by log-linearizing the inter-temporal budget constraint;
see Campbell and Deaton (1989). This simplified model abstracts from three main effects. First, it
does not capture the effect of marginal tax rates on consumption via the inter-temporal substitution
channel triggered by changes in the effective after-tax interest rate. However, as mentioned above,
all regressions include a full set of time fixed effects, which absorb such effects to a first order. Sec-
ond, certainty equivalence ignores the effect of tax uncertainty on household consumption through
changes in precautionary savings. Third, the model ignores potential effects of changes in expected
marginal tax rates on current and future labor supply or any other indirect effects of marginal tax
rates on pre-tax income such as wages or growth effects in general equilibrium. It also abstracts
from non-separability of consumption and leisure. The regression coefficient β can therefore also
be interpreted as a reduced form of a more general model that would explicitly model—and more
importantly also separately identify—those channels, which is beyond the scope of this paper.
    With quadratic preferences, a constant interest rate r equal to the rate of time preference, and
household wealth evolving as At = (1 + r)(At−1 + Yt−1 − Ct−1 ), consumption changes can be written
  16
    Note that the Euler equation approach already differences out household fixed effects.
  17
    In the typical application of the Bartik approach, ωi would be something like the lagged and hence predetermined
industry shares of a local economy.

                                                        19
in closed form:
                                               H−t
                                               X
                             Cit − Ci,t−1 =          ws (Et − Et−1 )(Yi,t+s − Ti,t+s ).
                                               s=1

Y is income before taxes T , and the annuity weights are given by ws = 1+r r
                                                                              [1− (1+r)1H−t+1 ]−1 (1+r)−s .
Following Campbell and Deaton (1989), I normalize consumption changes by (taxable) income,
thereby expressing tax liabilities as average tax rates and making the model scale independent, a
particularly useful feature when working with micro data. Specifically, I divide by predetermined ad-
justed gross income Yilagged asked in the first interview, thereby avoiding the endogeneity that would
arise if we used current or future income, i.e., income asked in the last interview.18 The robustness
section below shows similar results when using lagged consumption (appropriately rescaled) as a
normalization of consumption changes.
    To bring the model more closely to the data, I replace the constant annuity weights with the
weights based on real after-tax discount factors used in the previous section, and I limit the house-
hold’s planning horizon H to the maximum available maturity M (usually 30 years),

                                                       M
                                  Cit − Ci,t−1         X        (M )
                         ∆cit ≡                  ≈−           wt,s (Et − Et−1 )τ̄i,t+s + εit .               (10)
                                    Yilagged            s=1


This equation shows that to a first approximation, changes in expected average tax rates determine
the growth rate of consumption. Moreover, the tax news shock has a natural interpretation: It is the
change in the expected annuity value of average tax liabilities, which is the permanent component of
expected future tax changes. The error term ε contains measurement error in consumption growth
as well as economic shocks such as news about future income growth and any other shocks that the
model ignores and for which I proxy with observable covariates in the empirical analysis.

From expected top marginal rates to expected average rates: To go from the observed
expected top marginal tax rates to the unobserved expected average tax rates I have to make two
assumptions. First, I assume that changes in the tax base—if they do occur—are perfectly foreseen.
With the exception of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA), which is I discuss in more detail in the
robustness section below and in the online appendix, this assumption is reasonable for the income
tax reforms in my sample because the brackets did not change much. In the robustness section I
show that excluding TRA from the sample by focusing on the later period starting in the mid-1990s
yields similar results. Second, I scale the perfect-foresight tax rate τt+s (b) in each lower income
bracket b < B (where B denotes the top tax bracket) by a measure of foresight implied by current
expectations of future top tax rates. This measure is the ratio of the market-based expected top
tax rate Et τt+s ≡ Et τt+s (B) to the perfect-foresight top tax rate τt+s (B) ≡ τt+s , where the latter is
  18
     Note that the survey asks households only in the first and last interview about their annual income, while
expenditures are asked in each quarterly interview for the previous three months. Hence, income asked in the first
interview is fully predetermined relative to all quarterly consumption changes a household reports in subsequent
interviews.

                                                          20
taken from Saez (2004). We can therefore express the unobserved expected lower-bracket tax rates
in terms of observed quantities,19

                                                                   Et τt+s (B)
                                        Et τt+s (b) = τt+s (b) ×               .                                  (11)
                                                                    τt+s (B)

This means that if households have perfect foresight about the top marginal tax rate (i.e., if they
correctly guess the future tax rate such that the second term is one), they also have perfect foresight
about the lower bracket rates. Since the empirical analysis restricts the sample to higher-income
households, defined as the top quartile of the income distribution for which policy-induced changes
in average tax rates are highly correlated with changes in the top marginal tax rate, this assumption
does not affect the results much. In the robustness section I analyze the sensitivity of the results
to this assumption. First, I obtain essentially the same results when using only the smaller subset
of households in the top 10% percentile who are not much affected by assumptions about expected
rates in lower tax brackets, because most of their income falls into the higher brackets. Second,
I show that if we instead fix the lower bracket rates at their current predetermined level based
on the current tax code (i.e., if we use τt (b) instead of τt+s (b)) I obtain very similar results. This
essentially implements the Bartik approach without using the life-cycle model to derive the correct
cross-sectional weights.
    With these assumptions, changes in household-specific expected average tax rates can be written
as
                              X Bi,t+s (b)τt+s (b) (Et − Et−1 )τt+s    τ̄i,t+s
        (Et − Et−1 )τ̄i,t+s =                     ·                 =          (Et τt+s − Et−1 τt+s ),
                              b
                                     Yi,t+s             τt+s            τt+s

where Bi,t+s (b) is the income household i receives in tax bracket b. The expected change in the top
tax rate (Et −Et−1 )τt+s , which is identified using the municipal yield spreads, can now be interpreted
                                                                                    τ̄
as the signal that the household receives between date t − 1 and t. The term τi,t+s    t+s
                                                                                           is a measure of
the relevance of the signal for the household’s consumption decision. This corresponds closely to the
“importance weight” ωi in the Bartik approach described above: If this ratio is low then the impact
of news about the top tax rate in s years has only a small impact on the household’s expected
after-tax lifetime income, and a rational household should therefore largely ignore the signal. On
the other hand, if the ratio is large, then the household should pay close attention to the signal.
     It is important to note that this assumption does not imply that the expected change in the
average tax rate is the same for all households. To see this, suppose that the expected future
tax schedule in s years from now has only two tax rates, 10% and 50%. Let the first tax bracket
range from $0 to $10,000 so that all income above $10,000, which is the second income bracket, is
expected to be taxed at the 50% rate. Suppose that the expected top tax rate increases by 10%, i.e.
∆t Et+1 τt+s (B)
    τt+s (B)
                 = 0.1 such that the lower tax rate increases by 1 percentage point from 10% to 11%
  19
      Since the sampling frequency is quarterly at the household-level while expectations are formed over annual
intervals, I assume that the perfect-foresight variables do not change between quarters, so that (Et+1 − Et )τt+s (b) =
τt+s (b) × (Et+1τ−Et )τt+s
                 t+s
                           .


                                                          21
and the top tax rate by 5 percentage points from 50% to 55%. The expected average tax rate of a
household with an income of $10,000 increases by 1 percentage point, while the expected average
tax rate of a household with an income of $15,000 increase by 21/3 percentage points. Moreover, the
expected change of the average tax rate approaches 5 percentage points as income goes to infinity,
which equals the expected change of the top tax rate. Figure A2 in the online appendix shows
the cross-sectional treatment heterogeneity for each tax reform in the sample. Using the NBER
TAXSIM calculator, I compute perfect-foresight average tax rates {τ̄i,t+s }M  s=0 for each household i
in the CEX that depend on the head of household’s age and the household’s predetermined income
percentile. These income profiles allow for predictable changes in average tax rates due to the hump
shape of the life-cycle income profile and are described in more detail in the data section and the
appendix.
    As mentioned above, the assumption in equation (11) is least restrictive for higher-income house-
holds for which changes in the top tax rate are closely related to changes in their average tax rate.
For this reason I focus on the consumption response of higher-income households to tax news. Fig-
ure 5 shows that changes in average tax rates for households in the top quartile of the adjusted
gross income distribution (AGI) are highly correlated over the sample period, although they are not
perfectly correlated. I therefore choose the top income quartile of households (by tax filer status and
year) in the CEX as my baseline sample, and I then analyze how the results change as I change this
threshold. The different income distribution cut-offs trade off measurement error with statistical
power: While including more households that are further away from the top tax bracket increases
the precision of the estimates, it potentially biases the results if assumption (11) is less appropriate
for those additional households, i.e., if tax news shocks are less well measured with municipal yield
spreads for those households.

Estimation equation: The basic life-cycle model provides both a prescription for how to con-
struct tax news shocks for each household in the CEX as well as an interpretation of the coefficient
β of the following regression of the consumption growth rate on the tax news shock,

                                  M
                                                                            !
                                  X      (M )   τ̄i,t+s
                 ∆cit = β ·             wt,s            (Et τt+s − Et−1 τt+s ) + αt + φ0 zit + εit .   (12)
                                  s=1
                                                   τs
                              |                          {z                   }
                                   household-specific tax news shock

αt is a full set of year-by-month time fixed effects and zit is a vector of additional controls that are
standard in the literature. In particular, zit includes a quadratic in the age of the reference person,
quarterly changes in the number of adults and children, as well as other household characteristics
such as family size, the maximum level of education achieved by either the reference person or the
spouse, marital status, and the composition and number of earners. Furthermore, it also contains all
the variables (i.e., the “main effects”) used to construct the tax news shock—which is an interaction
term—such as federal adjusted gross, the household’s tax filing status, all perfect-foresight average

                                                           22
tax rates (τ̄i,t+s ), and the tax news shock formed with the residual of the low-pass filter applied
to the break-even tax rates. The robustness section provides an extensive analysis of the effect of
different time-series filter choices on the estimated consumption response.
     Strictly speaking, the model predicts that β = −1, i.e., that consumption moves one-for-one
with a change in the expected annuity value of life-cycle after-tax income, that is with permanent
income. However, one should keep in mind the many simplifying assumptions discussed above that
were required to obtain such a sharp prediction. Hence, finding a household response to this measure
of tax news that is different from −1 should not be taken as a rejection of the rational-expectation
life-cycle model of household consumption. The more relevant null hypothesis is β = 0, which
holds if households are not forward-looking at all. This null hypothesis therefore turns the typical
excess sensitivity test of the rational-expectation permanent income hypothesis (PIH) on its head.
Instead of testing the sharp prediction of PIH for the consumption response to predictable cash-flow
shocks (see e.g., Kueng (2016)), this null hypothesis tests the sharp prediction of models with no
forward-looking behavior—such as hand-to-mouth behavior—for the consumption response to news
shocks.

3.2 Identification of Forward-Looking Behavior
    The tax news response β is identified if news about future tax changes are uncorrelated with other
innovations ε that affect the household’s current consumption decision, conditional on observables
                                                         (M ) τ̄i,t+s
zt and time fixed effects αt , that is if Cov( M
                                                P
                                                  s=1 wt,s τt+s (Et τt+s − Et−1 τt+s ), εit |zit , αt ) = 0. As
discussed above, the year-by-month time fixed effects control for changes in the average interest
rate and hence for intertemporal substitution of spending, and they also control for the extent to
which fiscal policy is used to counteract aggregate fluctuations in economic activity. While fiscal
policy was extensively used prior to the 1980s, it was largely replaced by monetary policy as the main
countercyclical policy tool since then, at least until very recently. The extensive narrative analysis of
Romer and Romer (2010) therefore concludes that all income tax changes between 1980 and 2003—
with one minor exception in 2001—are not countercyclical nor did they coincide with changes in
government spending.20 Romer and Romer classify those income tax reforms as exogenous, driven
either by attempts to increase long-run economic growth (ERTA 1981, TRA 1986, EGTRRA 2001
and JGTRRA 2003) or by concerns about the federal budget deficit (OBRA 1990 and OBRA 1993).
    While the tax reforms in the sample are orthogonal to the current state of the economy—and
hence exogenous according to the terminology of Romer and Romer—, the corresponding tax news
shocks might nevertheless be correlated with news about future pre-tax income. Thus, while it is
not possible to fully rule out that the consumption response is at least partially driven by correlated
income news shocks, a consumption response to either type of shock still indicates that households
  20
     The minor exception is the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Tax Act of 2001 (EGTRRA). The
countercyclical part of EGTRRA concerns the accelerated implementation of the tax cuts but it does not concern
the overall size of the cuts. For instance, Romer and Romer (2008) note that “this [countercyclical] motivation was
almost always discussed in the context of making some of the cuts retroactive to January 1, 2001 rather than having
them begin on January 1, 2002.” (p.84)

                                                        23
are forward-looking.
    One final concern is that other shocks to the bond markets such as liquidity risk are correlated
with the business cycle or with bad income news in general. To assess the potential bias introduced,
note that when financial markets are under stress—such as during the financial crisis of 2008-2010—
the liquidity premium on Treasury bonds tends to increase. Such periods are also associated with
lower consumption. An increase in the demand for liquidity provided by Treasury bonds relative
to municipal bonds increases the relative price for Treasuries and hence lowers the Treasury yield
relative to the yield on municipal bonds. Equation (4) shows that this mechanism causes the BETRs
θt to decrease and therefore decreases the measured path of expected forward tax rates Et τt . To
the extent that such liquidity shocks are not absorbed by year-by-month time fixed effects, by
the filtering of the time series, or by directly controlling for them, they induce a spurious positive
correlation between changes in the measured path of expected tax rates and consumption changes.
This potential correlation leads the response coefficients to be biased upward against the forward-
looking consumption model. For these reasons—that income tax reforms in the sample are unrelated
to the current state of the economy, and that any remaining liquidity shock biases the results against
the basic model—estimating regressions of the form (12) provide a meaningful assessment of the
response of higher-income households’ consumption to news about future taxes. Furthermore, the
robustness section addresses this concern directly by including the yield residual and by directly
controlling for such bond risk factors.

3.3 Household Spending Data
    I use data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), which is the most comprehensive
data source on household consumption in the U.S. A more detailed description of the data and data
steps is provided in the appendix. The CEX is a monthly rotating panel and each household is
interviewed once per quarter for at most four consecutive quarters. In each interview the reference
period for expenditures covers the three months prior to the interview month. I follow the literature
and aggregate the expenditures to quarterly spending. Income data is asked only in the first and
last interview. The reference period for income covers the twelve months prior to the interview
month. The definition of spending on nondurables and services follows the literature and excludes
housing services, health care and health insurance, and education services, since these expenditures
have characteristics of durable goods.21 All nominal variables are deflated using the CPI-U. Due
to extreme outliers I windsorize consumption growth at the 10% level; all results are robust to
choosing a different threshold. Table 2 provides summary statistics of the main sample of higher-
income households used in the analysis. These households have a federal adjusted gross income
(AGI) above the 75th percentile by year and tax filer status.

  21
    Following the previous literature, this implicitly assumes linear Engle curves or separability between nondurables
and durables.



                                                         24
3.4 The Spending Response to the Reagan Tax Cuts: A Case Study
    By far the largest change in marginal and average tax rates occurred in the early 1980s under
President Reagan. Soon after Reagan announced his candidacy for President of the United States
on November 13, 1979 bond markets started to factor in lower expected tax rates at the longer end
of the term structure as seen in Figure 4. Luckily, this event coincides with the start of the CEX
sample. I therefore first conduct a case study of these tax changes before extending the sample to
include the entire period from 1980 to 2001.
    Table 3 estimates the response of household spending on nondurables and services to news about
future taxes using regression equation (12) on the sample of households with a federal AGI above
the 75th percentile by tax filer status in each year from 1980 to 1982. Column 1 uses a minimalist
specification including only year-by-month time fixed effects αt along the tax new shock. The
estimate suggests that household increase spending by about 1.5% in response to news about a
decrease in the annuity value of future tax liabilities of 1%. Column 2 adds the residual of the time-
series filter discussed in section 2.2. The news shock residual’s effect on spending is economically
small and not significantly different from zero consistent with the hypothesis that this variation
represents changes in relative bond prices that are not driven by news about future taxes. Column
3 uses variables that are standard in the literature to control for predictable changes in household
composition that can break the consumption Euler equation. The increases in spending related
to increases in the number of adults or children do not affect the response to the tax news shock.
Column 4 controls for the other main effects of the news shocks besides the time fixed effects, the
average tax rate and fixed effects for each tax filer status.
    The precision of the estimates in columns 1 to 4 is very low given the small sample size. Nev-
ertheless the point estimates suggest a substantial spending response to tax changes that were
implemented in later years. By increasing the sample size to include all years under President Rea-
gan we can increase the precision of the estimates and check the robustness of the initial results.
Columns 5 and 6 show that the point estimates are very similar when using this longer sample period
from 1980 to 1988. Column 6 also controls for other household characteristics including household
income (federal AGI), a quadratic of the head’s age, and fixed effects for marital status, family size,
number and composition of earners, and the level of education, where I use the maximum number
of years of schooling across head and spouse.

3.5 The Spending Response to Tax News in the Full Sample
    Table 4 presents the main results of the analysis. Column 1 uses the same minimalist specification
as before, but now on the full sample of households with AGI in the top quartile (by tax filer status
and year) from 1980 to 2001. The response of household spending to tax news is roughly one-
for-one (in absolute value). Adding the residual of the filtered news shock series (column 2) and
controlling for predictable changes in family composition (column 3) does not affect the response
to the tax news shock. Column 4 adds the main effects of the news shock, which include the 30

                                                  25
perfect-foresight average tax rates τ̄i,t+s used to construct the tax new shock weights in equation
(12) and fixed effects for each tax filer status. The estimated spending response to the tax news
shock remains largely unchanged. Column 5 is the preferred specification using the full set of
controls, including the other household characteristics described above such as household income
and age. The household spending response to the news shocks remains about one-for-one, although
still measured with substantial standard errors. Nevertheless, the null hypothesis of no forward-
looking behavior is strongly rejected. As mentioned above, this of course does not confirm the basic
life-cycle model, and given the relatively large standard errors many other models that also feature
forward-looking behavior are consistent with the estimated response.
     Finally, column 6 runs the same regression on the smaller sample of households in the top 10%
of federal AGI for whom the news shock should be measured with less error since it depends much
less on the assumption made in equation (11). While the precision decreases by about 50% as
expected based on the substantial reduction in sample size, the point estimate is almost unchanged
and remains economically and statistically significant.

3.6 Response Heterogeneity and Ricardian Equivalence
    As mentioned above, a model with dynastic households that are altruistically linked or with
an infinitely-lived representative agent with rational expectations would (under some assumptions)
predict that consumption would not change to changes in expected future taxes if those taxes were
lump-sum and if government spending was expected to remain unchanged; see Barro (1974) and
Seater (1993). Ideally, we would have a measure of households’ expectations of future changes in
government spending (and of pre-tax income). Unfortunately, such measures are in general not
available; see Ramey (2011) for an exception. In this section I instead analyze three dimensions of
cross-sectional heterogeneity that are informative to assess the degree of Ricardian equivalence in
the data.
    First, I test whether there is a difference in the spending response to tax news shocks between
families with and without children. Under Ricardian equivalence we would expect parents to respond
less to the tax news since their children will be affected by future changes in government spending
or by future changes in taxes not captured by the 30-year forecast horizon used in this paper; see
Altonji, Hayashi and Kotlikoff (1992, 1997). Column 1 of Table 5 shows that we cannot reject the
hypothesis that households with children respond as strongly as households without children. One
might be worried about misclassification if young households plan to have children but currently
do not have any yet or if older households had children that are not living in the same household
anymore. Column 2 therefore restricts the sample to households between 30 and 50 years old. The
point estimates remain largely unchanged suggesting that measurement error is not driving the
similarity in the responses. In fact, in both cases the point estimate of households with children is
slightly larger than that of childless families.
    Second, we would expect younger households to respond less to the tax news since they are


                                                 26
more likely to face off-setting changes in government spending in the future. Column 3 shows that
the response is similar for all households below age 55 and that households in the oldest 10-year
age bin in fact respond less, not more, rejecting equal responses with a p-value of 0.3%. Again, the
households which should respond the least in the presence of Ricardian equivalence effects have in
fact the largest point estimates.
    Third, I split the sample by whether household have a mortgage. We would expect that house-
holds with a mortgage would respond less if they fear that these future tax changes will be financed
by reducing or eliminating the mortgage interest tax deduction, which is one instance of government
benefits that disproportionately favor richer households.22 Column 4 instead shows that mortgage
owners respond similarly to the news as households without a mortgage. Again, the point esti-
mate for mortgage owners is larger, not smaller. Hence, these three tests suggest that Ricardian
equivalence is not a first-order concern when interpreting the spending responses to tax news shocks.


4 Robustness of the Spending Response to News Shocks
    In this section, I extend the previous analysis by adding two alternative tests of the underlying
mechanism and I check the robustness of the finding that changes in expected future taxes have
large effects on households’ current spending. I investigate the sensitivity of the main result to
using different sub-sample periods not previously analyzed and to alternative normalizations of the
spending changes. I also test the robustness of the results to different procedures of filtering the tax
news shocks and to controlling for bond risk directly. In all specifications I use the baseline sample
of households in the top quartile of the AGI distribution by tax filer status in each year and the full
set of controls as in column 5 of Table 4.

4.1 Alternative Tests of the Mechanism
    Table 6 provides two alternative tests of the underlying mechanism that focus on the absence
of a response in cases where we would not expect to find an effect. The first such test focuses
on lower-income households. Figure 5 shows that the average tax rate of households with an AGI
below the median is only weakly correlated with average tax rates of households in the top of the
income distribution. The partial correlation between changes in the average tax rates of households
below the median and households in the top 1% is only 3% and is not statistically different from
zero. Consistent with news about top tax rates not being informative about future average tax
rates for households below the median, column 1 shows no spending response of those households
to the bond-based tax news measure.
    Second, I analyze the response of household spending during a period in which factors other
than tax news dominate the municipal bond market and hence in which the identification approach
should break down. As discussed above and seen in Figure 1, in the absence of additional variation
  22
     Note that any wealthy-hand-to-mouth borrowing constraints would also predict a lower response of households
with mortgages and hence bias the test in favor of Ricardian equivalence.


                                                      27
from election probabilities, the bond-based measure of expected tax rates works well in the late
1990s and particularly in the early 1980s when marginal rates change dramatically. However, the
break-even tax rates at short maturities behave poorly in the early 1990s. Columns 2 and 3 split
the sample accordingly in order to investigate whether the household spending response also reflects
this pattern. Column 2 excludes the period from 1989 to 1992 when the relationship between short-
term municipal yield spreads and the top tax rate breaks down. The spending response increases
slightly but remains similar to the full-sample estimate. However, column 3 shows that the measure
of expected tax liabilities does not predict household spending from 1989 to 1992, in line with this
disconnect. In fact, the positive but insignificant point estimate of the news residual is consistent
with the fact that short-term break-even tax rates move in opposite direction to the top marginal
tax rate.

4.2 The Tax Reform Act of 1986 and Changes in the Tax Base
    Table 7 provides additional robustness checks of the main results. As discussed above and more
extensively in the online appendix, the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA) also changed tax brackets
in addition to changing marginal rates. Column 1 analyzes how excluding TRA from the analysis
affects the results. Since the bond markets might have predicted part of the rate decreases associated
with TRA already several years in advance as suggested by Figure 4, we cannot use data prior to
1986. Furthermore, since the municipal yield spread appears disconnected from tax fundamentals
at the short end of the term structure in the early 1990s (Figure 1 and Table 6) I restrict the sample
to years 1993-2001. Column 1 shows that despite the substantial reduction in the sample size, the
estimated response of household spending to tax news shocks is similar to the response over the full
sample period.
    Column 2 relates the analysis to the previous literature on fiscal foresight by only using the
legislated lags proposed by the narrative analysis of Yang (2008) as a measure of the length of
tax policy foresight. These are defined as the periods between the time a tax proposal was first
mentioned by a President and when it was enacted, but before rates changed. These periods
therefore exclude the times before the formal introduction of a tax bill to Congress, which contains
most of the news. In particular, it excludes any information that becomes available during a
presidential election, such as the variation used for the two quasi-natural experiments and the
variation associated with the Reagan tax cuts shown in the first five panels of Figure 4. Moreover,
this restriction also excludes false negatives, i.e., news about possible future tax changes that did
not materialize. Despite throwing away a substantial amount of identifying variation household
spending strongly responds to the bond-based measure of fiscal news even in this very limited
sample.
    Finally, column 3 analyzes the robustness of the measure of consumption growth using lagged
spending as an alternative normalization of spending changes, which is the specification obtained
when log-linearizing the inter-temporal budget constraint. To make the coefficient comparable with


                                                 28
the previous specifications, I scale the series by the sample median of the ratio of consumption to
predetermined income. The point estimate is very similar to the main response in column 5 of
Table 4, while the standard error is slightly larger.

4.3 Using Bartik-Type Reduced-Form News Shocks
    Are the results driven by the structure imposed by the life-cycle model when deriving the
household-level tax news shocks in equation (12)? To answer this question I construct an alternative
reduced-form tax news shock that follows the Bartik approach outlined in section 3.1 but does not
use the life-cycle model to derive the weights. Specifically, I interact the unweighted present value of
relative changes in expected top marginal tax rates with the predetermined average tax rate τ̄ilagged
based on income in the first interview instead of the prefect-foresight average tax rates {τ̄i,t+s }M
                                                                                                    s=1
implied by the life-cycle model. This leads to the following regression specification,

                                        M
                                                                      !
                                        X   (M )  E τ
                                                   t t+s −  E    τ
                                                              t−1 t+s
                ∆cit = β · τ̄ilagged ×     wt,s                         + αt + φ0 zit + εit .      (13)
                                       s=1
                                                         τt+s
                          |                     {z                    }
                                   Bartik-type tax news shock

    Table 8 shows very similar result when using this reduced-form tax news shock instead of the
more structural news shock in (12). In particular, higher-income households with an AGI in the
top quartile (column 1) or in the top 10% (column 2) strongly respond to news about future tax
changes, while households with below-median AGI (column 3) are not affected by news about future
tax rates in higher income brackets. Hence, the results are not driven by the structural model used
to derive the household-level tax news shocks used in the main analysis.

4.4 Effect of Different News-Noise Decompositions
    The analysis so far used the two-sided low-pass filter described in the previous section to filter
out noise unrelated to tax news from the break-even tax rate series. Table 9 reports results using
different filters shown in Figure 6. The two year cut-off is conservative since it probably filters
out some tax news shocks. This loss of information lowers the precision of the spending response
estimates. On the other hand, this cut-off value lowers the level of noise in the tax news shocks. The
reduction of the noise reduces the potential attenuation bias in the spending response coefficients.
Therefore, the choice of the frequency cut-off reflects a trade-off between bias and efficiency of the
estimates. To see this trade-off, columns 2 and 3 use different cut-offs. Column 2 uses a filter that
passes frequencies lower than eight years and hence is even more conservative than the baseline two-
year filter. While eight years might appear to be excessive, Figure 6 shows that this filtered series
is not very different from the filtered series using the baseline two-year filter. As expected, column
2 reports a less precisely estimated spending response with a higher point estimate, although one
cannot reject that the response is the same as in the main analysis reproduced for convenience in
column 1.

                                                     29
    Column 3 on the other hand passes higher frequencies than in the baseline specification. Figure 6
shows that passing all frequencies lower than half a year makes the filtered series fairly volatile. As
expected, the standard error of the estimated spending response falls by more than 60%, but the
noisier measure severely attenuates the estimated spending response. To see this point more clearly,
column 4 uses the raw series without any filtering. As expected, the substantial noise introduced by
the high-frequency shocks biases the spending response to zero. In fact, the attenuation bias in both
cases is almost complete, resulting in an estimated response that is economically and statistically
insignificant.
    Column 5 addresses the concern that a two-sided filter uses not only current and lagged obser-
vations, but also future ones. Therefore, the econometrician might overestimate the information set
of consumers, thereby underestimating the response to news. This would be the case for example
if households tried to infer the path of expected tax rates Et τ from municipal yield spreads θt . The
households and the econometrician would solve effectively the same signal extraction problem in
real time. Therefore, in this scenario the econometrician should only use current and past bond
prices to infer the households’ information sets. The difference between the two ways of modeling
information can be seen from the way the econometrician solves the signal extraction problem of
equation (5). The approach taken so far implies that the optimal solution is a two-sided filter, while
this alternative view requires the use of a backward-looking one-sided filter. To account for this
possibility, I use the optimal one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filter suggested by Mehra (2004), and I
follow Ravn and Uhlig (2002) in setting the smoothing parameter. One-sided filters only use current
and lagged observations, but induce a phase-shift; that is, the filtered series lags the raw data and
hence detects a change in the trend only with some delay. This phase-shift, shown in Figure 6,
introduces measurement error in the news shock and might therefore bias the spending response
toward zero under the plausible scenario in which households do not use municipal bonds to infer
future tax rates. Column 5 shows that the estimated spending response to the tax news shock that
uses a one-sided filter is very similar to the main estimate in column 1.
    Column 6 instead directly controls for these other bond risk factors by taking residuals from
regressing the BETRs on the corresponding Treasury on-the-run/off-the-run yield spreads before
applying the filter.23 The household spending response remains economically and statistically sig-
nificant and is similar to the baseline result. The smaller point estimate is consistent with the
regression residual being more volatile and hence noisier than the original BETR series.
    Finally, note that all specifications of Table 9 contain essentially the same information: adding
the residual to the filtered news shock reproduces the raw series used in column 4. The residual is
never statistically or economically significant. This suggest for example that even if we interpret the
model of the term-structure of break-even tax rates as a linear approximation of a more complete
but non-linear model such as the one proposed by Green (1993), the higher-order terms of such a
model do not significantly affect household spending behavior.
 23
      This spread is the only risk measure available going back to the late 1970s.


                                                          30
     Overall, the results in this section show that the estimated spending response to tax news
is similar under alternative specifications. More importantly, the point estimates change in the
direction we would expect if the tax news shocks indeed measure the persistent component of changes
in expected future tax liabilities. First, the response is lower in absolute value than predicted by the
life-cycle model if we use shocks that are not guided by theory or if we use noisier shocks while it is
in line with the theory if we filter out the noise and use theory-based news shocks (Tables 8 and 9).
Second, the response is stronger when looking at households which are more affected by the news
or when looking at periods during which we would expect the identification approach to work best
(Table 6).


5 Conclusion
    This paper identifies tax expectations using the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt
bonds with maturities of one to thirty years. Combining these tax expectations with household
spending data shows that the basic life-cycle consumption model with forward-looking households
describes the behavior of higher-income households remarkably well. This paper is the first to
directly measure the response of household spending to news shocks, and thus is the first direct test
of the theory’s prediction for the response of household spending to new information.
    While a full analysis of the macroeconomic implications of these results is beyond the scope
of this paper, it is nevertheless useful to discuss two issues related to fiscal policy. First, the
response of household consumption to news about future tax policies suggests that studies which
ignore anticipation effects do not capture the total effect of a tax change on the economy. Whether
the anticipation effect documented in this paper amplifies or dampens the effect that such studies
typically find—for example due to households that exhibit excess sensitivity in consumption—
depends on how this policy changes households’ expectations about other future tax policies. For
example, a tax reform that is expected to permanently lower taxes would cause unconstrained
forward-looking households to respond to the news, while constrained households (either because
of economic or behavioral frictions) would respond to the actual tax change, in which case the total
measured effect of a tax reform would be amplified by including the anticipation effects. On the
other hand, a tax stimulus that targets constrained households and is expected to be paid for by
increasing taxes on unconstrained households in the future would cause the anticipation and excess
sensitivity effects to go in opposite directions, thereby dampening the total effect of the stimulus.
    Second, while the anticipation effect could partially overcome the long implementation lag of
fiscal policies (a major limitation of taxes as short-run policy instruments) the fact that coun-
tercyclical policies are usually designed to be budget neutral over the business cycle implies that
forward-looking households might realize that a countercyclical tax policy has little effect on their
lifetime income and might thus respond neither to the news nor to the actual tax change.
    Clearly, more research on the response of households to news shocks needs to be undertaken
before such data can offer policy guidance that is empirically well-grounded. Identifying more news

                                                  31
shocks that directly affect household budget sets is clearly desirable in order to verify the results of
this study.

References
Abowd, John M. and David Card, “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours Changes,” Econo-
  metrica, 1989, 57 (2), 411–445.
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Is the Extended Family Altruistically
  Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data,” American Economic Review, 1992, pp. 1177–1198.
Altonji, Joseph G., Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Parental Altruism and Inter Vivos Transfers:
  Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1997, 105 (6), 1121–1166.
Ang, Andrew, Vineer Bhansali, and Yuhang Xing, “Taxes on Tax-Exempt Bonds,” Working Paper, 2007.
Ayers, Benjamin C., Bryan C. Cloyd, and John B. Robinson, ““Read My Lips ...”: Does the Tax Rethoric of
  Presidential Candidates Affect Security Prices?,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2005, 48 (1), 125–148.
Babina, Tania, Chotibhak Jotikasthira, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai, “Heterogeneous Taxes
  and Limited Risk Sharing: Evidence from Municipal Bonds,” Working Paper, 2015.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steve J. Davis, “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2016, 131, x–xx.
Barro, Robert J., “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82 (6),
  1095–1117.
Bartik, Timothy J., “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?,” in A. J.
  Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, eds., Upjohn Working Papers and Journal Articles, W.E. Upjohn Institute
  for Employment Research, 1991.
Baxter, Marianne and Robert G. King, “Measuring business cycles: approximate band-pass filters for
  economic time series,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999, 81 (4), 575–593.
Bloom, Nicholas, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, 2009.
Calmes, Jackie, “Bush Promotes Big Tax Cuts in a Move To Attract Middle-Class Swing Voters,” The
  Wall Street Journal, 2000, Monday, September 25, A.16.
Campbell, John Y. and Angus Deaton, “Why is Consumption So Smooth?,” Review of Economic Studies,
  1989, 56 (3), 357.
Chalmers, John M.R., “Default Risk Cannot Explain the Muni–Puzzle: Evidence from Bonds that Are
  Secured by U.S. Treasury Obligation,” Review of Financial Studies, 1998, 11 (2), 281–308.
Fama, Eugene F., “A Pricing Model of the Municipal Bond Market,” Working Paper, 1977.
Fitch Ratings, “Default Risk and Recovery Rates on U.S. Municipal Bonds,” Public Finance Special Report,
  2007.
Fortune, Peter, “Do Municipal Bond Yields Forecast Tax Policy?,” New England Economic Review, 1996.
Green, Richard C., “A Simple Model of the Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yield Curves,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 1993, 6 (2), 233–264.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright, “The U.S. Treasury yield curve: 1961 to the
  present,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2007, 54 (8), 2291–2304.
Hall, Robert E., “Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and
  Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86 (6), 971–987.
Harris, Lawrence E. and Michael S. Piwowar, “Municipal Bond Liquidity,” Working Paper, 2004.
Hempel, George H., The Postwar Quality of State and Local Debt, Columbia University Press, 1971.
Hodrick, Robert J. and Edward C. Prescott, “Post-War US Business Cycles: An Empirical Investigation,”

                                                    32
  Carnegie Mellon University discussion paper no. 451, 1980.
Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, “The Consumption Response to Income Changes,” Annual Review of
  Economics, 2010, 2, 479–506.
Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, “Household Expenditure and the Income
  Tax Rebates of 2001,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1589–1610.
Kochin, Levis A. and Richard W. Parks, “Was the Tax-Exempt Bond Market Inefficient or Were Future
  Expected Tax Rates Negative?,” Journal of Finance, 1988, 43, 913 – 931.
Kueng, Lorenz, “The Taxation of Bonds: A Short Primer,” Working Paper, 2012.
  , “Explaining Consumption Excess Sensitivity with Near-Rationality: Evidence from Large Predeter-
  mined Payments,” Working Paper, 2016.
Longstaff, Francis A., “Municipal Debt and Marginal Tax Rates: Is There a Tax Premium in Asset Prices?,”
  Journal of Finance, 2011, 66, 721–751.
Lorenzoni, Guido, “News and Aggregate Demand Shocks,” Annual Review of Economics, 2011, 3, 537–557.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and James M. Poterba, “Stock Market Yields and the Pricing of Municipal Bonds,”
 Working Paper, 1996.
Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri, “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 2004,
 72 (1), 1–32.
Mehra, Yash P., “The Output Gap, Expected Future Inflation and Inflation Dynamics: Another Look,”
 The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 2004, 4 (1), 1–17.
Poterba, James M., Explaining the Yield Spread between Taxable and Tax-exempt Bonds: The Role of
  Expected Tax Policy, The University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Ramey, Valerie A., “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s all in the Timing,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2011.
Ravn, Morten O. and Harald Uhlig, “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the Frequency of
  Observations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002, 84 (2), 371–376.
Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax Changes,” online appendix
  to Romer and Romer (American Economic Review 2010), ”The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
  Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks”, 2008.
   and , “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal
  Shocks,” American Economic Review, 2010, 100 (3), 763–801.
Saez, Emmanuel, “Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-2000: Evidence and Policy Implica-
  tions,” NBER Working Paper No. 10273, 2004.
Seater, John J., “Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1993, 31 (1), 142–190.
Seib, Gerald F. and Alan Murray, “Where They Stand: A Voters’ Guide to the Candidates and the Issues,”
  The Wall Street Journal, 1992, Monday, Septermber 21, R6.
Slemrod, Joel and Timothy Greimel, “Did Steve Forbes scare the US municipal bond market?,” Journal
   of Public Economics, 1999, 74 (1), 81–96.
Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz, “How Prediction Markets Can Save Event Studies,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 16949, 2011.
Souleles, Nicholas S., “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,” American
  Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 947–958.
Yang, Shu-Chun Susan, “A Chronology Of Postwar U.S. Federal Income Tax Policy,” Working Paper,
  2008.




                                                  33
A Appendix
    This section provides more details about the household spending and income data used in the
analysis. I use sample restrictions that are common in the literature; see for example, Souleles
(1999) or Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006). In particular, I restrict the sample to households
with complete income reports and non-zero income where the head’s age is between 25 and 65 years
and the head is not a student. In addition, I drop the following cases: interviews with more or less
than three monthly observations; households with zero food or total expenditures; non-consecutive
interviews; observations with negative expenditures where there should not be any; households with
more than one consumer unit; households for which the family size changes by more than three;
households for which the age of any member increases by more than one or decreases; and households
with negative liquid wealth; and households with positive business or farm income. I correct sample
breaks in the following few expenditure categories due to slight changes in the questionnaire: food at
home (’82Q1-’88Q1), personal care services (’01Q2), occupation expenditures (’01Q2), and property
taxes (’91Q1). As recommended by the BLS, I sum expenditures that occur in the same month but
are reported in different interviews.
    I impute taxes with the NBER TAXSIM calculator using an iterative procedure to determine the
itemization status of each household and to account for deductions that depend on the household’s
AGI such as health-care or job expenses. The code is available at www.nber.org/∼taxsim/to-taxsim/
cex-kueng/cex.do. I compute perfect-foresight average tax rates {τ̄i,t+s }M
                                                                          s=0 for each household i that
depend on the head of household’s age and the household’s predetermined income percentile. These
profiles allow for predictable changes in average tax rates due to the hump shape of the life-cycle
income profile. Other studies also found that household income dynamics are well approximated by
a random walk after controlling for the age profile of income; see e.g., Abowd and Card (1989) and
Meghir and Pistaferri (2004). Predetermined income summarizes observed household characteristics
such as education and experience as well as unobserved heterogeneity such as work effort. Household
age has predictive power for future income even conditional on work experience. Having only two
dimensions guarantees that there are at least 20 households in each age-income cell in each year.
    I estimate future average tax rates non-parametrically; in particular, I discretize the joint distri-
bution of age and income and assume that the household remains in the same age-specific income
percentile throughout its life-cycle.24 I use households age 65 to 75 to estimate counter-factual
retirement income after age 65. I assume that households expect to receive this level of retirement
income for the rest of the planning period. I limit the estimation of the retirement period to house-
holds between ages 65 to 75 due to the fact that the quality of the survey answers tends to be poorer
for old retirees.


  24
     More precisely, I use the following income percentile thresholds: 10, 20, . . . , 50, 55, . . . , 95. I use a finer grid
for higher incomes to better account for the increasing income inequality during the sample period. I use age bins
with a 10-year range to have at least 20 households in each cell. The five age bins 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-64, 65-75
approximate the income life-cycle profiles well.

                                                             34
Table 1: Quasi-natural experiments - Break-even tax rate responses to changes in election probabilities
                                                                                         maturity of break-even tax rate (BETR):
                                             1-year          2-year              3-year            5-year        7-year            10-year     20-year         30-year
                                               (1)             (2)                 (3)               (4)           (5)               (6)          (7)             (8)

A: Election in 2000

Price of Bush contract [in cents]             0.018         -0.018***           -0.031***         -0.033***     -0.028***          -0.024**     -0.006          0.003
                                             (0.013)         (0.007)             (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.010)            (0.011)    (0.009)         (0.013)

Observations                                  131              131                131                131           131               131         131             131

R-squared                                    0.892            0.943              0.944              0.938         0.902             0.842       0.833           0.740



B: Election in 1992

Price of Clinton contract [in cents]        0.140***         0.096**            0.140***           0.091***      0.097***          0.103***    0.042***        0.047**
                                            (0.048)          (0.047)            (0.040)            (0.026)       (0.022)           (0.021)     (0.015)         (0.018)

Observations                                   82              82                  82                82            82                82           82              82

R-squared                                    0.958            0.930              0.945              0.969         0.954             0.936       0.974           0.964

Notes: The contract yields 100 cents if the candidate wins the popular vote and zero otherwise. Therefore, an increase of the price by 1 cent corresponds to a 1%
increase in the perceived probability of the candidate winning the presidential election. All regressions include controls for (il)liquidity such as the number of repeated
prices, muni supply (negotiated and competitive offers), on-the-run/off-the-run Treasury spread, prediction market volume and units traded; for credit risk, such as the
pre-refunded spread, spreads between lower-grade municipal bonds; and for call option features, such as the taxable yield curve and the weekly standard deviation of
long-term treasuries. Newey-West HAC robust standard errors in parentheses: ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 2. Summary statistics of CEX sample

Variable                                           Observations        Mean      Median    Std. Dev.
Nondurable spending growth [in %]                          28007        0.08       0.00         6.73
Tax news shock [in %]                                      28007       -0.03       0.00         0.56
Residual of filtered news shock                            28007       -0.01       0.00         2.52
Average tax rate                                           28007       23.09      22.65         4.32
Federal AGI (in $1,000 of 1982-84)                         28007       55.06      49.67        31.40
Number of earners                                          28007        1.98          2         0.90
Age of reference person                                    28007       43.58         43         9.90
Family size                                                28007        2.88          3         1.41
Change in number of adults                                 28007        0.01          0         0.28
Change in number of children                               28007        0.00          0         0.21



                          Fraction (%)                                                   Fraction (%)
Education:                                            Tax filer status:
- no school                       0.03                - single                                 25.08
- high school dropout             5.19                - married filing jointly                 60.73
- high school                    21.08                - head of household                      14.19
- college dropout                21.35
- college                        27.73                Composition of earners:
- graduate school                24.63                - reference person only                  27.51
                                                      - reference person and spouse            33.58
Marital status:                                       - ref. person, spouse and others         15.53
- married                        62.15                - reference person and others            19.34
- widowed                         3.61                - spouse only                             1.48
- divorced                       17.64                - spouse and others                       0.71
- separated                       3.62                - others                                  0.95
- never married                  12.97                - no earners                              0.90

Notes: The sample includes households with federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top
quartile by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or head of household) in each year from
1980 to 2001. Education is the maximum level of education achieved by the reference person
and the spouse. All summary statistics in this table use sampling weights while all regressions in
the following tables are unweighted.
Table 3: A case study of the Reagan tax cuts
                                                sample period 1980-82                     sample period 1980-88
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"                  news      household       main          main     other household
nondurables and services            baseline    residual   composition     effects       effects    characteristics
                                      (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)

Tax news shock [in %]               -1.556**    -1.555**     -1.558**      -1.216       -1.423**       -1.397**
                                     (0.785)     (0.786)      (0.786)      (0.960)       (0.582)        (0.580)

Residual of filtered news shock                  0.010         0.036        0.037         -0.054         -0.056
                                                (0.358)       (0.355)      (0.354)       (0.155)        (0.156)

Change in the number of adults                               2.340***     2.367***      1.786***       1.640***
                                                             (0.593)      (0.595)       (0.295)        (0.305)

Change in the number of children                              1.463**      1.495**      1.162***       0.984***
                                                              (0.686)      (0.692)      (0.372)        (0.372)

- Time FE (year-by-month)             YES         YES          YES          YES           YES            YES
- Average tax rate                                                          YES           YES            YES
- Tax filer status FE                                                       YES           YES            YES
- Other household characteristics                                                                        YES

Observations                          2,886      2,886        2,886        2,886         11,071         11,071

R-squared                             0.023      0.023        0.029        0.029          0.031         0.034
Notes: The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top quartile of the cross-
sectional AGI distribution by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or head of household) in each year.
Columns (1)-(4) use observations for years 1980-82; columns (5) and (6) use observations for years 1980-88. The
dependent variable is the growth rate of household spending on nondurable goods and services. The average tax
rate in columns (4)-(6) is the household's federal average tax rate based on predetermined income in the first
interview. Other household characteristics include household federal AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of
household, and fixed effects for education (maximum of head and spouse), marital status, family size, number of
earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner household, two-income family, etc.). Robust standard
errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household correlations and
heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 4: Response of nondurable spending to tax news, 1980-2001
                                                                      th
                                                              AGI > 75 percentile
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"                     news      household      main      other household        AGI > 90th
nondurables and services                baseline   residual   composition    effects     characteristics       percentile
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)                  (6)

Tax news shock [in %]                   -1.162*** -1.162***     -1.142***   -1.104***      -1.034***            -1.000**
                                         (0.304)   (0.304)       (0.304)     (0.308)        (0.309)              (0.488)

Residual of filtered news shock                    -0.015       -0.014       -0.017         -0.014               -0.089
                                                   (0.104)      (0.104)      (0.104)        (0.104)              (0.190)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                 YES       YES           YES         YES            YES                  YES
- Changes in family composition                                   YES         YES            YES                  YES
- Perfect-foresight average tax rates                                         YES            YES                  YES
- Tax filer status FE                                                         YES            YES                  YES
- Other household characteristics                                                            YES                  YES

Observations                            28,007     28,007        28,007      28,007         28,007               11,368

R-squared                                0.023      0.023        0.027       0.028           0.030               0.040
Notes: The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top quartile of the cross-
sectional AGI distribution by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or head of household) in each year from 1980
                                                                th
to 2001 in columns (1)-(5), and with an AGI above the 90 percentile in column (6). The dependent variable is the
growth rate of household spending on nondurable goods and services. Changes in family composition control for
quarterly changes in the number adults and children separately. The perfect foresight average tax rates are the 30 rates
used to construct the tax new shock weights in equation (12). Other household characteristics include household federal
AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of household, and fixed effects for education (maximum of head and spouse),
marital status, family size, number of earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner household, two-income
family, etc.). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-
household correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 5: Heterogeneity in the response to to tax news, 1980-2001
                                              by having children
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"              ages        ages                    by mortgage
                                                                       by age
nondurables and services                      25-65       30-50                    ownership
                                                (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)

Tax news shock x Not having children        -0.983***    -0.944**
                                             (0.312)      (0.412)

Tax news shock x Having children            -1.089***    -1.023**
                                             (0.319)      (0.422)

Tax news shock x Age 25-34                                            -1.062***
                                                                       (0.314)

Tax news shock x Age 35-44                                            -0.934***
                                                                       (0.329)

Tax news shock x Age 45-54                                            -0.955***
                                                                       (0.358)

Tax news shock x Age 55-65                                             -0.458
                                                                       (0.367)

Tax news shock x Not having a mortgage                                              -1.018***
                                                                                     (0.309)

Tax news shock x Having a mortgage                                                  -1.119***
                                                                                     (0.332)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                      YES         YES          YES           YES
- Residual of filtered news shock              YES         YES          YES           YES
- Changes in family composition                YES         YES          YES           YES
- Perfect-foresight average tax rates          YES         YES          YES           YES
- Tax filer status FE                          YES         YES          YES           YES
- Other household characteristics              YES         YES          YES           YES
- Having children FE                           YES         YES
- 10-year age bins FE                                                   YES
- Mortgage-ownership FE                                                               YES

Observations                                  28,007      28,007       28,007        28,007

R-squared                                     0.030        0.038       0.030          0.030
Notes: The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the
top quartile of the cross-sectional AGI distribution by tax filer status (single, married filing
jointly, or head of household) in each year from 1980 to 2001. The dependent variable is
the growth rate of household spending on nondurable goods and services. Changes in
family composition control for quarterly changes in the number adults and children
separately. The perfect foresight average tax rates are the 30 rates used to construct the
tax new shock weights in equation (12). Other household characteristics include household
federal AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of household except in column (3), and
fixed effects for education (maximum of head and spouse), marital status, family size,
number of earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner household, two-income
family, etc.). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are
adjusted for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark
significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 6: Testing for spending responses where we would not necessarily expect any
                                                                municipal market disconnect
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"             AGI < 50th          excluding       including only
nondurables and services                     percentile           1989-92           1989-92
                                                 (1)                (2)                (3)

Tax news shock [in %]                          -0.031            -1.132***           -0.093
                                               (0.230)            (0.335)            (1.240)

Residual of filtered news shock                 -0.004             -0.098             0.318
                                               (0.072)            (0.117)            (0.217)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                       YES                 YES               YES
- Tax filer status FE                           YES                 YES               YES
- Perfect-foresight average tax rates           YES                 YES               YES
- Changes in family composition                 YES                 YES               YES
- Other household characteristics               YES                 YES               YES

Observations                                   51,830             22,430             5,577

R-squared                                       0.016              0.031             0.035
Notes: The sample in column (1) includes households with a below-median federal adjusted
gross income (AGI) by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or head of household) in
each year from 1980 to 2001. Columns (2) and (3) split the sample of households with AGI
in the top quartile by tax filer status in each from 1980 to 2001 into two sub-samples,
containing years 1989-92 in column (3) and years 1980-88 and 1993-2001 in column (2).
The dependent variable is the growth rate of household spending on nondurable goods and
services. The perfect foresight average tax rates are the 30 rates used to construct the tax
new shock weights in equation (12). Changes in family composition control for quarterly
changes in the number adults and children separately. Other household characteristics
include household federal AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of household, and fixed
effects for education (maximum of head and spouse), marital status, family size, number of
earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner household, two-income family,
etc.). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted
for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark significance
at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 7: Additional robustness checks of the main results

                                           using post-         using Yang        using nondurables
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"          TRA86 sample        (2008) dates            as basis
nondurables and services
                                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)

Tax news shock [in %]                        -1.048***           -0.737**             -0.989***
                                              (0.372)             (0.350)              (0.343)

Residual of filtered news shock               -0.173              -0.089                -0.042
                                              (0.166)            (0.077)               (0.109)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                      YES                 YES                  YES
- Tax filer status FE                          YES                 YES                  YES
- Perfect-foresight average tax rates          YES                 YES                  YES
- Changes in family composition                YES                 YES                  YES
- Other household characteristics              YES                 YES                  YES

Observations                                  11,359             12,845                28,007

R-squared                                      0.028              0.021                 0.031
Notes: The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top
quartile of the cross-sectional AGI distribution by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly,
or head of household) in each year. Column (1) uses the post-TRA 86 sample including yeas
1993-2001 (i.e., after the municipal market disconnect). Column (2) uses the news dates
suggested by the narrative analysis of Yang (2008). Column (3) uses the full sample from
1980 to 2001. The dependent variable is the growth rate of household spending on
nondurable goods and services. The perfect foresight average tax rates are the 30 rates used
to construct the tax new shock weights in equation (12). Changes in family composition
control for quarterly changes in the number adults and children separately. Other household
characteristics include household federal AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of
household, and fixed effects for education (maximum of head and spouse), marital status,
family size, number of earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner household,
two-income family, etc.). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household
level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, *
mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 8: Using reduced-form Bartik-type news shocks, 1980-2001
                                                                  th                th                th
                                                      AGI > 75          AGI > 90          AGI < 50
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"
                                                      percentile        percentile        percentile
nondurables and services
                                                           (1)              (2)               (3)

Average tax rate x PV of expected tax changes           -0.743**         -1.217***           0.007
                                                         (0.335)          (0.464)           (0.235)

Average tax rate x PV of tax change residuals           -0.046            -0.098            -0.005
                                                        (0.102)           (0.185)           (0.070)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                                 YES               YES              YES
- Average tax rate                                        YES               YES              YES
- Tax filer status FE                                     YES               YES              YES
- Changes in family composition                           YES               YES              YES
- Other household characteristics                         YES               YES              YES

Observations                                            28,007            11,368            51,830

R-squared                                                0.029             0.039             0.015
Notes: The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top
quartile of the cross-sectional AGI distribution by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or
head of household) in each year from 1980 to 2001 in column (1), in the top 10th percentile in
column (2), and with a below-median AGI in column (3), respectively. The dependent variable
is the growth rate of household spending on nondurable goods and services. The average tax
rate is the household's federal average tax rate based on predetermined income in the first
interview. Changes in family composition control for quarterly changes in the number adults
and children separately. Other household characteristics include household federal AGI, a
quadratic in the age of the head of household, and fixed effects for education (maximum of
head and spouse), marital status, family size, number of earners, and composition of earners
(e.g., single-earner household, two-income family, etc.). Robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-household
correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level,
respectively.
Table 9: Effect of using different time-series filters for the signal-noise decomposition
                                                         two-sided BP filter                                  one-sided HP     control for bond
Dep. var.: ∆cit, "three-monthly"                                                                                  filter       market liquidity
                                          baseline     pass lower freq.    pass higher freq.     no filter
nondurables and services
                                             (1)              (2)                 (3)               (4)             (5)               (6)

Tax news shock [in %] (signal)            -1.034***        -1.236***             -0.082           -0.063         -0.936***         -0.707**
                                           (0.309)          (0.366)             (0.121)          (0.100)          (0.302)           (0.300)

Residual of filtered news shock (noise)     -0.014           -0.018              -0.024                            0.001             -0.028
                                           (0.104)          (0.102)             (0.175)                           (0.104)           (0.104)

- Time FE (year-by-month)                   YES              YES                 YES               YES             YES               YES
- Changes in family composition             YES              YES                 YES               YES             YES               YES
- Other household characteristics           YES              YES                 YES               YES             YES               YES
- Perfect-foresight average tax rates       YES              YES                 YES               YES             YES               YES

Observations                               28,007           28,007              28,007           28,007           28,007            28,007

R-squared                                   0.030            0.030              0.030             0.030           0.030             0.030

Notes : The sample includes households with a federal adjusted gross income (AGI) in the top quartile of the cross-sectional AGI distribution
by tax filer status (single, married filing jointly, or head of household) in each year from 1980 to 2001. The dependent variable is the growth
rate of household spending on nondurable goods and services. The perfect foresight average tax rates are the 30 rates used to construct the
tax new shock weights in equation (12). Changes in family composition control for quarterly changes in the number adults and children
separately. Other household characteristics include household federal AGI, a quadratic in the age of the head of household, and fixed effects
for education (maximum of head and spouse), marital status, family size, number of earners, and composition of earners (e.g., single-earner
household, two-income family, etc.). Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level, are adjusted for arbitrary within-
household correlations and heteroskedasticity. ***, **, * mark significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Figure 1 – Nonparametric evidence of the importance of expected tax rates for the break-even tax rate


                                  2yr BETR (trend)                    15yr BETR (trend)
                                  top 1% tax rate                     33% tax bubble (’88−’90)
           60


           50


           40


           30


           20


           10
                1977    1980             1985             1990             1995             2000          2004
    Notes: The thin lines are the raw data and the thick lines are the corresponding low frequency components
    of the 2-year and the 15-year break-even tax rates, respectively, corresponding to equation (4). The blue thin
    dashed line is the top 1% tax rate taken from Saez (2004). The solid blue line is the ‘33% tax bubble’ during
    the years 1988-1990; in this period, the top marginal tax rate is higher than the marginal tax rate of the top
    1% of the income distribution.
Figure 2 – Identity and stability of the marginal investor in the taxable income distribution over time


                          70



      marginal tax rate   60


                          50


                          40


                          30


                          20
                               1980 1982     1985    1988     1991   1994   1997      2000       2003      2006

                                           marginal investor (SCF)           +2 SEs/−2 SEs
                                           top 1% of income (Saez)           top 5−1% of income (Saez)
                                           top 5% of income (Saez)           highest statutory rate

    Notes: The blue dots are the estimated marginal tax rate of the marginal investor defined as the asset-weighted
    average of the effective marginal tax rates over all households that own both taxable and tax-exempt bonds.
    Two standard error bands are shown around the point estimates of the marginal investor’s marginal tax rate.
    The black lines are the marginal tax rates of different percentiles of the income distribution taken from Saez
    (2004).
                                                     Figure 3 – Response of the BETR and path of expected tax rates to election probabilities in
                                                     the two quasi-natural experiments

                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16                                    EGTRRA →               ← JGTRRA



                                                     2                                                Newey-West 95% confidence band
                                                                                                                ↓                                                                                                   14


                                                     1                                                                                                                                                              12




                change in break-even tax rate [%]




                                                                                                                                                                               change in break-even tax rate [%]
                                                         current        counterfactual if
                                                         year ↓         E[τ |Gore] = τ 2000
                                                                              ↓
                                                     0                                                                                                                                                              10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     assuming W.Bush tax cuts expire
                                                    −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ↑                                                                   ↓
                                                                                                      ← point estimates β̂                                                                                                            perfect foresight coefficients β                  pf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ↑
                                                                                                      perfect foresight coefficients β pf                                                                               6                                                                            assuming W.Bush tax cuts become permanent
                                                    −2                                                               ↓
                                                                                                                             ↑
                                                                                                                   assuming Bush tax cuts expire                                                                        4
                                                    −3                                                                                                                                                                                                       ← Newey-West 95% confidence band

                                                                                                                   assuming Bush tax cuts become permanent                                                                                                                                               տ point estimates β̂
                                                                                                                             ↓                                                                                          2
                                                    −4                                                                                                                                                                                             counterfactual if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            current               E[τ |H.Bush] = τ 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             year ↓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ↓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0

                                                           2000           2005           2010           2015            2020            2025          2030                                                                     1992        1995               2000           2005           2010             2015              2020 2022
                                                                           forecasting horizon m during presidential election of 2000                                                                                                                 forecasting horizon m during presidential election of 1992


                                                         (a) BETR response to 2000 election probability                                                                                                                      (b) BETR response to 1992 election probability

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   48
                    41

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   46
                    current                                        counterfactual if
                40 year                                            E[τ |Gore] = τ2000
                         ↓                                              ↓                                                                                                                                          44
               39.6
                                                                                                                                 ↑
                                                                                                                      assuming Bush tax cuts expire                                                                42
                    39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          assuming W.Bush tax cuts expire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ↓
tax rate [%]




                                                                                                                                                                                       39.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ← path of perfect foresight tax rates τ



                                                                                                                                                                tax rate [%]
                    38                                                            ← path of expected tax rates in 2000: E[τ |∆Bush] + τ2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   38


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   36                                                                                     assuming W.Bush tax cuts become permanent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ↓
                    37
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   34                                                           ← path of expected tax rates in 1992:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                counterfactual if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E[τ |∆Clinton] + τ1992
                    36                                                                                                                                                                                             32       current year       E[τ |H. Bush] = τ 1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ↓                      ↓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   31
                                                                           path of perfect foresight tax rates τ                                                                                                   30
                                                                             ↓
                    35
                                                                                                                        տ assuming Bush tax cuts become permanent                                                  28

                                                         2000           2005            2010           2015             2020             2025         2030
                                                                          forecasting horizon m during presidential election of 2000                                                                               26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1992         1995               2000            2005            2010             2015                         2022
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       forecasting horizon m during presidential election of 1992


                                                              (c) Implied path of expected tax rates, 2000                                                                                                                            (d) Implied path of expected tax rates, 1992

                                                     Notes: Panels (a) and (b): The black lines are the estimated response of the BETRs β̂ in equation (6) to
                                                     changes in the election probability of George W. Bush and Bill Clinton, respectively, and 95% confidence bands.
                                                     The blue lines show the population coefficients β pf one would obtain under perfect foresight. Panels (c) and
                                                     (d): The black line is the expected tax path recovered by inverting equation (7) and adding the top tax rate
                                                     during the election year.
Figure 4 – Anticipation of the Reagan tax cuts (ERTA 1981 and TRA 1986) between January
1977 and January 1982.

                                                                   current date: 01/1977                                                                                     current date: 01/1978

                                            60                                                                                                        60




                                                                  path of market-based expected tax rate
                                                                                                  ↓
                                            50                                                                                                        50
         expected vs actual tax rates [%]




                                                                                                                   expected vs actual tax rates [%]
                                            40                                                                                                        40




                                            30                                                                                                        30

                                                                                                  ↑
                                                    path of actual (perfect-foresight) tax rate of top 1%


                                            20                                                                                                        20
                                             1978          1982                            1987             1992                                       1979           1983                            1988            1993
                                                                     forecasting horizon                                                                                        forecasting horizon



                                                                   current date: 01/1979                                                                                     current date: 01/1980

                                            60                                                                                                        60




                                            50                                                                                                        50
         expected vs actual tax rates [%]




                                                                                                                   expected vs actual tax rates [%]




                                            40                                                                                                        40




                                            30                                                                                                        30




                                            20                                                                                                        20
                                             1980          1984                            1989             1994                                       1981           1985                            1990            1995
                                                                     forecasting horizon                                                                                        forecasting horizon



                                                                   current date: 01/1981                                                                                     current date: 01/1982

                                            60                                                                                                        60




                                            50                                                                                                        50
         expected vs actual tax rates [%]




                                                                                                                   expected vs actual tax rates [%]




                                                                                                                                                              path of actual (perfect-foresight) tax rate of top 1%
                                                                                                                                                                  ↓



                                            40                                                                                                        40




                                            30                                                                                                        30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ↑
                                                                                                                                                                             path of market-based expected tax rate


                                            20                                                                                                        20
                                             1982          1986                            1991             1996                                       1983           1987                            1992            1997
                                                                     forecasting horizon                                                                                        forecasting horizon




Notes: This figure shows the evolution of the path of expected tax rates between 1977 and 1982 in the run-up to
the first Reagan tax cut (ERTA 1981). The dashed line, which represents the perfect-foresight tax path, is the
marginal tax rate of the top 1% of the income distribution taken from Saez (2004). The bond market did not
anticipate the Reagan tax cuts until the election year of 1980. However, the bond prices already incorporate the
second Regan tax cut (TRA 1986) by the end of 1981. The web appendix of this paper (www.lorenzkueng.com)
contains an animation of the evolution of Et [τ ] from January 1977 to August 1982 that shows monthly changes
in the path of expected tax rates.
                                             Figure 5 – Average tax rates by income percentiles, 1980-2007


                                 40
                                                                                    top 1%              top 10%
                                                                                    top 25%             bottom 50%


                                 30
  average federal tax rate [%]




                                 20




                                 10




                                 0
                                      1980           1985          1990          1995          2000          2005
Source: Internal Revenue Service’s Statistics of Income Division. This figure shows the time series of effective
federal average tax rates between 1980 and 2007 for households in different percentiles of adjusted gross income
(AGI). It motivates the definition of high-income households used in the paper and the external validity checks
using households with incomes in the top 10th percentiles and households with incomes below the median.
The average tax rates within the top quartile are highly but not perfectly correlated. The average tax rate of
households with incomes below the median is not significantly correlated with the average tax rates of high-
income households.
        Figure 6 – Robustness: Different decompositions of BETR into news and noise


                                                                   two−sided BP: pass > 2−years
       50
                                                                   two−sided BP: pass > 8−years
                                                                   two−sided BP: pass > 1/2−year
                                                                   one−sided HP
                                                                   no filter
       40




       30




       20




       10
            1977      1980               1985               1990                1995               2000
Notes: The thin black line is the unfiltered 2-year BETR. BP denotes Baxter-King band-pass filters; see Baxter
and King (1999). The filter renders the series stationary and passes frequencies lower than 2, 8, and 1/2 years,
respectively. HP denotes the optimal one-sided Hodrick-Prescott filter (Hodrick and Prescott (1980)) based on
Ravn and Uhlig (2002).
