NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF HEAD START
Marianne P. Bitler
Hilary W. Hoynes
Thurston Domina
Working Paper 20434
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20434

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

This research was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human
Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number PO1HD065704. The content
is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institutes of Health. We thank Child Care & Early Education Research Connections for providing
access to the experimental data used here. We also thank Josh Angrist, Peg Burchinal, Liz Cascio,
Janet Currie, Greg Duncan, George Farkas, Avi Feller, Alex Gelber, Adam Isen, Doug Miller, Luke
Miratrix, Jesse Rothstein, Diane Schanzenbach, Gary Solon, Deborah Vandell, Chris Walters and members
of the UC Irvine Network on Interventions in Development and our INID Advisory Board members
Jeff Smith, Howard Bloom, Susanna Loeb, Sean Reardon, Robert Crosnoe, Dale Farran, and Jacquelynne
Eccles as well as seminar participants at Claremont McKenna, Stanford, Texas, Tulane, UCLA, UC
Davis, UC Irvine, UC Santa Cruz, University of Houston, APPAM, the Institute for Research on Poverty,
the NBER Summer Institute, and SREE for helpful comments. Kevin Williams provided expert research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Marianne P. Bitler, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Thurston Domina. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Experimental Evidence on Distributional Effects of Head Start
Marianne P. Bitler, Hilary W. Hoynes, and Thurston Domina
NBER Working Paper No. 20434
August 2014
JEL No. H52,I20,I38
ABSTRACT
This study provides the first comprehensive analysis of the distributional effects of Head Start, using
the first national randomized experiment of the Head Start program (the Head Start Impact Study).
We examine program effects on cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes and explore the heterogeneous
effects of the program through 1st grade by estimating quantile treatment effects under endogeneity
(IV-QTE) as well as various types of subgroup mean treatment effects and two-stage least squares
treatment effects. We find that (the experimentally manipulated) Head Start attendance leads to large
and statistically significant gains in cognitive achievement during the pre-school period and that the
gains are largest at the bottom of the distribution. Once the children enter elementary school, the cognitive
gains fade out for the full population, but importantly, cognitive gains persist through 1st grade for
some Spanish speakers. These results provide strong evidence in favor of a compensatory model of
the educational process. Additionally, our findings of large effects at the bottom are consistent with
an interpretation that the relatively large gains in the well-studied Perry Preschool Program are in part
due to the low baseline skills in the Perry study population. We find no evidence that the counterfactual
care setting plays a large role in explaining the differences between the HSIS and Perry findings.

Marianne P. Bitler
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 96297
and NBER
mbitler@uci.edu

Thurston Domina
Department of Education
UC Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697
tdomina@uci.edu

Hilary W. Hoynes
Richard & Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
hoynes@berkeley.edu

1

Introduction
Created in 1965, the federal Head Start program is among the more prominent educa-

tional initiatives in the US. By giving matching grants to programs providing comprehensive
early education, health care, and nutritional services to poor children and parenting training to their parents; Head Start aims to raise educational attainment levels and narrow
educational inequalities. Head Start enrolls more than 900,000 children and has an annual
federal operating budget of nearly $7 billion with additional expenditures by state and local
governments (US DHHS, Office of Head Start 2008). Despite the recent growth of state
public pre-K programs, Head Start remains a central early childhood education provider for
low-income families (Cascio & Schanzenbach (2013)). Additionally, educational inequities—
as measured by preschool enrollment—still exist across the income distribution (Duncan &
Magnuson (2013)).
Head Start and other e↵orts to expand preschool education are predicated on the notion
that the positive e↵ects that educational interventions have on young children multiply across
their life course (Cunha, Heckman, Lochner & Masterov (2006); Heckman (2006); Heckman
(2007)). For example, Knudsen, Heckman, Cameron & Shonko↵ (2006) summarize research
from economics, neurobiology, and developmental psychology on the key role that early
experiences play in later development. They conclude that early in life is the most promising
period for investments in disadvantaged children, since such investments have high rates of
return. Experimental data from the Perry Preschool program, the Abecedarian Project, and
the Chicago Child-Parent Centers lend credence to this argument, demonstrating that early
education programs can have large positive e↵ects on participants’ academic achievement
and attainment (Schweinhart, Barnes & Weikart (1993); Campbell & Ramey (1995); Barnett
(1996); Currie (2001); Heckman, Moon, Pinto, Savelyev & Yavitz (2010)).
In this study, we provide the first comprehensive analysis of the distributional e↵ects
of Head Start. We examine the program’s e↵ects on cognitive and non-cognitive (socialemotional) outcomes and explore the heterogeneous e↵ects of the program through 1st grade
by estimating quantile treatment e↵ects under endogeneity (IV-QTE) as well as various
types of subgroup mean treatment e↵ects and two-stage least squares treatment e↵ects. Our

1

analysis is based on data from the Head Start Impact Study, the first national randomized
experimental evaluation of Head Start. This work adds to a growing body of evidence on
the distributional e↵ects of educational interventions (e.g., Neal & Schanzenbach (2010);
Heckman, Pinto & Savelyev (2010); Angrist, Dynarski, Kane, Pathak & Walters (2012);
Felts & Page (2013)).
By moving beyond the analysis of mean impacts, we test two competing hypotheses
concerning how Head Start impacts vary across the skill distribution. Observational studies
indicate that low-achieving children stand to gain the most by enrolling in early education
(Magnuson, Meyers, Ruhm & Waldfogel (2004); NICHD Early Child Care Research Network
(2004)). This e↵ect may be particularly pronounced in the context of Head Start, since the
program’s curricula are explicitly geared towards remedying the skills’ deficits that often
disadvantage poor students at the beginning of elementary school (Puma, Bell, Cook, Heid
& Lopez (2005)). On the other hand, research on learning trajectories in elementary school
and beyond indicates that since academic skills are cumulative, achievement inequalities
tend to widen as children progress through school (Stanovich (1986)). Similarly, the theory
of dynamic complementarities (Cunha & Heckman (2010)) argues that a higher endowment
of human capital in one period raises the productivity of investments in future periods. Our
analysis will test the ‘compensatory’ hypothesis (predicting the largest gains at the bottom
of the skill distribution) against the ‘skills-begets-skills’ hypothesis (predicting the largest
gains at the top of the skill distribution), within the context of the Head Start applicant
population.
Our work builds on decades of research documenting that Head Start generates important
and statistically significant impacts on cognitive outcomes (e.g., see Currie & Thomas (1995)
and the review in Currie (2001)). Recent evidence using a wide range of quasi-experimental
methods further demonstrates that exposure to Head Start in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s
had positive long-term e↵ects on youth educational attainment, health, and labor market
outcomes (Garces, Currie & Thomas (2002); Ludwig & Miller (2007); Deming (2009); and
Carneiro & Ginja (Forthcoming)). While it is clear that Head Start boosts attendees’ academic skills in the short-term, several studies demonstrate that these e↵ects fade out as
students move from Head Start into Kindergarten and elementary school (e.g., Currie &
2

Thomas (1995); Ludwig & Phillips (2008)). On its face, this pattern of e↵ects seems at odds
with the idea that the e↵ects of early skill formation multiply across later periods of youth
development.
The Head Start Impact Study, mandated by Congress in 1998, was designed to determine
“the impact of Head Start on children’s school readiness and parental practices” as well as
“under what circumstances Head Start achieves its greatest impact and for which children”
(Puma et al. (2005)). The study randomized children applying to oversubscribed Head Start
centers for the first time to either an o↵er of a slot or denial of a slot for one year. The
experiment followed nearly 5,000 children in two cohorts that were three or four years old
at the time of Head Start application through third grade, collecting detailed outcomes on
academic and social-emotional measures.
In this paper, we use the 3-year old HSIS cohort and examine the impacts of Head Start
on cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes. We comprehensively explore the heterogeneity of
e↵ects from the first year of preschool through 1st grade, using quantile treatment e↵ects as
well as mean treatment e↵ects for subgroups. Our main results use an instrumental variables
approach, where the first stage outcome is Head Start participation and the instrument
is the o↵er of a Head Start slot. This allows us to rescale the results from the reduced
form to estimate the e↵ect of the treatment on the treated. We examine cognitive tests
such as the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) as well as various measures from
the Woodcock Johnson III (WJIII) battery of achievement tests. We also examine socialemotional outcomes; for example, relationship measures using the Pianta scales and measures
of child behavior using the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention (ASPI) and other
parent and teacher reports.
We find that Head Start leads to large and statistically significant gains in cognitive skills
in the preschool period. This is evident for the PPVT, which tests receptive vocabulary,
as well as for Woodcock Johnson III measures of early mathematics and early literacy.1
Generally, we find that the gains are largest at the bottom of the distributions of each of
Note that the PPVT and WJIII achievement tests have been shown to be correlated with IQ measures
in many settings and for many age groups (e.g., Caravajal (1988), Campbell, Bell & Keith (2001), Schrank,
Becker & Decker (2001).
1

3

these measures of achievement. The di↵erences in the treatment e↵ect across the distribution
are large—ranging from more than a full standard deviation at the bottom of the distribution
to about a quarter of a standard deviations at the top for PPVT. The range of e↵ects is
substantial for the WJIII measures as well. We also find di↵erences across groups, with larger
positive e↵ects for Hispanics, for those with limited English, and for those with low baseline
cognitive skills. We go on to document that in large part, these di↵erences across groups
largely reflect di↵erences in where in the skill distribution these subgroups are concentrated.
Importantly, our results also speak to a possible explanation for the large short run
cognitive gains found in the Perry experiment. The Perry program was considerably more
intensive than Head Start, providing daily classes and weekly home visits. While we can
not assess the consequences of this programmatic di↵erence, we can assess two additional
explanations for the gap between the large and positive e↵ects of Perry (and other model
programs of the 1960s) and the smaller and less lasting e↵ects of Head Start. First, the Perry
program (like the other model programs) was targeted at a very disadvantaged population.
Our results of large e↵ects of Head Start at the bottom of the distribution indicate that in a
modern setting, we also identify very large gains at low achievement levels, suggesting some
consonance between these earlier findings and the more current ones. Second, the counterfactual care setting for the control groups in the early 1960s was likely quite di↵erent from
the current options for potential HS children. For example, Perry control group members
had little access to any center based care; in contrast, currently, we are seeing the rapid
growth of state means-tested early childhood education programs (Cascio & Schanzenbach
(2013), Duncan & Magnuson (2013)). Indeed, 25% of the control group children in the
HSIS attended a non-Head Start child care center. The HSIS experiment, then, may understate the e↵ects of Head Start compared with a counterfactual of no formal early childhood
education (Shager, Schindler, Magnuson, Duncan, Yoshikawa & Hard (2013)). To address
this possibility, we consider the extent to which subgroup-specific estimated program e↵ects
correlate with subgroup-specific rates of treatment compliance and non-center care participation. Interestingly, we find little role for these factors in explaining underlying di↵erences
in the treatment e↵ects across the distribution or in how these distributional e↵ects di↵er
across subgroups.
4

Overall our results show strong evidence in favor of a compensatory model of educational
process. Once the children enter elementary school, however, these cognitive gains fade
out. Importantly, though, we find that Spanish speakers have cognitive gains that persist
through 1st grade. We find little e↵ect of Head Start on non-cognitive outcomes, either
during preschool or through 1st grade and the e↵ects we do find are fairly constant across
the distribution.
The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. We begin in section 2 by discussing
the literature and theoretical setting for our problem. In section 3, we discuss the HSIS
experiment, HSIS data, and our sample. In section 4, we present the mean treatment e↵ects,
and in section 5, we discuss the methods. Our main results are in section 6. We provide a
discussion in section 7 and conclude in section 8.

2

Background and Context

2.1

E↵ects of Head Start

Although Head Start has been extensively evaluated over its nearly 50 years of existence,
evidence regarding its e↵ectiveness is mixed. It is well established that children enrolled
in Head Start experience short run improvements in cognitive outcomes (see the review by
Currie (2001) for a comprehensive treatment). However, it is less clear how long those test
score gains persist. For example, Currie & Thomas (1995), use a within-family, siblingcomparison research design—where the key variation comes when one sibling attends Head
Start and the other does not—and find that black participants experience fade out in test
score gains in elementary grades while white participants’ gains persist into adolescence.2
More recently, focus has turned to longer-term impacts of Head Start. Garces et al. (2002)
use a sibling-comparison research design and find that Head Start significantly increases
educational attainment for whites but not blacks; yet it significantly decreases criminality
for blacks but not whites. Ludwig & Miller (2007) use a regression discontinuity approach
based on the initial roll-out of the program in the mid-1960s and find that Head Start leads
to significant decreases in child mortality and increases in educational attainment. Deming
Aizer & Cunha (2012), also using a sibling comparison approach, analyze Head Start during the roll-out
of the program in the mid 1960s. An alternative approach used by Gri↵en (2014) uses observational data
but a more structural approach.
2

5

(2009) uses a family fixed e↵ect approach and finds that Head Start has a positive e↵ect on
young adults’ life chances (measured as an index that includes high school completion, college
attendance, idleness, crime, teen pregnancy, and self-reported health status). Carneiro &
Ginja (Forthcoming) use variation in Head Start income eligibility rules and find that the
program leads to reductions in behavioral problems and health improvements in adolescence
and reduces crime and idleness in young adulthood.
Long-term Head Start e↵ects on human capital outcomes are difficult to reconcile with
evidence of fade-out in cognitive domains. One potential explanation is that Head Start influences parents and their investments in children (Gelber & Isen (2013)). Another possibility
is that the long-run treatment operates through changes in non-cognitive or social-emotional
outcomes, something that we explore in our study.
Overall, little is known about heterogeneous impacts of Head Start. The existing work
primarily focuses on di↵erences by race and gender (as described above). Walters (2014)
and Bloom & Weiland (2013) also examine heterogeneity in e↵ects across program sites,
suggesting some role for center inputs. Learning more about the heterogeneity of Head
Start is the focus of our work. We combine a distributional approach with an eye on various
subgroups and where in the counterfactual distribution they are located, bringing new insight
into where the gains are concentrated.

2.2

Theoretical Expectations and Heterogeneity Elsewhere in Social and Educational Policy

In this study, we present a comprehensive analysis of the heterogeneous impacts of the
Head Start program within the context of the first nationally representative randomized
experiment of the program. In particular, we focus on estimating the e↵ects of Head Start
across the distribution of cognitive achievement. This approach allows us to test two competing hypotheses advanced in the broader literature on e↵ects of educational interventions
across the life course.
One theory argues for a “compensatory” e↵ect, where the largest gains to a given educational intervention will accrue to those with lower skills ex-ante. Evidence from observational
studies find evidence in support of this theory in the context of enrolling in early education

6

(Magnuson et al. (2004); NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2004)). This e↵ect
may be particularly pronounced in the context of Head Start. Head Start has traditionally
focused attention on preparing the most disadvantaged students for school entry, which may
lead Head Start programs to emphasize the most basic cognitive skills. The performance
standards in the 1998 HS reauthorization speak to this curricular emphasis, calling on the
program to ensure that all students recognize a word as a unit of print and can identify at
least 10 letters (DHHS ACF (2003)). While Head Start is a highly decentralized program
and does not have a single coordinated curriculum, these performance standards were widely
publicized within the program, and may have influenced instructional priorities (DHHS ACF
(2000)). Similarly, Head Start’s mission of serving “at-risk” young children may lead Head
Start programs to dedicate particular attention to the most socially and emotionally troubled
children.3
On the other hand, the theory of “dynamic complementarities” (Cunha & Heckman
(2010)) argues that higher endowment of human capital in one period raises the productivity
of investment in a future period. Heckman, Pinto & Savelyev (2010) provide supportive
evidence in favor of this theory, finding that the Perry Preschool program led to gains at the
top of the distribution of cognitive achievement for girls.
In sum, our analysis will test the ‘compensatory’ hypothesis (predicting that the largest
gains will accrue at the bottom of the skill distribution) against the ‘skills-begets-skills’
hypothesis (predicting that the largest gains will appear at the top of the skill distribution).
We should point out that we analyze these predictions within an experiment and population
that is highly disadvantaged relative to the nation. We turn to this below in discussing the
study and sample.4
Duncan & Vandell (2012) consider the ramifications for both the skills beget skills models and a more
complicated child-policy fit model for designing interventions.
4
The final HSIS report provides some evidence on potential heterogeneous e↵ects of Head Start by various
subgroups. Puma, Bell, Cook & Heid (2010) report that the o↵er of a Head Start slot had greater positive
short-term cognitive achievement e↵ects for students with special needs, for students who entered into the
program with very low cognitive skills, and for black students and English-language learners. While the
program e↵ects for black students and English language learners typically decayed by the end of Kindergarten,
Puma et al. (2010) find some evidence to suggest that e↵ects of Head Start program o↵ers for special-needs
and low-performing students persist through first grade.
3

7

3

Head Start Impact Study and Data
In this section, we describe the HSIS experiment and the results of the HHS funded

evaluation. We also describe the public use data, our sample, and conduct tests of balance
across the treatment and control groups.

3.1

The HSIS Experiment and Evaluation

The HSIS grew out of a Congressional mandate to evaluate the program which was part
of the 1998 re-authorization of Head Start. The HSIS sample consists of 4,442 children
who were new applicants to oversubscribed Head Start centers. The sample is nationally
representative of children at such centers and consists of 84 regional Head Start programs
spanning 353 centers.5 In the Fall of 2002, applicants were randomly assigned to a treatment
group that received an o↵er to enroll in the Head Start center they applied to and a control
group that did not.6
The HSIS consists of two age cohorts: 3-year olds and 4-year olds.7 The experiment was
intended to determine the e↵ects of being exposed to one year of Head Start. While many
3-year olds in the treatment group would have been expected to continue in Head Start, this
is not an explicit component of the experimental treatment. Indeed many control children
also attended HS at age 4 while some treatment children left Head Start programs. Most
children in the 4-year old cohort would have been expected to transition to Kindergarten in
year two (after the one year of HS treatment).
The evaluation of the HSIS expects to analyze data for children through grade 5. As of
this writing, the HHS-funded evaluation has released final reports on outcomes through grade
1 (Puma et al. (2010)), and more recently through grade 3 (Puma, Bell, Cook, Heid, Broene,
Jenkins, Mashburn & Downer (2012)). In our analysis we use data including outcomes
through the end of first grade.
The HSIS is representative of oversubscribed centers in the U.S. Puma et al. (2010) reports that such
centers account for about 85% of the children enrolled in Head Start. With some exceptions to account for
participation in other evaluations, all over-subscribed centers were at risk of inclusion. The bulk of centers
are oversubscribed.
6
Severely disabled children were excluded from randomization.
7
Note that more precisely, the cohorts were individuals eligible for 2-years or 1-year of Head Start before
Kindergarten, we use 3-year olds and 4-year olds as shorthand for this longer description.
5

8

The reports on the HSIS show positive mean e↵ects on students’ cognitive development.
At the end of the evaluation’s first year, both 3-year-olds and 4-year-olds in the treatment
group scored between 0.10 and 0.30 standard deviations higher than did their peers in the
control group on a wide range of cognitive tests. However, most of the cognitive e↵ects
decayed as students moved into elementary school. There is little consistent evidence for
e↵ects on social-emotional (non-cognitive) outcomes in the short or medium term; most
such impacts are small and statistically insignificant.8
As is common for this type of intervention, the HSIS o↵er of treatment did not translate
one-for-one into Head Start participation. In particular, there were “no shows” (those who
did not participate in HS despite being o↵ered a HS slot) as well as “crossovers” (those who
participated in HS despite not having been o↵ered a HS slot). About 15 percent of the
children in the control group ultimately enrolled in Head Start in the experimental year,
while about 14 percent of treatment group children did not. In light of this cross-over and
incomplete take-up, it is important to point out that the findings described above (from the
final report) represent the e↵ects of Head Start enrollment o↵ers (intent to treat or ITT),
rather than the e↵ects of Head Start enrollment itself (treatment on the treated or TOT).
Given the lack of complete take-up and crossovers in this experiment, we follow Ludwig &
Phillips (2008) and Walters (2014) and use an instrumental variable approach in our analysis.
We discuss the first stage, the counterfactual child care setting environment (where children
would have gone absent the option of the o↵er of a Head Start slot), the mean intent to
treat (ITT) or reduced form, and the treatment e↵ect on the treated (TOT) or instrumental
variables results below.

3.2

Sample, Means, and Tests of Balance

We limit our analysis to the 3-year old cohort. The main reason for doing so is that,
as stated above, eligibility for inclusion in the experiment required children to be first time
applicants to the Head Start program. Since HS serves children during the two years prior to
Any positive social-emotional e↵ects were limited to parent reports for the 3-year old cohort; for example
parents of 3-year olds o↵ered a Head Start slot reported closer and more positive relationships with their
children at the end of 1st grade than did parents in the control group (Puma et al. (2010)). The teacher
reports, which are universally available for all children beginning in Kindergarten, show no significant e↵ects
of Head Start on social-emotional outcomes.
8

9

Kindergarten, this restriction was not limiting for 3-year olds. However, limiting the sample
in this way for 4-year olds may lead to external validity concerns without more information on
why these 4-year olds had not participated in HS at age 3. As might be expected, we find the
4-year old cohort to be potentially more disadvantaged compared with the 3-year old cohort,
with a higher share of children living in Spanish speaking households and living with lower
educated mothers. Additionally, we focus on the 3 year cohort because increasingly many
4-year olds have options besides Head Start with the growth of the state pre-K movement
(Cascio & Schanzenbach (2013)).
The 3-year old sample consists of 2,449 children, with 1,464 in the treatment group and
985 in the control group. Due to a complicated sample design and adjustments for attrition,
there are a variety of sampling and non-response weights available in the data. We use the
baseline weights which we augment in order to balance non-response as discussed below.9
Randomization occurred in the summer and fall of 2002, and we use HSIS data that
span the period from the summer after application to a Head Start center through first
grade (if the child is on track). In our analysis, we refer to the main intervention year for
our 3-year olds as the “Head Start year” or first Head Start year which corresponds to the
2002–03 academic year, which is followed by the “Age-4 year” or second Head Start year
(2003–04), the Kindergarten year (2004–05), and the first grade year (2005–06). Thus, these
labels refer to the normative outcome for the children in each year. The HSIS data consist
of the results of interviews with parents, teachers, and center directors as well as cognitive
and social-emotional tests. We also make use of baseline data from parent interviews and
baseline tests given to the children in the Fall of 2002.
Appendix Table 1 summarizes the cognitive and social-emotional (non-cognitive) measures that we use, as well as the years during which they are available for all children.
For cognitive outcomes, we use the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT) of vocabulary
knowledge and receptive language10 and the Woodcock Johnson III measure of Pre-Academic
The baseline weights adjust for the complex sampling. The HSIS also makes available non-response
adjusted weights, however, we do not make use of these adjustments. Our bootstrapping inference procedure
requires that we be able to replicate the process of obtaining our inverse propensity-score adjusted weights
to account for baseline test scores and demographics. More detail on this is given below.
10
English test takers were administered the PPVT III, while Spanish speakers were administered both the
PPVT III if they had sufficient English as well as the Test de Vocabilario en Imagenes Peabody. A very
9

10

Skills, which is a composite of three components measuring language, early literacy, and early
numeracy. We focus on these two measures for two reasons. First, both the PPVT and WJIII
Pre-Academic Skills index and its subtests (Applied Problems, Letter-Word, and Spelling)
are available for all years of the study. Second, the PPVT has been shown to be a good
predictor of later life skills (e.g., Romano, Babchishin, Pagani & Kohen (2010)) while the
WJIII Applied Problems (one of the components of the Pre-Academic skills composite) is
the only assessment capturing early math skills, which are also highly predictive of later life
skills (Duncan, Dowsett, Claessens, Magnuson, Huston, Klebanov, Pagani, Feinstein, Engel,
Brooks-Gunn, Sexton, Duckworth & Japel (2007)).11 Social-emotional outcomes include
parents’ reports of child behavior and parent and child relationships as well as teachers’
reports of children’s classroom behavior. Parent-reported measures are provided each year
while teachers’ reports only become uniformly available in Kindergarten. (Children who are
at home do not have teacher reports of their behavior; this includes a large share of the control group in the “Head Start” year.) Social-emotional skills are measured using the Pianta
scale (Pianta (1992), Pianta (1996)) and the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention
(ASPI), as well as other teacher and parent reports. Each of these measures are indices constructed from a series of questions about the child posed to the teacher or parent, counting
affirmative answers (ASPI) or counting responses on a five-point Likert scale (Pianta) or, in
some cases, aggregating parent reports of children’s behavior.
Table 1 reports summary statistics for child, parent, and caregiver variables at baseline
(Fall 2002). The first column reports means for the control group, weighted using the baseline
child weights.12 As expected given their eligibility for and application to Head Start, these
children (and their treatment group counterparts) are fairly disadvantaged. A little less
than half of these 3-year olds are living with both biological parents, most children have
mothers (or caregivers) with at most a high school diploma or a GED, 39% have mothers
small number (67) of the children were not eligible to take the PPVT III in English while the vast bulk of
the Spanish speakers took this test in English. Thus, the PPVT is a useful pre-test for some outcomes given
its score is available for almost all children in the fall of the Head Start year.
11
Some of the other WJIII tests included on the survey are not very continuously distributed and are thus
perhaps less suitable for our distributional methods.
12
We omit observations for children where either there is no propensity score weight (which can occur if
there was only 1 child in the center) or where there was no valid imputed or actual PPVT at baseline because
the child could not take the test in English. We discuss the propensity score weighting in the next section.

11

who were never married, and 21% are in medium or high risk families.13 The 3-year olds
are about evenly split across three race/ethnicity groups: Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, and
non-Hispanic white or other. A little more than a quarter either took some tests in Spanish
or speak Spanish at home (this group is labeled “Spanish speaker” in the table).
As shown in the bottom of the table, the timing and presence of the baseline test assessment varied across children. Recall that these baseline tests were administered during the
Fall of 2002. Unfortunately, it was infeasible to administer these pre-tests to many children
before Fall 2002 and thus the assessments for many children took place during the school
year. In addition, a further complication is that children were assessed in di↵erent months
(and thus likely at di↵erent ages and developmental points). Table 1 shows that about
16% of the control sample children were assessed before November, a third were assessed in
November, another quarter were assessed after November, and 26% have no baseline score.
The children with missing baseline tests had their test scores (and other subgroup variables)
imputed so these pre-tests could be included in later year analyses.14
The second column provides the di↵erence in means of the variables between the treatment and control groups (using the baseline child weights). These di↵erences are also adjusted for arbitrary correlation within Head Start center of random assignment. Consistent
with the random assignment, almost none of the demographic characteristics are significantly
di↵erent between the treatment and control groups (22 of the 25 variables are not statistically di↵erent at the 5% level), with these measures collected mostly at baseline. These
column 2 results show that the treatment group contains a statistically significantly lower
share of children born to teen mothers (significant at the 10% level), a lower share of low risk
children and higher share of high risk children (significant the 10% level), a higher share of
children with special needs (significant at the 5% level), and a lower share of children with
younger caregivers (significant at the 5% level).
Household risk is assessed by the number of affirmative reports at baseline to the following five conditions:
receipt of TANF or Food Stamps, neither parent has a high school diploma or a GED, neither parent is
employed or in school, the child’s biological mother/caregiver is a single parent, and the child’s biological
mother was age 19 or younger when child was born. Children with 0–2 risk factors are assigned to be low
risk, those with 3 risk factors are assigned moderate risk, and those with 4–5 are denoted high risk.
14
We have explored also treating these pre-tests as partial post-tests and excluding them from our propensity score weights. This makes little di↵erence for our findings.
13

12

Perhaps of more concern is the fact that the timing and presence of baseline test assessments vary significantly between the treatment and control groups. The results show that
children in the treatment group were somewhat more likely (10 percentage points more so)
to be assessed earlier than the control children (before November) while those in the control
were 12% less likely to be assessed at all and more likely to be assessed later (if they were
assessed). The control group’s later test assessment will, if anything, be expected to lead to
a downward bias in the estimated e↵ects of Head Start. The di↵erential attrition might also
lead to bias. Thus, to account for the di↵erences in attrition, the month of test assessment,
and the other observables, in our results throughout the paper, we construct a weight that
adjusts for the di↵erence in selection into the sample. This is discussed below.

3.3

Weighting and Adjusting for Di↵erences in Observables

Often we are interested in controlling for baseline characteristics of groups in settings
such as this. In particular, in the context of educational interventions, it is typical to
adjust for pre-treatment baseline test scores if they are available to account for where “kids
came in,” although it is not necessary with experimental data (e.g., Krueger & Zhu (2004)).
Furthermore, we want to control for other baseline observables to adjust for the (presumed
relatively minor) imbalances in the demographic characteristics between the treatment and
control groups as well as the di↵erences in baseline assessment date and di↵erential attrition.
Given our interest in distributional estimates and in particular quantile treatment estimates (QTE) and QTE under endogeneity (IV-QTE), there is a natural way to control for
observables in this context with experimental data. Firpo (2007) shows that with selection
on observables, one can obtain efficient estimates of the unconditional quantile treatment
e↵ects by weighting with inverse propensity score weights, obtained by predicting treatment
status with the observables. Frolich & Melly (Forthcoming) extend this to the case of endogeneity in the key right hand side variable (here enrollment in Head Start). We use these
approaches in our context, where the list of observables incorporates both attrition in the
baseline test and baseline test scores (thus richly accounting for baseline scores). In particular, we estimate the propensity score pb, the predicted probability of being in the treatment
group as a function of baseline characteristics using a logit, estimated using the child baseline

13

weight.15 We then weight each observation by its inverse propensity-score weight (1/p̂ if in
the treatment group, and 1/(1

p̂) if a control observation).

In our logit model, we control for all of the child and caregiver variables in Table 1.
Additionally, to richly control for baseline test scores, we assign dummies for decile of the
baseline (2002) PPVT, separately for the four assessment month groupings in Table 1. One
of the assessment-month groups is “missing or imputed PPVT,” allowing us to use and
account for the observations with imputed baseline values. Thus, we are also able to control
for di↵erences in attrition. Finally, we include a full set of fixed e↵ects for the Head Start
center to which the child applied.16 In the estimated propensity score model, of the 39
dummies for assessment-month-group-by-decile of test score only 2 are significant at the 5%
level, and there is no consistent pattern in the sign of the coefficients among these baseline
test score identifiers. Looking at the overlap of the propensity scores between the treatments
and controls, they look extremely similar with trivial non-overlap.17 The final column of
Table 1 presents the “adjusted” di↵erence in means between the treatments and controls.
This is the di↵erence in the weighted means using our inverse propensity score weights.
As expected, the treatment and control samples look even more balanced after adjusting
for observable di↵erences with our inverse p-score weight. Only 2 of 28 total controls (25
demographic variables and 3 timing variables) are statistically significantly di↵erent at the
5% level, compared to 5 of the 28 in column 2 (using the baseline child weight). In the
remainder of the paper, we use the inverse propensity score weights for all of our results.

4

Mean Treatment E↵ects and the First Stage
As discussed above, an o↵er of treatment in the HSIS (an o↵er of a slot in an oversub-

scribed center) does not translate one-for-one into Head Start participation (either at the
center of random assignment or at another Head Start center). Table 2 provides detailed
Zanutto (2006) and Dolton & Smith (2011) discuss use of survey weights with propensity-score weighting
estimation.
16
The fixed e↵ects for the center of application help control for the fact that random assignment shares
varied by center and also adjust for important potential geographic heterogeneity. Note that the public-use
data do not reveal anything about the location of the centers.
17
We also explored a number of alternative propensity-score adjustments, and our findings are robust to
these (and in fact to not weighting at all). The results of the propensity score weighting model are available
in request.
15

14

information on child care settings, separately for the treatment and control groups (as well
as for their di↵erence). The first row provides what we call “the Administrative report”
of Head Start participation, which is directly provided in the HSIS data and corresponds
to the child having participated in a federally funded Head Start program for some time
during the first year of the study. The table shows that 86% of the children o↵ered a slot
(treatment group children) are enrolled in Head Start during the Head Start year compared
to 15% of the control group children. Thus the experimentally manipulated o↵er of a Head
Start slot led to a highly statistically significant 70.5 percentage point increase in Head Start
enrollment (column 3).
To gain more insight into the counterfactual care setting environment experienced by
these children, we also report in Table 2 the modal child care setting, as reported by the
parents in Spring 2003 (at the end of the “Head Start” year), and again in Spring 2004.
Looking at the control group means for Spring 2003, about 15% are in Head Start, a quarter
are in another center, and about 60% are in family day care or being cared for by a parent
or relative, with the vast bulk being with a parent or relative. As discussed by Duncan &
Magnuson (2013), understanding the counterfactual child care environment is important for
providing context for the results and expectations for the e↵ects of the intervention. The
o↵er of a Head Start slot mostly displaces use of other centers and parent/relative care: The
table shows a 18 percentage point decline in use of other centers with a Head Start o↵er and
a 49 percentage point decline in use of family day care or parent or relative care.18
In the bottom of the table, we provide similar tabulations for parent reports of child
care use (or Kindergarten enrollment) for our 3-year old cohort at the end of the second
year of the study (the “Age 4 year”). As discussed above, the HSIS treatment is a oneyear treatment. As one might expect given this disadvantaged population as well as the
aforementioned growing public pre-K options for children aged 4, there is significant change
in care arrangements between ages 3 and 4 for these children. Additionally, the di↵erences
in child care settings narrow between the treatment and control, “blunting” the treatment.
Unfortunately, we do not have “administrative” confirmation about children’s use of any centers but
Head Start, and must rely on parent reports of the center at which the children spent the most time.
However, note the high degree of concordance of the administrative measure and parent reports of Head
Start in spring 2003 (the only year for which we have the administrative measure).
18

15

At the end of the Age-4 year, 61% of the treatment group is in Head Start compared to
nearly half of the controls, with a di↵erence of 13.5 percentage points. The di↵erence in
staying with a parent or relative is nearly 3 percentage points. Much of the change in the
treatment-control di↵erence in child care settings between the Head Start year and the Age-4
year comes from changes in child care setting for the control group. Among control children,
14.6% are in Head Start in the HS year compared to 47.3% in the Age-4 year. Many fewer
control children are in parent or relative care during the Age-4 Year: 53.6% of the control
children are in parent/relative care in the Head-Start year as compared to 10.3% in the Age-4
year. For treatment children, most of the change is an increase in use of other center-based
care (and a reduction in use of Head Start), with use of other center care increasing from
6.8% to 25.0%.
It is not completely obvious what one might think of as the appropriate “first stage”
treatment here. Our position is that the appropriate first stage outcome is use of Head
Start in the “Head Start” year. This is the explicit experimental manipulation—the HSIS
o↵ered treatment children a slot in Head Start for one year. We use this as the first stage
for the analysis of outcomes in all years in the HSIS. Alternatively, if one considers use of
any center-based care in the Head Start year—whether Head Start or other centers—to be
the first stage outcome, then the first stage treatment is smaller but still quite large, with an
o↵er of a slot leading to an increase of 49 percentage points in the probability of using center
care in the Head Start year. It is important to note that any reduction in the magnitude
of the first stage would lead to larger TOT e↵ects from a Wald estimate. In that case, our
results provide a lower bound for the estimated e↵ects of use of center care in the HSIS.
Before examining the impacts of HS across the distribution of outcomes, we first present
mean treatment e↵ects for our main cognitive outcome, PPVT, and also show we achieve
balance in attrition with our inverse p-score weights. Table 3 contains mean treatment
e↵ects and control group means using our inverse propensity-score weights (in the leftmost 3
columns of the table) and using the baseline weights (in the rightmost 2 columns of the table).
For each assessment period, we show results for two di↵erent outcome variables: PPVT test
scores—reported in the top panel—and the probability that the PPVT test score is missing

16

(or for the baseline 2002 period only, imputed or missing)—reported in the bottom panel.19
Columns 1–3 report the control mean, the mean intent to treat e↵ect (reduced form), and
the two stage least squares estimates; each estimated while balancing baseline characteristics
(e.g., using inverse propensity score weights). For reference, in columns 4 and 5 we present
the control group mean and treatment-control di↵erence (intent to treat) using only the
baseline child weights.
The first row of each panel examines the baseline PPVT, providing another balance test.
The table shows that the mean of PPVT at baseline was 231 with a standard deviation of 38
(both measures calculated for the control group). There are at most trivial di↵erences,
on average, in the baseline scores across the treatment and control groups, either with
(column 2) or without (column 5) controls. (Recall the controlling is done with the weights.)
This is, of course, important as it indicates balance in the randomization on key baseline
measures. Without the use of inverse propensity-score weights, we do find a statistically
significant di↵erence of 12% in the share of observations with missing (imputed or simply
not administered) baseline PPVT scores, with more control observations missing test scores.
However, after inverse propensity-score weights are applied, the probability of a missing
baseline score is balanced (the di↵erence is a statistically insignificant 0.03 after adjustment).
In fact, our inverse propensity-score weights balance the PPVT non-response in each later
year from 2003–2006 as well, with small and statistically insignificant di↵erences in nonresponse in those years.
Next we turn to mean treatment e↵ects (reduced form e↵ects) in Spring 2003 after the
experimental year. The HSIS’s o↵er of a Head Start slot led to a statistically significant
increase in PPVT of 7.2 points or 0.19 standard deviations (the unadjusted results, using
the baseline weights, are nearly identical). The IV estimates (TOT) indicate that Head Start
participation led to a 10.2 point or 0.27 standard deviation increase in PPVT. The IV results
scale up the ITT results by about 40 percent, reflecting the first stage of about 0.70.
The mean treatment e↵ects for the years after the Head Start year show fade-out in
the experiment’s impacts. The IV estimates show that participation in Head Start leads
The PPVT and one Woodcock Johnson III measure were imputed for almost all children missing them
at baseline. No imputations were made for scores missing in spring 2003 or later.
19

17

to a increase in PPVT of 4.2 points at the end of Age-4 Year, 0.3 points at the end of
Kindergarten, and 2.9 points at the end of 1st Grade. None of these e↵ects is statistically
significant. The qualitative finding of fade-out and no significant mean e↵ects of the program
after the first year hold for both our adjusted and unadjusted estimates, and for the ITT as
well as the TOT estimates.
We now move on to our main analysis, examining the heterogeneity of Head Start and
the HSIS across groups and across the distribution.

5

Empirical approach
It is useful to begin with the usual potential outcomes model notation (e.g., Rubin (1974);

Holland (1986)) for estimation of the e↵ects of a treatment. Each individual i has two
potential outcomes, Y1i and Y0i (here, outcomes are test scores or indices of student behavior).
Person i has outcome Y1i if assigned to the treatment group and outcome Y0i if assigned to
the control group. D(i) denotes the group that i is assigned to in a randomized experiment
(D(i) = 1 if in the treatment group and D(i) = 0 if in the control group). The treatment
e↵ect on person i is then

i

= Y1i

Y0i . The fundamental evaluation problem is that we

do not observe the treatment e↵ect—that is, only one potential outcome is observed for
each person i. With randomization of treatment, however, we can identify the average
treatment e↵ect using the di↵erence in means between the treatment and control group,
= E[ i ] = E[Y1 ]

5.1

E[Y0 ]. This is what we presented above.

Quantile Treatment E↵ects

Our interest here is in exploring the heterogeneity in impacts of Head Start, and in particular, in examining the impacts across the distribution of cognitive achievement. For this
analysis, we use quantile treatment e↵ects (QTE), and ultimately a particular implementation of instrumental variables quantile treatment e↵ects (IV-QTE) which we describe in
turn. The QTE are simply the distributional analog of the average treatment e↵ect. If F (y)
is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of Y , then the qth quantile of the distribution
F (y) is defined as the smallest value yq such that F (yq ) is at least as large as q. Further, if
F1 is the CDF if D = 1 and F0 the CDF if D = 0, then the QTE estimate is the di↵erence
between the qth quantiles of these two distributions yq = yq1
18

yq0 , where yqd is the qth

quantile of distribution Fd .
In general, the joint distribution of (Y0i , Y1i ) is not identified without further assumptions. However, as with the average treatment e↵ect, randomization of treatment implies
identification of the marginal quantiles yqd , and thus identification of the di↵erences in their
quantiles, yq = yq1

yq0 . For example, given random assignment, one can consistently es-

timate the QTE at the median (0.50 quantile) simply by subtracting the control group’s
sample median from the treatment group’s sample median.20 The only adjustment we make
to this simple setup for our reduced form estimates of the e↵ect on the distribution is to use
the inverse propensity score weights to account for observables, as discussed above.
This QTE approach is an analysis of the ex post cognitive achievement (e.g., PPVT at
the end of the Head Start year), and the result is an estimate of how Head Start a↵ects the
distribution of cognitive achievement. In this context we can test to what extent the data are
consistent with the compensatory or skill-begets-skills theories of educational development.
An alternative approach would be to use baseline skills (in our context, 2002 PPVT) as the
measure of underlying skill and to explore how the treatment varies across this spectrum. A
third approach would be to estimate how Head Start a↵ects the value added in test scores
from baseline. We choose to focus on the QTE (although in one set of results we explore
estimating mean treatment e↵ects across the distribution of baseline PPVT) for a couple of
reasons. First, as discussed above, not all children were assessed at baseline, and there is
imbalance in the month of assessment and the rate of missing PPVT across the treatment
and control groups. Second, a significant share of the assessments took place in the mid and
late fall of 2002, months into the first year; thus the pre-test for some may reflect treatment.
In short, the baseline test is not ideal in this context.

5.2

IV-QTE

While it is of interest to look at the directly policy relevant outcome “What would
happen if we expanded the number of Head Start slots at oversubscribed centers?,” it is also
of interest to know the underlying parameter, the e↵ect for a child of attending Head Start.
Empirically, with no covariates, this is identical to a set of quantile regressions (Koenker & Bassett
(1978)) of the outcome on the constant and a dummy for treatment status at various percentiles (and with
no other additional control variables); hence the term unconditional QTE.
20

19

Thus, instead of simply looking at the reduced form e↵ects of treatment assignment, we also
want to look at the e↵ects of Head Start take-up. In the usual notation, now the endogenous
variable is Head Start participation (D) and the instrument Z is treatment assignment.
In the mean outcome setting, two-stage least squares gives us the e↵ect of Head Start on
the marginal child induced to enter Head Start only if they obtain an o↵er of a slot under some
assumptions (Imbens & Angrist (1994)). In the QTE setting, there are various approaches for
dealing with endogeneity, such as Abadie, Angrist & Imbens (2002) for conditional IV-QTE
or Chernozhukov & Hansen (2005). We use the approach of Frolich & Melly (Forthcoming)
who develop estimators for unconditional QTE when treatment (here use of Head Start)
is endogenous. They extend the LATE approach of Imbens & Angrist (1994) and Abadie
(2002), and estimate e↵ects of taking up the treatment across the distribution for compliers.21
This approach uses assumptions that are analogous to those used in the usual LATE settings:
There are compliers, monotonicity holds, the instrument is independent (excludable and
unconfounded), and there is common support. For asymptotics, their approach also requires
unique and well-defined quantiles. If these assumptions are satisfied, the distributions of the
outcome under either counterfactual are defined non-parametrically.

5.3

Inference

The HSIS data are not random samples of children across centers, but rather were sampled
in a complicated fashion. For inference, we bootstrap, with centers being randomly sampled
with replacement (with all children from sampled centers appearing in the data whenever
a center is sampled). We construct confidence intervals using the percentile method. With
999 bootstrap resamples, a 90% confidence interval is given by sorting the resulting bootstrap quantile treatment e↵ect estimates for a given quantile q in increasing magnitude, and
selecting the 50th and 950th bootstrap estimates. These point-wise confidence intervals are
plotted along with the real data QTE in our figures. Within each bootstrap replicate, the
propensity score is re-estimated on the bootstrap sample. A similar process is applied to the
We make use of Frolich & Melly’s (Forthcoming)’s software, using our own estimate of the predicted
probability of being in the treatment group (propensity score) as an input, but bootstrap our resulting
estimates 999 times with replacement and use the resulting distribution of estimates for inference rather than
using their asymptotic calculations. This allows us to account for non-response with our inverse propensity
score weights.
21

20

IV estimates.

6

Main Results for the Heterogeneous E↵ects of HSIS

6.1

QTE and IV-QTE Results for the Head Start year, full sample

Figure 1a presents the QTE for the Head Start year, using the PPVT test administered
in Spring 2003. Recall from above, the QTE are the simple di↵erence in the quantiles of the
treated and control groups (where the quantiles are calculated using the inverse propensity
score weights). We plot the QTE for each centile between 1 and 99 along with the point-wise
90% bootstrapped confidence intervals. The solid line gives the QTE and the long dashed
lines give the 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals at each percentile index. The horizontal
dotted line presents the average treatment e↵ect (as reported in Table 3).22 This graph being
of the QTE (and not the IV-QTE), the results show the impact of an o↵er of Head Start,
the reduced form or ITT e↵ects. There are several things to note from these results. First,
the o↵er of a HS slot improves cognitive skills (PPVT) throughout the distribution (all the
point estimates are positive). Second, the gains associated with treatment are largest at the
bottom of the test score distribution. The estimates at the lower end of the skill distribution
are very large, ranging from around 30 for quantiles 1–3, to 17 for quantile 13, to 3 at
quantile 43 (which is the last QTE which is statistically significantly di↵erent from zero at
the 10% level). These e↵ects are substantial relative to the control group standard deviation
of 38 (see column 1 of Table 3), implying e↵ect sizes upwards of 0.8 SD at the bottom of the
distribution to 0.08 SD at the median. (In this figure, and in the rest of the figures in the
paper, to help in interpreting the magnitudes we set the y-axis to be approximately plus or
minus one control-group standard deviation of the outcome plotted.)
The QTE capture the impact of the treatment on the distribution of outcomes. One limitation of the QTE estimator is that the QTE at quantile q need not equal the treatment e↵ect
for an individual located at quantile q of the control group. While our hypotheses are about
e↵ects for individuals of various cognitive abilities, our QTE results will represent e↵ects on
We also provide one additional balance test. In particular, in Appendix Figure 1, we report the QTE
for the baseline PPVT (2002). Notably, the confidence intervals all include 0; thus, we have balance across
the two groups in the baseline test score distribution. (In results not shown, there is only modest imbalance
in the baseline QTE before controlling for observables using the inverse propensity score weights.)
22

21

the whole distribution. Only with further assumptions, which are perhaps undesirable, can
we conclude that the QTE is the treatment e↵ect for a particular individual.23
Having established the existence of a reduced form e↵ect of an o↵er of Head Start on
PPVT at the end of the first year, we now move to the estimates of the treatment-on-thetreated using the IV-QTE approach of Frolich & Melly (Forthcoming). Figure 1b presents
these results. The graph is set up as before, except in addition to the IV-QTE (and the
bootstrapped 90% confidence intervals) the horizontal line plots the mean treatment-onthe-treated estimate (e.g., the 2SLS estimate of 10.2 test score points from Table 3). The
results are qualitatively very similar to, but scaled up from, the QTE. The results show that
participating in Head Start leads to increases in cognitive achievement across the distribution,
with much larger e↵ects at the bottom of the distribution. The magnitudes are quite large—
gains in the bottom quintile range from 12 to 38, representing between 0.32 and 1 SD
units. The results for PPVT in the Head Start year provide strong evidence in favor of the
compensatory theory.
We now continue our presentation of IV-QTE, examining the impacts for the WJIII
Pre-academic Skills composite and its components (Applied Problems, Letter-Word, and
Spelling). These tests are complementary to the PPVT (a test of receptive vocabulary), with
one major advantage being the ability to examine the Applied Problems test, which reflects
early numeracy. The other components encompass pre-reading, letter-word recognition,
early writing, and spelling. The WJIII results are presented in Figures 2a–2d. Starting
with Figure 2a, the IV-QTE for Pre-Academic Skills indicate results that largely echo the
findings for the PPVT. Participating in Head Start leads to an increase in achievement
throughout the Pre-Academic Skills distribution, with significant and large e↵ects at the
bottom of the distribution and smaller e↵ects losing statistical significance beginning around
the 40th percentile. Notably, though, there is somewhat less variation in the treatment
e↵ects across the distribution compared with the PPVT, and the confidence intervals are
wider. Interestingly, when we separately examine the three test components of the PreOne assumption that allows for treatment heterogeneity is rank preservation (e.g., Heckman, Smith &
Clements (1997)), under which a person’s location in the distribution is unchanged by the treatment. In this
case, the QTE are the same as the distribution of individual treatment e↵ects.
23

22

Academic Skills test, we see that the e↵ects on early numeracy (Applied Problems, Figure
2b) show dramatic evidence of large impacts at the bottom of the distribution, with e↵ects
above zero until around the 40th percentile. The results for WJIII Letter-Word (Figure 2c)
show evidence of positive e↵ects in the middle and top of the distribution (and some nonnegative e↵ects at the bottom). The WJIII Spelling test (Figure 2d) shows little variability
across the distribution, with some marginally significant positive e↵ects. Overall the WJIII
tests findings largely confirm the results using the PPVT—the evidence is in favor of a
compensatory e↵ect of HS for those at the bottom of each test scale distribution. In addition,
having a measure of the impact of HS on early numeracy (Applied Problems) is particularly
useful given Duncan et al.’s (2007) results showing the importance of early numeracy in
predicting long term achievement. We do note, however, that the test components capturing
literacy (Letter-Word, and to a lesser extent, Spelling) provide some evidence in favor of the
skills-beget-skills hypothesis. (We further remind the reader that the bottom of the various
test score distributions do not have to be the same individuals, although they may be.)

6.2

Results for Subgroups in the Head Start Year

Another dimension of heterogeneity is captured by examining di↵erences across subgroups
of the HSIS population. In particular, we begin by analyzing reduced form (ITT) mean
impacts by race (Hispanic, non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic white), language (Spanish
speaker, English speaker), and terciles of the baseline PPVT score. Reduced-form estimates
for these subgroups are in the second column of Table 4 for PPVT in the Head Start year
(along with the control group means in column 1). This table shows dramatic di↵erences
across subgroups, with larger reduced-form mean treatment e↵ects for Hispanics (11.5 or
0.29 standard deviations), Spanish speakers (15.0 or 0.47 standard deviations) and those in
the bottom tercile of the baseline test score (11.2 or 0.34 standard deviations) than for the
other subgroup members. These are very large e↵ects.
One possible explanation for the di↵erences in treatment e↵ects across groups is di↵erences in the probability of taking up Head Start across subgroups. Additionally, variation
across subgroups may reflect di↵erences in counterfactual child care settings across these
subgroups, which is viewed by many as an important context for understanding e↵ects of
Head Start (and early childhood programs more generally). In fact, a strength of our ap23

proach is that analyzing impacts across subgroups gives us some potential insight into the
role played by the first stage and the counterfactual care setting. The third column of Table
4 presents the administrative first stage for the various subgroups. It is notable that the
magnitude of the first stage does not always track the magnitude of the reduced form; for
example Hispanics have lower take-up rates than do non-Hispanic blacks and whites.
Figure 3a displays this information about the first stage and reduced forms by group more
compactly for these and other subgroups. Figure 3a is a scatter plot where the administrative
first stage is on the x-axis and the reduced form mean treatment e↵ect (ITT) is on the y-axis.
Each dot represents a di↵erent subgroup, including as above race/ethnicity, Spanish speaker
and terciles of baseline distribution plus gender and mother’s education, with the size of the
dots reflecting the the sum of inverse propensity score weights accruing to the subgroup.
Perhaps surprisingly, the graph shows little or no systematic relationship between the first
stages and the reduced-form e↵ects on PPVT by subgroup. For example, while Hispanics
and Spanish speakers have the largest reduced form e↵ects, they do not have larger first
stages than do other subgroup members. The first stage e↵ect of an o↵er of Head Start on
Head Start take-up is higher for females compared with males, but their reduced-form e↵ects
are similar.
Figure 3b explores the role of the counterfactual care setting with a scatter plot identical
to Figure 3a, except that the x-axis now plots the control group mean for use of non-center
care (family day care, parent, relative or unknown). Figure 3c provides another lens by
plotting on the x axis the “first stage” of the e↵ect of the Head Start o↵er on use of noncenter care. Echoing the results above, overall the HSIS data show little relationship between
the counterfactual care settings and the reduced form PPVT e↵ects across subgroups.24
We further explore this using the approach of Abadie, Chingos & West (2014) by creating
subgroups based on the propensity to use non-center care. Of course the problem is that use
of non-center care is endogenous (we do not have a “pre” measure of this variable). Following
Abadie et al. (2014), we predict non-center propensity for the treatment group members,
using coefficients estimated based on the control group. Non-center propensity is predicted
similarly for the control group, except we use a “leave one out” approach (dropping the
24

See Appendix Table 2 for the point estimates behind these two scatter plots.

24

own control observation from the regression used to predict its value). (The model includes
the same covariates we used to predict the propensity scores.) We predict hexiles of the
predicted non-center care counterfactual, and produce scatterplots similar to Figure 3, with
the reduced form (ITT) e↵ects on the y-axis and the first stage (Figure 4a), control group
non-center mean (Figure 4b) and alternative first stage for non-center care (Figure 4c). (We
also include a fitted line.) The results echo the findings from Figure 3—we find no evidence
that di↵erences in the magnitude of the mean treatment e↵ects across the predicted hexiles
of using non-center care are explained by di↵erences in the take-up of Head Start (the first
stage) or counterfactual care setting.25
Returning to the subgroups in Figure 3 (and Table 4), it is notable that children in the
bottom tercile of the baseline PPVT score show evidence of a larger first stage (79% compared
with the full sample first stage of 70.5%), a larger reduced form e↵ect (11.2 compared with
the full sample e↵ect of 7.2), and high use of non-center care among the controls. To explore
the di↵erences across baseline skills further, we take a less parametric approach. In Figure 5a,
we examine how the first stage varies with the baseline PPVT score by estimating local linear
regressions (by baseline PPVT) of parent-reported HS use in spring of the Head Start year,
separately for the treatment and control groups. When seen across the entire distribution
of baseline PPVT, the figure shows remarkable uniformity in the first stage e↵ect of an o↵er
of a slot on Head Start participation across the baseline skills distribution. We can take
this further to explore the reduced form impacts of a Head Start o↵er on PPVT at the
end of the Head Start year, across baseline scores. In particular, in Figure 5b, following
Duflo, Dupas & Kremer (2011), we estimate local linear regressions of the mean e↵ect on
PPVT at the end of the Head Start year, as a function of the baseline PPVT, estimated
separately for the treatment and control groups and in Figure 5c, we plot the treatmentminus-control di↵erences from these local linear regressions (along with the bootstrapped
confidence intervals).26 These estimates as a function of baseline PPVT (another version of
a subgroup estimate) show large gains at the bottom of the baseline PPVT skills distribution
An alternative explanation of course is that the selection into counterfactual care choice is based on
unobservables which are orthogonal to these observables used to predict non-center care use.
26
The bandwidth here is 1/20 the range of scores, and we use a rectangular kernel. Results are robust to
deviations from this bandwidth.
25

25

with treatment group assignment, with some evidence of a positive e↵ect near the top third
of the baseline skills distribution. Interestingly, this approach yields similar findings to the
QTE qualitatively (the figure is best compared to the ITT QTE in Figure 1a). We prefer
the QTE (and IV-QTE) for several reasons. First, note that we only have baseline scores
for the full sample for PPVT (most of the WJIII tests were not administered at baseline to
Spanish speakers). Second, we worry about the prevalence of missing baseline test scores
(disproportionately imputed for the controls) as well as the variation in month of assessment
for this test (leaking into the treatment period). Further, and more importantly, for many
policy interventions such as Head Start, knowing about e↵ects on the (ex-post) distribution—
the QTE or IV-QTE—are of substantial interest, and the rhetoric about closing test gaps
is about ex-post (of some reform or treatment) scores, not ex-ante ones. The QTE captures
precisely these ex-post e↵ects while the local linear results captures the ex-ante e↵ects (in a
very unrestricted way).
Overall, this analysis suggests that the reduced-form e↵ects of the HSIS vary across
demographic subgroups and by baseline test score. We find little evidence that this is
explained by di↵erences in either program take-up or counterfactual care settings. Returning
to Table 4, we present the IV estimates for our key subgroups in column 4. Not surprisingly
given the above discussion, these results are qualitatively similar to the reduced form, but
scaled up by 40–50%. The analysis of mean e↵ects (ITT and TOT) across subgroups again
shows evidence of the compensatory hypothesis, with larger e↵ects for those with lower
baseline scores, and for Hispanics and those who speak Spanish at home, compared to others.
We can further explore the di↵erences across subgroups by estimating the IV-QTE separately for each subgroup (these are referred to as “conditional IV QTE” as they are conditioned on being in the subgroup of interest). The results for language subgroups are
presented in Figure 6a. (To make for easier viewing, we drop the confidence intervals and
the mean treatment e↵ect from these graphs.) The results are dramatic—while both Spanish and English speakers have the largest gains at the bottom of the PPVT distribution
(as in the full sample), the IV-QTE for Spanish speakers are very large at the bottom of
the distribution—they are above 20 or two-thirds of a standard deviation through the 60th
percentile.
26

While these conditional IV-QTE are useful, making comparisons across the two groups
is complicated by the fact that it is not an “all held constant” situation. In particular, a
much larger share of the Spanish-speaking students have PPVT scores in the lower end of the
(pooled) test score distribution (for example, see the di↵erences in the control group means
by subgroup in Table 4). Given that these conditional IV-QTE plot each line on a common
percentile scale (the subgroup-specific percentiles), making conclusions by looking across the
subgroup QTE at specific percentiles is problematic. We address this by performing a simple
translation to put each subgroup’s QTE on the same absolute scale (the scale we use here is
given by the percentiles of the full sample of the control group). We term these “translated”
IV-QTE and they are presented in Figure 6b.27 These translated IV-QTE stretch out the
conditional QTE by a di↵erent amount depending how uniformly the subgroup in question
is laid out across the overall unconditional distribution in the control group. To give some
guidance on the amount of stretching this produces, in the translated graphs, there is a
symbol at each decile of the subgroup’s own (conditional) distribution. Thus, one can see
that in the lower half of the (overall unconditional) PPVT distribution, the symbols for
deciles for the Spanish speakers are more compressed while in the upper half the opposite
is true. Figure 6b shows that once the subgroups’ IV-QTE are put on the same absolute
scale, the di↵erences between groups become greatly attenuated. We see similarly-sized, very
large gains throughout the bottom deciles of PPVT scores for both groups; yet we see larger
e↵ects of the treatment on Spanish speakers (compared to English speakers) throughout the
rest of the distribution. However, this divergence at the top of the Spanish and English
speaking distributions is driven by a small share of the Spanish speaking distribution, and
the di↵erences are smaller where the overlap is more substantive.
Figures 7a and 7b provide similar analyses by race/ethnicity; for non-Hispanic whites,
non-Hispanic blacks, and Hispanics. The results are quite dramatic—while the conditional
Essentially what this is doing is stretching the conditional distributions in some places and shrinking
them in others in order to put them both on the same scale. We use the PPVT score of the control group (for
the full sample) at each percentile as the anchor. We take the IV-QTE at each percentile of each subgroup,
and find the location of that percentile value of each subgroup’s control group in the overall control group
distribution. For example, if subgroup A’s median were the 25th percentile in the overall control group, the
median IV-QTE for subgroup A would be relocated to the overall control group’s 25th percentile. You can
easily see that neither line extends to the full range of the x-axis, indicating the relative lack of scores in
some parts of the pooled distribution for each subgroup.
27

27

IV-QTE (Figure 7a) show widespread gains for Hispanics (relative to the two non-Hispanic
groups), on a common scale, the translated IV-QTE (Figure 7b) shows much more similarity
in e↵ects across race/ethnicity groups throughout the distribution. Thus, by race, there is
little heterogeneity in e↵ects across groups given that we are looking at a common quantile
in the overall control group distribution. The variation in the conditional IV-QTE is driven
more by the di↵erences in where the bulk of the subgroups are located within the control
group. To put it more simply, the heterogeneity by race appears to be all driven by where
in the overall control group the race groups are situated and not by heterogeneous e↵ects
given a control percentile.
Taking these results as a whole, we find compelling evidence in the heterogeneity of Head
Start on cognitive achievement at the end of the Head Start year. Based on the analysis
across the distribution as well as across demographic groups, we find evidence largely in
favor of the “compensatory” theory. That is, we find larger gains in the lower end of the
skill distribution. We also find evidence that students entering preschool with low English
language skills stand to gain more from the experience.28

6.3

Results for beyond the Head Start year

Having established the results for the Head Start year, we now move on to examine
impacts through grade 1. Figure 8a shows the IV-QTE for PPVT for each year: Head
Start year (2003), Age-4 year (2004), Kindergarten year (2005), and first grade year (2006).
As we discussed above, the first stage for each of these outcomes is the same—it is the
e↵ect of an o↵er Head Start participation in the Head Start year. The figure shows positive
(and significant, although CIs are not shown here) e↵ects at the bottom remain for the
lower end of the distribution through the preschool years (end of 2004). However, once this
cohort transitions into elementary school, the control group catches up, and the di↵erences
substantially fade.
As with the demographic subgroups, the x-axis scale for each of the years corresponds
To complement this work, we also explored di↵erences across characteristics of the center of random
assignment. We found larger e↵ects for centers whose directors cited having a significant amounts of competition from other preschool centers in their area. We also explored, but found little di↵erence in treatment
e↵ects, based on variation across the centers of random assignment in teacher credentials, curriculum, staffing,
and teacher ratings from direct classroom observation (Arnett and ECERS-R scores).
28

28

to the percentiles of the PPVT distribution for that year. This is a meaningful scale—it
reveals, for example, the e↵ect of participation in Head Start on median PPVT scores at
the end of the Head Start year, Age-4 year, Kindergarten and 1st grade. However, it is also
useful to translate the IV-QTE to a common scale, as we did with the demographic groups.
This is presented in Figure 8b; the translated IV-QTE show much more alignment in the
e↵ects across years at given PPVT score values in the control group. The results suggest
that Head Start brings children up to some level but once they are achieving at that level
there are no additional gains to be had.
To highlight further the e↵ects in later preschool, Appendix Figures 2a and 2b present
results for the end of the Age-4 year for WJIII Pre-Academic Skills and Applied Problems
tests. The results show persistence of gains into the end of the second year, especially around
the 80th percentile of the distribution for the Applied Problems test (marginally significant).
By the end of grade 1 (in results not shown here) the e↵ects of Head Start on Pre-Academic
Skills have faded out. There is a hint of gains at the bottom of the distribution of the Applied
Problems score, but the results are not statistically significant.
Given the large gains experienced by some demographic subgroups in the Head Start
Year, it is natural to return to those groups to look at e↵ects on this longer-term outcome.
Figure 9a presents the translated IV-QTE for PPVT for Spanish versus English speakers
for the first grade year. Notably, here we see some evidence of persistent gains for Spanish
speakers, throughout the bottom half of the (overall) distribution. These gains, at 10–15
points, are quite large, measuring 0.38 to 0.58 standard deviations. Additionally, Figure 9b
presents the translated IV-QTE for PPVT for the three terciles of baseline scores, for Grade
1. Importantly, these results suggest that the larger e↵ects of Head Start in preschool for
those with low baseline skills do not persist though first grade.

7

Discussion
Our analysis of the cognitive e↵ects of the Head Start Impact Study shows that Head Start

participation led to significant gains in cognitive skills in the preschool years. Additionally,
these gains are largest at the bottom of the cognitive skills distribution. Further, these gains
are larger for Spanish speakers as well as those who at baseline are scoring in the bottom

29

tercile of the PPVT distribution than for others.
Given the broad discussion of “compensatory” versus “skills-beget-skills” theories of education, our work provides new and compelling evidence in favor of the compensatory theory.
In particular, those with low baseline scores and those with limited English gain the most
from the intervention, both when measured by PPVT and when measured by WJIII achievement tests. Our analysis shows that these di↵erences cannot be explained by di↵erences in
take-up of the program or di↵erences in the counterfactual care setting. Interestingly, Feller,
Grindal, Miratrix & Page (2013) find—using a principal stratification approach—that e↵ects
are concentrated among those compliers who in the absence of an o↵er of a slot would have
stayed home with lesser e↵ects among those who would have gone to a center no matter
what. Yet, our breakdowns of the first stage by subgroup suggest that the observables we
have looked at (mother’s education, gender, race/ethnicity, baseline test score tercile, language, and a host of others including center of random assignment) do not explain who is in
which group of compliers.
Our work also sheds light on the large e↵ects of 1960s intensive interventions, such as
the Perry Preschool Program, relative to Head Start. Perry targeted 123 Black children in
Ypsilanti, Michigan and randomly assigned them either to a intensive pre-school or to the
control condition. The Perry treatment led to an increase of 12 points in mean IQ after 1
or 2 years of treatment and 6 points after the end of Kindergarten (Schweinhart & Weikart
(1981)).29 These are large e↵ects (i.e., a 0.8 e↵ect size) but are not dissimilar from the large
e↵ect sizes we find for HSIS at the bottom of the distribution. Further, the Perry children
were targeted based on parents’ low completed education and occupational status as well as
for being of low IQ—the sample average IQ was 79 and participants had scores 1–2 standard
deviations below the population mean (Schweinhart & Weikart (1981)). Thus, our results
show that HS can generate meaningful increases in cognitive outcomes and suggest that the
large Perry e↵ects may derive, in part, from the study participant’s low baseline skills being
well suited to the intervention.
Taking into account these findings, along with the fadeout in cognitive gains, we suggest
that the gains in preschool may not persist if the elementary schooling environment is not of
29

Take-up in Perry was nearly 100% so the ITT are also TOT estimates.

30

high quality. As stated in Duncan and Magnuson (2013, p. 118), “If little learning occurs in
low-quality schools, then early advantages imparted by programs such as Head Start might
be lost. In this case, preschool does not ’immunize’ against the adverse e↵ects of subsequent
low-quality schooling.” We can not test directly for this, given that we do not observe much
about the schools the HSIS participants attend. However, if Head Start teachers teach to
some (low) proficiency standards (e.g., knowing the ABCs, counting to 10), then the HS
setting may be insufficient to yield gains beyond that point. As described in Cascio &
Schanzenbach (2013), Head Start programs score a 5 (on a 10 point scale) in the NIEER
scale, compared to higher scores for many state-funded preschool programs. In these settings
there may not be the capacity for dynamic complementarities (Cunha & Heckman (2010)).
Finally, our results suggest that those with limited English skills in early childhood stand to
gain from Head Start.
These large and persistent Head Start e↵ects on students with limited English skills may
also help to reconcile long term human capital e↵ects with evidence of Head Start cognitive
e↵ect fade out in early elementary school. It would be interesting to know if the experience
of these groups can account for the positive long term outcomes others have found.
Additionally, many have argued that preschool (or other investments during this crucial
period) may lead to improvements in non-cognitive outcomes and these may facilitate gains
in elementary school and beyond. This is testable in the HSIS. The data contain a host of
non-cognitive or social-emotional measures—we focus on the Pianta scales of student-teacher
and child-parent relations and the Adjustment Scales for Preschool Intervention [ASPI] (a
measure of emotional and behavioral adjustment to preschool). We estimated IV models for
9 parent-reported measures in the Head Start year and 9 parent-reported and 14 teacherreported measures in Grade 1.30 We standardize the social-emotional measures to have a
mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 (using the control group mean and SD) and to be
aligned so a higher score is always worse than a lower score. As shown in Appendix Table 3,
in the Head Start year, the IV estimates are negative—implying an improvement in parentreported non-cognitive outcomes—for seven of the nine non-cognitive outcomes. However,
Recall we only have the teacher reports for everyone when they are all in school, thus our reliance on
parent reports in the Head Start year.
30

31

only 2 of the 9 are statistically significant at the 5% level (significance found for hyperactivity
and externalizing behavior). The first grade e↵ects are uniformly small and only 2 of the 23
outcomes show statistically significant improvement (at the 5% level), and both only for the
parent-reported measures. In sum, while there are a few positive findings, the overall result
is one of very small and statistically insignificant e↵ects in the social-emotional domain on
average, and this lack of an e↵ect is mirrored in the distributional results.

8

Conclusion
In this study, we provide the first comprehensive analysis of the distributional e↵ects of

Head Start. We use data from the Head Start Impact Study, the first national randomized
experiment of Head Start. We focus on the 3-year old cohort and examine impacts on
cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes in the Head Start year and through Grade 1. We find
that Head Start participation leads to large and statistically significant gains in cognitive
skills in the preschool period in receptive vocabulary, early literacy, and early numeracy.
We find that the gains are largest at the bottom of the distribution of achievement, with
treatment on the treated e↵ects sizes upwards of a full standard deviation at the lowest
achievement levels. Once the children enter school, the overall cognitive gains fade out. We
find little e↵ect of the experiment on non-cognitive outcomes.
We explore variation in the e↵ects across various subgroups of the population including
ones defined by race/ethnicity, by the child speaking Spanish or English, by baseline levels
of cognitive skills, by gender, and by mother’s education. We analyze these subgroups in
part because they provide a framework through which we can learn about the role played
by di↵erences in Head Start take-up and counterfactual child care setting across groups. We
find significant variation in the e↵ect of Head Start during the preschool years, with larger
e↵ects for Hispanics, Spanish speakers, and those with lower baseline cognitive skills. We
find little role for di↵erences in Head Start take-up or the underlying counterfactual child
care setting in explaining these heterogeneous e↵ects. Importantly, we also find that for
Spanish speakers, the cognitive gains persist through 1st grade.
This study provides new evidence that the e↵ects of Head Start are largely consistent
with a compensatory theory of education. The cognitive gains are largest at the bottom

32

of the distribution of achievement. This is revealed using quantile treatment e↵ects and
IV-QTE applied to the ex-post distribution of achievement, local linear regression estimates
based on baseline skills, and analyses across demographic groups. There is some limited
evidence of the e↵ects predicted by “skills beget skills” theories.
These findings serve to shed light on a potential source for the relatively large short run
cognitive gains in the Perry experiment. Previous explanations include the intensity of the
Perry intervention and/or the counterfactual care environment that operated at that time.
The Perry program also targeted very low IQ children; our results of large e↵ects at the
bottom of the distribution indicate that in a modern setting we also identify very large gains
at low achievement.

References

Abadie, A. (2002), ‘Bootstrap tests for distributional treatment e↵ects in instrumental variable models’,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 97, 284–92.
Abadie, A., Angrist, J. D. & Imbens, G. (2002), ‘Instrumental variables estimates of the e↵ect of subsidized
training on the quantiles of trainee earnings’, Econometrica 70(1), 91–117.
Abadie, A., Chingos, M. & West, M. (2014), Endogenous stratification in randomized experiments, Working
Paper 19742, NBER.
Aizer, A. & Cunha, F. (2012), The production of child human capital: Endowments, investments, and
fertility, Working paper.
Angrist, J., Dynarski, S., Kane, T., Pathak, P. & Walters, C. (2012), ‘Who benefits from KIPP?’, Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management 31(4), 837–860.
Barnett, W. (1996), Lives in the Balance: Age 27 cost-benefit Analysis of the High/Scope Perry Preschool,
High/Scope Press, Ypsilantim MI.
Bloom, H. & Weiland, C. (2013), Moving beyond average impacts: Do Head Start’s impacts on children’s
language, literacy, and math skills vary across individuals, subgroups, and centers?, Working paper.
Campbell, F. & Ramey, C. (1995), ‘Cognitive and school outcomes for high-risk African American students
at middle adolescence: Positive e↵ects of early intervention’, American Educational Research Journal
32(4), 743–772.
Campbell, J., Bell, S. & Keith, L. (2001), ‘Concurrent validity of the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-Third
edition as an intelligence and achievement screener for low-SES African American children’, Assessment
8(1), 85–94.
Caravajal, H. (1988), ‘Relationship between scores of gifted children on Stanford-Binet IV and Peabody
Picture Vocabulary Test Revised’, Assessment for E↵ective Intervention 14(22), 22–25.
Carneiro, P. & Ginja, R. (Forthcoming), ‘Long-term impacts of compensatory pre-school on health and
behavior: Evidence from Head Start’, AEJ Applied Economics .
Cascio, E. & Schanzenbach, D. (2013), ‘The impacts of expanding access to high-quality preschool education’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity pp. 127–179.
Chernozhukov, V. & Hansen, C. (2005), ‘An IV model of quantile treatment e↵ects’, Econometrica
73(1), 245–261.
Cunha, F. & Heckman, J. J. (2010), Investing in our young people, Working paper, NBER. W16201.

33

Cunha, F., Heckman, J., Lochner, L. & Masterov, D. (2006), Interpreting the evidence on life-cycle skill
formation, in E. Hanushek & F. Welch, eds, ‘Handbook of the Economics of Education, Volume 1’,
Elsevier, pp. 697–812.
Currie, J. (2001), ‘Early childhood programs’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(2), 213–238.
Currie, J. & Thomas, D. (1995), ‘Does Head Start make a di↵erence?’, American Economic Review
85(3), 341–364.
Deming, D. (2009), ‘Early childhood intervention and life-cycle skill development: Evidence from Head
Start’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3), 111–134.
DHHS ACF (2000), ‘Curriculum in Head Start: Head Start Bulletin 67’.
DHHS ACF (2003), ‘Initial guidance on new legislative provisions on performance standards, performance
measures, program self assessment and program monitoring ACYF-IM-HS-00-03’.
Dolton, P. & Smith, J. (2011), The impact of the UK New Deal for lone parents on benefit receipt, Working
Paper 5491, IZA.
Duflo, E., Dupas, P. & Kremer, M. (2011), ‘Peer e↵ects, teacher incentives, and the impact of tracking:
Evidence from a randomized evaluation in Kenya’, American Economic Review 101(5), 1739–74.
Duncan, G., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K., Huston, A., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L., Feinstein,
L., Engel, M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H., Duckworth, K. & Japel, C. (2007), ‘School readiness and
later achievement’, Developmental Psychology 43(6), 1428–46.
Duncan, G. & Magnuson, K. (2013), ‘Investing in preschool programs’, Journal of Economic Perspectives
27(2), 109–132.
Duncan, G. & Vandell, D. (2012), Understanding variation in the impacts of human capital interventions on
children and youth, Working paper.
Feller, A., Grindal, T., Miratrix, L. & Page, L. (2013), Compared to what? Variation in the impacts of Head
Start by alternative child-care setting, Working paper.
Felts, E. & Page, M. (2013), ‘Estimating the distributional e↵ects of education reforms: A look at Project
STAR’, Economics of Education Review 32, 92–103.
Firpo, S. (2007), ‘Efficient semiparametric estimation of quantile treatment e↵ects’, Econometrica 75(1), 259–
276.
Frolich, M. & Melly, B. (Forthcoming), ‘Unconditional quantile treatment e↵ects under endogeneity’, Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics .
Garces, E., Currie, J. & Thomas, D. (2002), ‘Longer-term e↵ects of Head Start’, American Economic Review
92(4), 999–1012.
Gelber, A. & Isen, A. (2013), ‘Children’s schooling and parents’ behavior: Evidence from the Head Start
Impact Study’, Journal of Public Economics 101, 25–38.
Gri↵en, A. (2014), Evaluating the e↵ects of child care policies on children’s cognitive development and
maternal labor supply, Working paper.
Heckman, J. (2006), ‘Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged children’, Science
312(5782), 1900–1902.
Heckman, J. (2007), The productivity argument for investing in young children, Working Paper 13016,
NBER.
Heckman, J. J., Smith, J. & Clements, N. (1997), ‘Making the most out of programme evaluations and
social experiments: Accounting for heterogeneity in programme impacts’, Review of Economic Studies
64, 487–535.
Heckman, J., Moon, S. H., Pinto, R., Savelyev, P. & Yavitz, A. (2010), ‘Analyzing social experiments
as implemented: A reexamination of the evidence from the High Scope/Perry Preschool Program’,
Quantitative Economics 1(1), 1–46.
Heckman, J., Pinto, R. & Savelyev, P. (2010), ‘Understanding the mechanisms through which an influential
early childhood program boosted adult outcomes’, American Economic Review 103(6), 2052–2086.
Holland, P. (1986), ‘Statistics and causal inference’, Journal of the American Statistical Association
81(396), 945–970.

34

Imbens, G. W. & Angrist, J. D. (1994), ‘Identification and estimation of local average treatment e↵ects’,
Econometrica 62(2), 467 – 75.
Knudsen, E., Heckman, J., Cameron, K. & Shonko↵, J. (2006), ‘Economic, neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s workforce’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
103(27), 10155–10162.
Koenker, R. & Bassett, G. (1978), ‘Regression quantiles’, Econometrica 46, 33–50.
Krueger, A. & Zhu, P. (2004), ‘Another look at the New York City school voucher experiment’, American
Behavioral Scientist 47(5), 658–698.
Ludwig, J. & Miller, D. (2007), ‘Does Head Start improve children’s life chances? Evidence from a regression
discontinuity approach’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 159–208.
Ludwig, J. & Phillips, D. (2008), ‘Long-term e↵ects of Head Start on low-income children’, Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1136, 247–268.
Magnuson, K., Meyers, M., Ruhm, C. & Waldfogel, J. (2004), ‘Inequality in preschool education and school
readiness’, American Educational Research Journal 41(1), 115–157.
Neal, D. & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2010), ‘Left behind by design: Proficiency counts and test-based accountability’, Review of Economics and Statistics 92(2), 263–283.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (2004), ‘Modeling the impacts of child care quality on children’s
preschool cognitive development’, Child Development 74, 1454–1475.
Pianta, R. C. (1992), Child-Parent relationship scale, Working paper, University of Virginia. Charlottesville,
VA.
Pianta, R. C. (1996), Student-Teacher relationship scale, Working paper, University of Virginia. Charlottesville, VA.
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R. & Heid, C. (2010), ‘Head Start Impact Study: Final report’, Prepared for
USDHHS, ACF.
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C., Broene, P., Jenkins, F., Mashburn, A. & Downer, J. (2012), ‘Third
Grade Follow-Up to the Head Start Impact Study Final Report’, Prepared for USDHHS, ACF.
Puma, M., Bell, S., Cook, R., Heid, C. & Lopez, M. (2005), ‘Head Start Impact Study: First year findings’,
Prepared for USDHHS, ACF.
Romano, E., Babchishin, L., Pagani, L. & Kohen, D. (2010), ‘School readiness and later achievement:
Replication and extension using a nationwide Canadian survey’, Developmental Psychology 45(5), 995–
1007.
Rubin, D. (1974), ‘Estimating causal e↵ects of treatments in randomized and non-randomized studies’,
Journal of Educational Psychology (66), 688–701.
Schrank, F., Becker, K. & Decker, S. (2001), ‘Woodcock-Johnson III Asssessment Bulletin Number 4: Calculating ability/achievement discrepancies between the Weschler Intelligence Scale for Children-Third
Edition and the Woodcock-Johnson III Tests of Achievement’, Riverside Publishing.
Schweinhart, L., Barnes, H. & Weikart, D. (1993), Significant Benefits: The High/Scope Perry Preschool
study through age 27, High/Scope Press, Ypsilanti, MI.
Schweinhart, L. & Weikart, D. (1981), ‘E↵ects of the Perry Preschool Program on youths through age 15’,
Journal of Early Intervention 3(29), 29–39.
Shager, H., Schindler, H., Magnuson, K., Duncan, G., Yoshikawa, H. & Hard, C. (2013), ‘Can research design
explain variation in Head Start research? A meta-analysis of cognitive and achievement outcomes’,
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 35(1), 76–95.
Stanovich, K. (1986), ‘Matthew e↵ects in reading: Some consequences of individual di↵erences in the acquisition of literacy’, Reading Research Quarterly pp. 360–407.
Walters, C. (2014), Inputs in the production of early childhood human capital: Evidence from Head Start,
Working paper.
Zanutto, E. (2006), ‘A comparison of propensity score and linear regression analysis of complex survey data’,
Journal of Data Science 4, 67–91.

Figure 1: QTE and IV-QTE for PPVT scores in spring 2003 for the 3-year old cohort, with
90% bootstrapped confidence intervals, using inverse propensity score weights
(a) QTE of e↵ect of a Head Start O↵er on PPVT scores

−30

−10

0

10

30

QTE for PPVT in Spring HS Yr. 1, 90% CIs

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

(b) IV-QTE of e↵ect of Head Start on PPVT scores

−30

−10 0

10

30

IVQTE for scores in 2003, 3−year−old cohort

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

Notes: Figure shows QTE for e↵ect of an o↵er of a Head Start slot on PPVT IRT scores at end of the first
year in spring 2003 (at the end of the Head Start year) for the 3-year old cohort in the top panel and IV-QTE
for e↵ects of Head Start participation during the Head Start year on PPVT scores at the end of the Head
Start year (instrumenting using treatment group status) in the bottom panel, using inverse propensity score
weights. 90% confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping by Head Start center. Dashed horizontal
line denotes mean TE (top panel)/mean 2SLS estimate (bottom panel).

Figure 2: IV-QTE for e↵ect of Head Start participation during the Head Start year on various
Woodcock Johnson-III tests as measured in the spring of 2003, with 90% bootstrapped
confidence intervals & inverse propensity score weights
(a) IV-QTE estimates on WJIII PreAcademic scaled score

(b) IV-QTE estimates on WJIII Applied
Problems scaled score

5
0
−5

−5

0

5

15

IVQTE for scores in 2003, 3−year−old cohort

15

IVQTE for scores in 2003, 3−year−old cohort

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

Percentiles

60

80

100

Percentiles

Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

(c) IV-QTE estimates on WJIII Letter-Word
scaled score

QTE
Mean difference

(d) IV-QTE estimates on WJIII Spelling
scaled score
IVQTE for scores in 2003, 3−year−old cohort

−5

−5

0

0

5

5

15

15

IVQTE for scores in 2003, 3−year−old cohort

0

20

40

60

80

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
QTE
Mean difference

Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

Notes: Figure shows IV-QTE for the e↵ect of Head Start participation during the Head Start year on various
Woodcock Johnson III scaled scores for spring 2003 for the 3-year old cohort, using the randomization as an
instrument. The top left panel presents results for the Pre-Academic Composite score, the top right panel
presents results for the Applied Problems score, the bottom left presents results for the Letter-Word score,
and the bottom right presents results using the Spelling score, all using inverse propensity score weights.
90% confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping by Head Start center. Dashed horizontal lines denote
mean 2SLS estimates.

Figure 3: Reduced-form e↵ects of a Head Start o↵er on PPVT in 2003 by subgroup compared
to the administrative first stage, compared to the control group mean for non-center care,
and compared to the “first stage” on non-center care, using inverse propensity score weights
(a) Reduced form vs. administrative first
stage
15

Reduced Form vs. First Stage by Subgroup

Reduced Form vs. Control Mean for Non−Center Care by Subgroup
15

Spanish Speaker

Hispanic

Spanish Speaker

Bottom Tercile, Baseline

Hispanic

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

(b) Reduced form vs. control group mean for
non-center care

HS or GED
High Tercile, Baseline
HS Dropout Female
Male
White
Black
English Speaker
Some College

Bottom Tercile, Baseline

HS or GED
High Tercile, Baseline
Male
Black
Some College

Middle Tercile, Baseline

Female HS Dropout
White
English Speaker

0

0

Middle Tercile, Baseline

.62

.68

.74
Administrative First Stage

.82

.52

.57
.62
Control Group Mean, Non−Center Care

.67

(c) Reduced form vs. “first stage” on noncenter care
15

Reduced Form vs. First Stage on Non−Center Care by Subgroup
Spanish Speaker

Hispanic

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

Bottom Tercile, Baseline

HS or GED
Female

HS Dropout
White

High Tercile, Baseline
Male

Black
English Speaker

Some College

0

Middle Tercile, Baseline

−.56

−.52
−.48
First Stage on Non−Center Care

−.44

−.42

Notes: Figure plots reduced-form e↵ects of an o↵er of Head Start on PPVT for 2003 (the Head Start year) by
subgroup (y-axis) versus the subgroup-specific administrative first stage (4a), versus the subgroup-specific
control group mean by subgroup for non-center care (4b), and versus the subgroup-specific “first stage”
e↵ect of an o↵er of Head Start on take-up of non-center care by subgroup (4c). Subgroups are not mutually
exclusive. Size of points reflects the sum of the inverse propensity score weights for the observations in each
subgroup. All estimates use the HSIS and inverse propensity score weights.

Figure 4: Reduced-form e↵ects of a Head Start o↵er on PPVT in 2003 by predicted hexiles of
non-center care using the control group compared to the administrative first stage, compared
to the control group mean for non-center care, and compared to the “first stage” on noncenter care, using inverse propensity score weights
(a) Reduced form vs. administrative first
stage

(b) Reduced form vs. control group mean for
non-center care
Reduced Form vs. Control Mean for Non−Center Care,
by Hexiles of Predicted Non−Center Care, Control Group
15

15

Reduced Form vs. First Stage,
by Hexiles of Predicted Non−Center Care, Control Group

Lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

4th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

5th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

5th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
2nd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

2nd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
Lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

4th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

3rd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

Highest 1/6, pred. non−center

0

0

3rd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
Highest 1/6, pred. non−center

.45

.6
.75
Administrative First Stage

.9

.3

.55
Control Group Mean, Non−Center Care

.8

(c) Reduced form vs. “first stage” on noncenter care

15

Reduced Form vs. First Stage on Non−Center Care,
by Hexiles of Predicted Non−Center Care, Control Group

Reduced form, PPVT
5
10

5th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
2nd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
Lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

4th lowest 1/6, pred. non−center

0

3rd lowest 1/6, pred. non−center
Highest 1/6, pred. non−center

−.7

−.5
First Stage on Non−Center Care

−.2

Notes: Figure plots reduced-form e↵ects of an o↵er of Head Start on PPVT for 2003 (the Head Start year) by
hexiles of predicted non-center care (y-axis) versus the hexile-specific administrative first stage (4a), versus
the hexile-specific control group mean by hexile for non-center care (4b), and versus the hexile-specific “first
stage” e↵ect of an o↵er of Head Start on take-up of non-center care by hexile (4c). Hexiles of the predicted
value of being in non-center care are constructed as follows (following Abadie, Chingos, and West, 2014).
Control group observations’ predicted values use regression estimates that leave the control observation out
of the sample (leave one out). Treatment group observations’ predicted values use regressions estimated with
the entire control group. Non-center care is predicted using the same Xs as are used to create the inverse
propensity score weights. The fitted line is also plotted, weighting each observation by the sum of the inverse
propensity score weights for each hexile. All estimates use the HSIS and inverse propensity score weights.

Figure 5: Local linear regression of spring 2003 Head Start participation and 2003 PPVT
scores on 2002 baseline scores for treatment and control groups, and T-C di↵erence in 2003
PPVT scores by 2002 score
(a) 2003 HS participation by 2002 PPVT
score for T and C

(b) 2003 PPVT score by 2002 PPVT score
for T and C

Children in Head Start, Spring HS Yr. 1
.8

Fan Local Linear Regressions for PPVT

150

200

250
PPVT Baseline
Control

300

350

200

0

250

.2

300

350

Pct. Head Start
.4
.6

400

Spring HS Yr. 1

150

Treatment

200

250
2002 Baseline PPVT Score

Control

1248, 100

300

350

Lower end of 90% CI, Control

(c) 2003 T-C di↵erence in PPVT by 2002
PPVT score
Fan Local Linear Regressions for PPVT

−100

−50

0

50

Spring HS Yr. 1

150

200

250
2002 Baseline PPVT Score

300

350

Treatment Minus Control

Notes: Figure shows local linear regression of parent-reported Head Start participation in spring 2003 on
baseline PPVT test scores, local linear regression of 2003 PPVT score on baseline PPVT test scores, and
2003 treatment minus control di↵erence in local linear regressions of 2003 PPVT score on baseline PPVT
test scores, using inverse propensity score weights. The kernel is rectangular and the bandwidth 1/20th of
the score range. 90% confidence intervals for panels b and c are obtained by bootstrapping by Head Start
center.

Figure 6: Conditional IV-QTE and translated IV-QTE for PPVT scores in spring 2003 for
the 3-year old cohort, by language
(a) Conditional IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, by language

IVQTE by Language for PPVT

0

10

20

30

40

Spring Head Start Yr. 1

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
English

Spanish

(b) Translated IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, by language

Translated IVQTE by Language for PPVT

−10

0

10

30

Spring Head Start Yr. 1

0

20

40

60

80

100

PPVT
English

Spanish

Notes: Figure shows conditional IV-QTE (top panel) and translated IV-QTE (bottom panel) for e↵ect of
Head Start participation during the Head Start year on PPVT IRT scores at end of the first year in spring
2003 (at the end of the Head Start year) for the 3-year old cohort, by language, using inverse propensity
score weights. Top panel estimates IV-QTE separately for English and Spanish speakers. Bottom panel
presents “translated” IV-QTE, which position the IV-QTE from the top-panel at the relevant percentile of
the unconditional control group distribution to which they correspond. Dots on translated IV-QTE graphs
denote the deciles of the unconditional control group.

Figure 7: Conditional IV-QTE and translated IV-QTE for 2003 PPVT scores, by
race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black and white and Hispanic, any race)
(a) Conditional IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT, by race

IVQTE by Race for PPVT

−20

0

20

40

Spring Head Start Yr. 1

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
White
Hispanic

Black

(b) Translated IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, by race

Translated IVQTE by Race for PPVT

−10

0

10

30

Spring Head Start Yr. 1

0

20

40

60

80

100

PPVT
White
Hispanic

Black

Notes: Figure shows conditional IV-QTE (top panel) and translated IV-QTE (bottom panel) for e↵ect of
Head Start participation during the Head Start year on PPVT IRT scores at end of the first year in spring
2003 (at the end of the Head Start year) for the 3-year old cohort, by race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic black,
non-Hispanic white, and Hispanics of any race), using inverse propensity score weights. Top panel estimates
IV-QTE separately by race/ethnicity. Bottom panel presents “translated” IV-QTE, which position the IVQTE from the top-panel at the relevant percentile of the unconditional control group distribution to which
they correspond. Dots on translated IV-QTE graphs denote the deciles of the unconditional control group.

Figure 8: Conditional IV-QTE and translated IV-QTE for PPVT scores for the 3-year old
cohort, all years
(a) Conditional IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, all years

−10

0

Difference, T−C
10
30

IVQTE, All Years

0

20

40

60

80

100

PPVT
2003
2005

2004
2006

(b) IV-QTE for PPVT scores for all years, translated

−10

0

Difference, T−C
10
30

IVQTE, All Years

150

200

250

300

350

400

PPVT
2003
2005

2004
2006

Notes: Figure shows conditional IV-QTE (top panel) and translated IV-QTE (bottom panel) for e↵ect of
Head Start participation during the Head Start year on PPVT IRT scores for the 3-year old cohort, for all
years, using inverse propensity score weights. Top panel estimates IV-QTE separately for each year. Bottom
panel presents “translated” IV-QTE, which position the IV-QTE from the top-panel at the absolute level of
the PPVT score from the control group distribution to which they correspond.

Figure 9: Translated IV-QTE for PPVT scores in spring 2006 (first grade year) for the 3-year
old cohort, by language and baseline score tercile
(a) Translated IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, by language

Translated IVQTE by Language for PPVT

−10

0

10

30

Spring 1st Grade

0

20

40

60

80

100

PPVT
English

Spanish

(b) Translated IV-QTE of e↵ect of HS on PPVT scores, by baseline score tercile

Translated IVQTE by Baseline Tercile for PPVT

−10

0

10

30

Spring 1st Grade

0

20

40

60

80

100

PPVT
Low Tercile
High Tercile

Med Tercile

Notes: Figure shows translated IV-QTE by language (top panel) and by baseline score tercile (bottom panel)
for e↵ect of Head Start participation during the Head Start year on PPVT IRT scores at end of the first grade
year in spring 2006, for the 3-year old cohort, using inverse propensity score weights. Each panel presents
“translated” IV-QTE, which position the conditional IV-QTE by subgroup at the relevant percentile of
the unconditional control group distribution to which they correspond. Dots on translated IV-QTE graphs
denote the deciles of the unconditional control group.

Table 1: Summary statistics at baseline
Baseline Child Weights
Control Di↵erence
Mean
T-C
Child characteristics
Non-Hispanic white
0.344
Non-Hispanic black
0.338
Hispanic
0.318
Female
0.527
Spanish speaker at home
0.257
Low risk
0.789
Medium risk
0.156
High risk
0.055
Special needs
0.103
Lives with both biological parents
0.499
Urban
0.793
Mother/caregiver characteristics
Non-Hispanic white
0.364
Non-Hispanic black
0.339
Hispanic
0.298
Mother is teenager
0.176
High School dropout
0.346
Only high school diploma/GED
0.325
More than high school
0.329
Mom is married
0.457
Mom is divorced
0.149
Mom is never married
0.394
Age 20–24
0.316
Age 25–29
0.332
Age 30–39
0.259
Age 40 or older
0.064
Fall 2002 test month/no Fall assessment
Before November
0.162
November
0.318
After November
0.260
No Fall assessment (imputed)
0.259

Inv. P-Score Weights
Di↵erence
T-C

-0.022
0.005
0.017
-0.023
0.001
-0.041⇤
0.013
0.028⇤
0.031⇤⇤
-0.003
0.001

-0.001
0.001
0.0002
0.017
0.016
0.044⇤⇤
-0.019
-0.025⇤
0.008
0.024
0.006

-0.020
0.001
0.018
-0.043⇤
-0.032
0.033
-0.001
-0.018
-0.010
0.028
-0.052⇤⇤
-0.016
0.029
0.038⇤⇤⇤

-0.008
0.010
-0.001
0.023
0.001
-0.024
0.023
0.022
0.017
-0.038
0.036
0.021
-0.016
-0.042⇤⇤⇤

0.099⇤⇤⇤
0.029
-0.013
-0.116⇤⇤⇤

0.015
-0.022
-0.025
0.031

Notes: Table reports summary statistics for baseline characteristics for the 3-year old cohort in the Head
Start Impact Study. Column 1 provides the control group means, using the baseline child weights. Column
2 provides the unadjusted di↵erence in means between the treatment and control groups (using the baseline
weights). Column 3 provides the adjusted di↵erences in means using the inverse propensity score weights.
The risk index for the child is based on Food Stamp/TANF receipt in Fall 2002, whether both parents are
high school dropouts, whether neither is working, whether the child’s mother was a teenager at birth, and
whether the mother is single. Imputed fall assessments were done for children eligible to take the PPVT
in English who did not take it. Children who could not take the Baseline PPVT in English did not have
a baseline score imputed. The sample size for column 1 is 964, for columns 2 and 3 it is 2378. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ , and
⇤⇤⇤
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Significance levels for di↵erences allow for arbitrary
correlation within center of random assignment.

Table 2: Child care setting, by treatment or control status
Treatment Control
Mean
Mean
Head Start in HS Year
Head Start
(Administrative report)
Parent Report, Spring 2003
Head Start
Other Center
Family day care
Parent/relative
Not reported
Parent Report, Spring 2004
Head Start
Other Center
Family day care
Parent/relative
Kindergarten
Not reported

Di↵erence
T-C

0.857

0.153

0.705⇤⇤⇤

0.823
0.068
0.014
0.094
0.001

0.146
0.252
0.064
0.536
0.002

0.677⇤⇤⇤
-0.183⇤⇤⇤
-0.050⇤⇤⇤
-0.442⇤⇤⇤
-0.001

0.608
0.250
0.018
0.077
0.016
0.031

0.473
0.355
0.015
0.103
0.021
0.033

0.135⇤⇤⇤
-0.105⇤⇤⇤
0.003
-0.025
-0.005
-0.002

Notes: Table reports means for the age-3 cohort treatment- and control-group childcare settings and their di↵erence for the official administrative report of Head Start
attendance for the Head Start year (top panel), and for parent reports for the end
of the Head Start year—spring 2003 (middle panel) and for the end of the Age-4
year—spring 2004 (bottom panel). Data are from the Head Start Impact Study.
Data for the spring 2003 and 2004 parent reports are for the modal child care setting
(setting where the child spent the most time) as reported by parents/Kindergarten
for children in Kindergarten in spring 2004. Data for the Head Start administrative
report are those used in the HSIS reports. Statistics exclude observations missing
a valid PPVT score. Statistics weighted using inverse propensity score weights. ⇤ ,
⇤⇤
, and ⇤⇤⇤ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. Significance levels
for di↵erences allow for arbitrary correlation within center of random assignment.

0.031
(0.022)
-0.009
(0.023)
0.009
(0.022)
0.005
(0.022)
0.001
(0.022)

-0.003
(1.84)
7.20⇤⇤⇤
(1.64)
2.89
(1.81)
0.21
(1.29)
2.00
(1.42)
10.20⇤⇤⇤
(2.40)
4.15
(2.60)
0.30
(1.84)
2.90
(2.07)
0.281
[0.450]
0.219
[0.414]
0.212
[0.409]
0.235
[0.424]
0.254
[0.436]

231
[39]
252
[37]
299
[41]
340
[29]
358
[30]
-0.118⇤⇤⇤
(0.022)
-0.103⇤⇤⇤
(0.018)
-0.072⇤⇤⇤
(0.022)
-0.054⇤⇤
(0.021)
-0.065⇤⇤⇤
(0.023)

-0.88
(2.25)
6.56⇤⇤⇤
(2.04)
2.49
(2.31)
0.76
(1.49)
3.05
(1.94)

Baseline Child Weights
Control mean Reduced form
[SD]
(SE)

Notes: Table reports means (columns 1 and 4), mean reduced-form estimates (ITT) of the e↵ect of being o↵ered a Head Start slot (columns
2 and 5), and two-stage least squares (TOT) estimates of the e↵ect of attending Head Start in the Head Start Year (column 3), for the 3-year
old cohort in the Head Start Impact Study by assessment period. The top panel reports the results for PPVT test scores and the bottom
panel reports the results for indicators for the test score being missing (for 2002 this is 1 for observations where the test score is missing
or imputed). Results reported for 2002 include the imputed values for the tests. Column 1 has the control group means, using our inverse
propensity score weights with the standard deviations in brackets. Column 2 has the reduced-form e↵ects (ITT) of being o↵ered a Head
Start slot using inverse propensity score weights with the standard errors in parentheses. Column 3 has the two-stage least squares (TOT)
estimates of the e↵ect of attending Head Start during the Head Start year using inverse propensity score weights with the standard errors
in parentheses. The first stage for the Head Start year (spring 2003) is 0.705 (SE is 0.029), that for the Age-4 year (spring 2004) is 0.696
(SE is 0.029), that for the Kindergarten year (spring 2005) is 0.700 (SE is 0.028), and that for the first grade year (spring 2006) is 0.694
(SE is 0.029). Column 4 has the control group means, using the baseline weights with the standard deviations in brackets. Column 5 has
the reduced-form e↵ects (ITT) of being o↵ered a Head Start slot using the baseline score weights with the standard errors in parentheses.
SEs for di↵erences allow for arbitrary correlation within center of random assignment. Inverse propensity score weights estimated including
baseline demographics and baseline test deciles by approximate month of assessment. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ , and ⇤⇤⇤ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels. See text for more details.

PPVT scores
Baseline PPVT, fall HS year
231
(fall 2003)
[38]
PPVT, spring HS year
251
(spring 2003)
[38]
PPVT, Age-4 year
298
(spring 2004)
[40]
PPVT, Kindergarten year
339
(spring 2005)
[29]
PPVT, first grade year
358
(spring 2006)
[30]
PPVT missing or imputed
Imputed/no baseline PPVT fall HS year 0.222
(fall 2002)
[0.416]
No PPVT spring HS year
0.190
(spring 2003)
[0.393]
No PPVT Age-4 year
0.179
(spring 2004)
[0.383]
No PPVT Kindergarten year
0.233
(spring 2005)
[0.423]
No PPVT first grade year
0.251
(spring 2006)
[0.434]

Inverse P-Score Weights
Control mean Reduced form 2SLS
[SD]
(SE)
(SE)

Table 3: Reduced-form e↵ects of a HS slot o↵er on PPVT scores and on test score missing (attrition) and 2SLS e↵ects of HS
participation on PPVT scores, by year

Table 4: Reduced-form estimates of the e↵ect of an o↵er of a Head Start slot, first stage
estimates of the e↵ect of an o↵er on administrative Head Start take-up, and two-stage least
squares estimates (TOT) of the e↵ect of attending Head Start on PPVT, by demographic
subgroup for the Head Start year (spring 2003)

Race/ethnicity subgroups
Hispanic
Non-Hispanic Black
Non-Hispanic White
Language subgroups
Spanish speaker at home

Control mean
[SD]

Reduced form First stage
(SE)
(SE)

Two-stage least squares
(SE)

234
[39]
250
[32]
268
[34]

11.54⇤⇤⇤
(3.06)
5.19⇤⇤
(2.58)
6.49⇤⇤
(3.14)

0.673⇤⇤⇤
(0.060)
0.694⇤⇤⇤
(0.046)
0.749⇤⇤⇤
(0.033)

17.13⇤⇤⇤
(4.94)
7.48⇤
(3.83)
8.66⇤⇤
(4.23)

15.0⇤⇤⇤
(3.30)
4.93⇤⇤⇤
(1.86)

0.672⇤⇤⇤
(0.057)
0.717⇤⇤⇤
(0.029)

22.37⇤⇤⇤
(5.65)
6.87⇤⇤⇤
(2.62)

11.2⇤⇤⇤
(2.77)
2.21
(2.45)
7.50⇤⇤
(3.16)

0.787⇤⇤⇤
(0.035)
0.641⇤⇤⇤
(0.047)
0.674⇤⇤⇤
(0.041)

14.2⇤⇤⇤
(3.72)
3.44
(3.84)
11.13⇤⇤
(4.78)

223
[32]
English speaker at home
261
[34]
Baseline PPVT score tercile subgroups
Bottom tercile, baseline PPVT 229
[33]
Middle tercile, baseline PPVT 251
[30]
Top tercile, baseline PPVT
274
[36]

Notes: Table reports control group means (column 1), reduced-form e↵ects of an o↵er of Head Start (column
2), first stage e↵ects of an o↵er of Head Start on Head Start use in the Head Start year (column 3), and
two-stage least squares estimates of the e↵ect of attending Head Start in the Head Start year (column 4)
for the 3-year old cohort in the Head Start Impact Study by various subgroups for the Head Start (spring
2003) assessment period. Each panel reports results for a set of mutually exclusive subgroups. Column
1 has the control group means, using the inverse propensity score weights with the standard deviations
in brackets. Column 2 has the reduced-form estimates of the e↵ects of an o↵er of a Head Start slot on
PPVT scores using inverse propensity score weights with the standard errors in parentheses. Column 3
has the first stage e↵ects of an o↵er of a Head Start slot on use of Head Start during the Head Start year
using inverse propensity score weights with the standard errors in parentheses. Column 4 has two-stage
least squares estimates of the e↵ect participating in Head Start during the Head Start year on PPVT using
inverse propensity score weights with the standard errors in parentheses. Inverse propensity score weights
estimated including baseline demographics and baseline test deciles by approximate month of assessment.
SEs allow for arbitrary correlation within center of random assignment. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ , and ⇤⇤⇤ denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. See text for more details.

For online publication only: Appendix Figure 1: QTE for PPVT scores at baseline for the
3-year old cohort, with 90% bootstrapped confidence intervals, using inverse propensity score
weights

−30

−10

0

10

30

QTE for PPVT in Fall HS Yr. 1, 90% CIs

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

Notes: Figure shows QTE for PPVT IRT score at baseline in Fall 2002 for the 3-year old cohort, using inverse
propensity score weights. 90% confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping by Head Start center.

For online publication only: Appendix Figure 2: IV-QTE of Woodcock Johnson III PreAcademic and Applied Problems tests for spring 2004
(a) Pre-Academic Skills

−5

0

5

15

IVQTE for scores in 2004, 3−year−old cohort

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

(b) Applied Problems

−5

0

5

15

IVQTE for scores in 2004, 3−year−old cohort

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentiles
Lower end of 90% CI
Upper end of 90% CI

QTE
Mean difference

Notes: Figure shows IV-QTE for the e↵ect of Head Start participation during the Head Start year on
various Woodcock Johnson III scaled scores for spring 2004 (Age-4 year) for the 3-year old cohort, using
the randomization as an instrument. The top panel presents results for the Pre-Academic Composite score
and the bottom panel presents results for the Applied Problems score, both using inverse propensity score
weights. 90% confidence intervals are obtained by bootstrapping by Head Start center. Dashed horizontal
lines denote mean 2SLS estimates.

For online publication only: Appendix Table 1: Cognitive and social-emotional outcomes in
the HSIS, by normative year in school
Head Start year
Age 3
Age 4 Kindergarten
Language, literacy, vocabulary
PPVT
Letter Word (WJIII)
Spelling (WJIII)
Mathematics
Applied Problems (WJIII)
Composite
Pre-Academic Skills (WJIII)
Social-emotional outcomes, parent reports
Aggressive behavior
Hyperactive
Withdrawn
Social competencies
Social skills/positive learning
Behavioral problems
Conflict (Pianta)
Closeness (Pianta)
Positive relationships (Pianta)
Social-emotional outcomes, teacher report
Aggressive behavior (ASPI)
Hyperactive (ASPI)
Withdrawn (ASPI)
Shy (ASPI)
Oppositional (ASPI)
Problems with peer interactions (ASPI)
Problems with structure (ASPI)
Interaction problems (ASPI)
Conflict (Pianta)
Closeness (Pianta)
Positive relationships (Pianta)

1st grade

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

Notes: Table reports whether each of the cognitive and social-emotional outcomes are reported in each
year for all children. Column 1 reports whether each measure was taken in the experimental Head Start
year (when the children are age 3), and columns 2–4 report the same for the second pre-school year (age
4), the normative Kindergarten year, and the normative first grade year. Note that the teacher reports of
social-emotional outcomes are only listed if they were collected from everyone (in pre-school, these were only
collected from children who were in organized center care).

For online publication only: Appendix Table 2: E↵ect of Head Start o↵er on parent report
of child care arrangements, by demographic subgroup for the Head Start year (spring 2003)
Head
Start

Other
Center

First stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.636⇤⇤⇤
(0.060)
0.137

-0.170⇤⇤⇤
(0.038 )
0.240

-0.465⇤⇤⇤
(0.056 )
0.623

Non-Hispanic Black

First stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.683⇤⇤⇤
(0.047)
0.178

-0.191⇤⇤⇤
(0.034 )
0.269

-0.491⇤⇤⇤
(0.045 )
0.554

Non-Hispanic White

First stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.712⇤⇤⇤
(0.034)
0.121

-0.189⇤⇤⇤
(0.033 )
0.245

-0.523⇤⇤⇤
(0.041 )
0.634

First stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.641⇤⇤⇤
(0.057)
0.152

-0.191⇤⇤⇤
(0.049 )
0.275

-0.450⇤⇤⇤
(0.055 )
0.573

First stage
(SE)
Control mean
Baseline PPVT score tercile subgroups
Bottom tercile, baseline PPVT First Stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.690⇤⇤⇤
(0.029)
0.144

-0.181⇤⇤⇤
(0.023 )
0.243

-0.509⇤⇤⇤
(0.030 )
0.612

0.721⇤⇤⇤
(0.036)
0.123

-0.179⇤⇤⇤
(0.035 )
0.219

-0.542⇤⇤⇤
(0.044 )
0.658

Middle tercile, baseline PPVT

First Stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.638⇤⇤⇤
(0.047)
0.165

-0.158⇤⇤⇤
(0.035 )
0.227

-0.480⇤⇤⇤
(0.048 )
0.608

Top tercile, baseline PPVT

First Stage
(SE)
Control mean

0.656⇤⇤⇤
(0.040)
0.155

-0.190⇤⇤⇤
(0.032 )
0.289

-0.466⇤⇤⇤
(0.039 )
0.556

Race/ethnicity subgroups
Hispanic

Language subgroups
Spanish speaker at home

English speaker at home

Parent/relative/
Other care

Notes: Table reports the coefficient on treatment status for parent reports of the child using Head Start,
another center, or some other source of care in the Head Start year using Head Start Impact Study data.
The parent report is for the modal child care setting for the child. For each subgroup, the first row has the
coefficient on the treatment group dummy for each of the three outcomes, the second row has the SEs, and the
third row has the control group mean. The column 1 outcome is that the parent reported the child attended
a Head Start center, the column 2 outcome is that the parent reported the child attended a non-Head Start
center, and the column 3 outcome is that the child was at home with a parent or relative or attended a
non-center family day care or did not report a child care setting. All regressions estimated with the inverse
propensity score weights. Inverse propensity score weights estimated including baseline demographics and
baseline test deciles by approximate month of assessment. SEs allow for arbitrary correlation within center
of random assignment. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ , and ⇤⇤⇤ denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. See text for more
details.

For online publication only: Appendix Table 3: Two-stage least squares estimates of the
e↵ect of attending Head Start on social-emotional outcomes for spring 2003 and 2006
Head Start year
(Spring 2003)
Parent reports
Aggressive (ASPI)
Hyperactive (ASPI)
Lack of Social Competencies (ASPI)
Lack of Social Skills (ASPI)
Withdrawn (ASPI)
Conflict (Pianta)
Lack of closeness (Pianta)
Lack of positive relationship (Pianta)
Externalizing behavior problems
Teacher reports
Aggressive (ASPI)
Oppositional (ASPI)
Inattentive (ASPI)
Shy/socially reticent (ASPI)
Withdrawn/low energy (ASPI)
Problems with structured learning (ASPI)
Problems with peer interactions (ASPI)
Problems with teacher interactions (ASPI)
Combined ASPI index—negativity
Combined ASPI index—shy
Combined ASPI index—interactive
Lack of closeness (Pianta)
Lack of positive relationship (Pianta)
Conflict (Pianta)

-0.115⇤
(0.068)
-0.274⇤⇤⇤
(0.074)
0.022
(0.071)
-0.032
(0.075)
0.027
(0.071
-0.012
(0.066)
-0.121⇤
(0.064)
-0.048
(0.066)
-0.169⇤⇤
(0.070)

Grade 1 year
(Spring 2006)
-0.084
(0.078)
-0.111
(0.074)
-0.067
(0.079)
-0.014
(0.076)
-0.069
(0.076)
-0.169⇤⇤
(0.075)
-0.099
(0.076)
-0.166⇤⇤
(0.078)
-0.106
(0.073)
-0.059
(0.085)
-0.009
(0.083)
-0.074
(0.079)
0.068
(0.079)
0.043
(0.081)
-0.021
(0.082)
-0.055
(0.082)
-0.019
(0.077)
-0.048
(0.074)
0.057
(0.071)
-0.032
(0.068)
0.010
(0.087)
0.016
(0.089)
0.023
(0.088)

Notes: Table reports two-stage least squares estimates of the e↵ect of attending Head Start at age 3 on social-emotional outcomes.
Outcomes are parent reports from 2003 and 2006 and teacher reports for 2006, using Head Start Impact Study data. Teacher reports are
not available for all children until Kindergarten. Variables standardized to be “bad” outcomes, and then to have mean 0 and standard
deviation 1 except for the combined ASPI indices. SEs allow for arbitrary correlation within center of random assignment. ⇤ , ⇤⇤ , and
⇤⇤⇤
denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. See text for more details.

