NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATHWAYS TO EDUCATION:
AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO HELPING AT-RISK HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS
Philip Oreopoulos
Robert S. Brown
Adam M. Lavecchia
Working Paper 20430
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20430

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

We are extremely grateful to Pathways' administrators, Dianne Bascombe, Megan Conway, Margaret
Douglin, Petrona Eccleston, Sharmini Fernando, Thomas Gerginis, David Hughes, Faisal Islam, Irene
Parvin, and Stacey Young for their enthusiastic support and for providing program details, participation
data, and making available internal reports. We also thank Marc Frenette for producing the census
robustness analysis in the paper, and seminar participants from the Canadian Institute for Advanced
Research's Social Interactions, Identity, and Well Being group, Brigham Young University, University
of Montreal, Laval University, University of Western Ontario, University of Stravenger Workshop
on Labor Markets, Families, and Children, DIW Berlin, Simon Fraser University, University of Toronto,
the Canadian Economics Association Meetings, the Midwest Economics Association Meetings and
the 12th Conference on Research on Economic Theory and Econometrics. Research support was provided
by the Education Policy Research Initiative. Any errors or omissions are those of the authors. Data
and code to reproduce the results are available on request. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Philip Oreopoulos, Robert S. Brown, and Adam M. Lavecchia. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pathways to Education: An Integrated Approach to Helping At-Risk High School Students
Philip Oreopoulos, Robert S. Brown, and Adam M. Lavecchia
NBER Working Paper No. 20430
August 2014
JEL No. I2,I3,J24
ABSTRACT
Pathways to Education is a comprehensive youth support program developed to improve academic
outcomes among those entering high school from very poor social-economic backgrounds. The program
includes proactive mentoring to each student, daily tutoring, group activities, career counseling, and
college transition assistance, combined with immediate and long-term incentives to reinforce a minimum
degree of mandatory participation. The program began in 2001 for entering Grade 9 students living
in Regent Park, the largest public housing project in Toronto, and expanded in 2007 to include two
additional Toronto projects. In all three locations, participation rates quickly rose, to more than 85
percent, even though parents and students were required to commit in writing to conditions and high
expectations of the program. Comparing students from other housing projects before and after the
introduction of the program, high school graduation and post secondary enrollment rates rose dramatically
for Pathways eligible students, in some cases by more than 50 percent.

Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca
Robert S. Brown
Toronto District School Board
Toronto, Ontario
Canada
rob.brown@tdsb.on.ca

Adam M. Lavecchia
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S3G7
Canada
adam.lavecchia@mail.utoronto.ca

I. Introduction
Children from very poor social-economic backgrounds are subject to many

stresses while growing up and are vastly more at-risk of ending up poor,

incarcerated, unhealthy, and unhappy than children from more affluent

backgrounds. 1 Not only do impoverished children often receive poorer parental
investments - in part because parents are subject to many social-economic stresses
themselves - they also are exposed to far worse school and neighborhood

environments at critical development stages. This compounding adversity can take

a serious psychological toll. 2 Ethnographic studies document harsh realities from
being regularly exposed to violence, subject to low expectations and, overall,

"weighed down by a world of no". 3

Overarching programs have long been sought to meaningfully overcome

these challenges. Evidence on their effectiveness is usually disappointing, but there
are exceptions. 4

In the well-known Perry Preschool Project, extremely

disadvantaged preschoolers from rural Michigan were randomly provided two

years of intensive preschool and home visits by experienced teachers. More than

thirty years later, those selected into the program were substantially less likely to

have spent time in jail (28 versus 52 percent) and substantially less likely to have

received government assistance (59 versus 80 percent). 5 More recent research also
1

Holzer et al. 2008, Lynn and McGeary, 1990, and McLoyd, 1998.
Dearing, 2008
3
See Dvorak, 2010, Osofsky, 1999, and Polidano et al. 2012. For ethnographic study examples, see
Venkatesh, 2000, and the BBC documentary series, "Growing up poor"
(http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01s8p78/episodes/guide, accessed on August 1, 2013).
4
Camilli et al, 2010
5
Schweinhart et al., 2005
2

1

points to promising interventions directed at disadvantaged adolescents. Some

chartered schools accepting poor students into their programs by lottery have been

shown to generate impressive long-term benefits. 6 Dobbie and Fryer (2011b)

identify common features among them, including more time in school, tutoring,

after-school assistance, and a culture of high expectations. Fryer (2012) finds

applying these features to public schools can lead to similar estimated impacts.
Similarly impressive gains to high school attainment and academic performance
were found from another recent randomized trial that provided daily two-on-one

tutoring combined with social-cognitive behavioral therapy to disadvantaged
students from Chicago (Cook et al., 2014).

This paper evaluates another recent effort to comprehensively help at-risk

youth escape from chronic poverty.

The Pathways to Education Program

(Pathways) began as a grass-roots effort by staff from the community health center

of Regent Park, Canada's oldest and largest public housing project, in Toronto.

Regent Park represents one of Canada’s poorest neighborhoods. It comprises of
2,087 high- and low-rise apartment units within a self-contained downtown

community, and is home to 7,500 residents, all paying rent-geared-to-income. The
community faces relatively high levels of crime and gang activity. From the 2001

census, 87 percent of family households living in Regent Park are classified as falling

below Statistics Canada’s Low-Income Cut-Off (LICO), 56 percent of residents are

6

Dobbie and Fryer, 2011a, Abdulkadiroglu et al., 2011

2

single parent, and 59 percent of residents have no earnings. 7 In the 1990s, more
than half of Regent Park youth failed to complete high school.

From this backdrop, the Board of Directors for the Regent Park Community

Health Centre began to discuss a plan for the development of a program that could
promote and support academic achievement for Regent Park youth, with the
ultimate goal of fostering a more positive community environment. The program

adopts a multi-faceted approach, offering extensive tutoring, mentoring, and
financial support (such as bus tickets tied to attendance at school and bursaries for
postsecondary schooling), as well as easy access to student-parent workers who

provide information and advice as needed on a wide range of issues. After several

years of consultation and obtaining seed funding, the program began in the 2001-

2002 school year for entering Grade 9 students from Regent Park, and was phased
in for successive Grade 9 cohorts each year thereafter. Eligibility is based solely on

residing in Regent Park, though participation requires parents and students to
commit to the program's high expectations in writing each year.

The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) conducted a pro bono evaluation of

Pathways in 2007 and concluded that the program led to a fall in the high school
dropout rate from 56 percent to 10 percent. A concern with this evaluation is that it
involved comparing dropout rates among Pathways participants to a group

previously living in the same area. In other words, the comparison group included

everyone that would have been eligible for the program, but the treated group

7

A household falls below the LICO if they spend more than 20 percentage points above the average
comparative household on food, clothing, and shelter. For example, if the average Canadian family spends
35 percent of before-tax income on food, clothing, and shelter, a family that spends more than 55 percent of
before-tax income on these items falls below the LICO.

3

included only participants, possibly those who would have done better anyway. The
BCG evaluation also did not account for the general tendency for dropout rates to
decline over time when looking at successfully younger cohorts. Data and full

details of the study were never made available, making follow-up analyses and
further exploration challenging.

Few other youth intervention evaluations find such large effects as the BCG

study does for Pathways. If the size of these program impacts could be replicated in
other settings, scaling up the Pathways program could lead to a highly effective
strategy for helping disadvantaged youth.

This paper represents a more

transparent attempt to evaluate impacts from the introduction of Pathways. We

compare students from Regent Park and other Toronto housing projects entering
high school between 2000 and 2007 to produce a more convincing and clear

evaluation of the Program’s initial impact on high school completion, postsecondary
enrollment, as well as on intermediate school attainment measures within high

school. We also explore differences in Pathways participation and impacts by
gender, language spoken at home, and initial academic ability.

Matching Pathways participants to Toronto District School Board high school

students from Regent Park, we find Pathways participation rates quickly rose to
more than 85 percent. While our estimated effects are not on the same order of

magnitude as those concluded in the BCG study, they are nevertheless impressive.

We estimate that Pathways eligibility increased high school completion by 40
percent (from 38 to 53 percent) and post secondary enrollments by more than 50

percent (from 34 to 53 percent). We find intermediate effects on math and reading
4

scores, as well as on the likelihood of taking more university prerequisite courses.
Pathways appears to impact females more than males, but immigrant and nonimmigrant families equally.

The expansion of Pathways in 2007 at two additional Toronto housing

projects (Rexdale and Lawrence Heights) provides an opportunity to check the
internal and external validity of the Regent Park estimates. Even when looking only

at the first year impact of the program, results are consistent for the expansion sites
compared to Regent Park - almost full participation among eligible students (85

percent), and a very large relative increase in high school completion. College
enrollment impacts are also significant for males.

The next section better details the structure of the Pathways program.

Section III describes the data. Section IV presents the main results and several
robustness checks.

Section V concludes with a discussion on costs, possible

mechanisms underlying the results and an outline for further research.
II. The Structure of the Pathways to Education Program 8
A. Origins

The Pathways to Education program began as an effort to address poor academic

performance by youth from Toronto’s Regent Park, Canada’s largest public housing project.
Regent Park is comprised mostly of immigrants (69 percent in 2001), hailing from a wide

range of countries, including Somalia, Bangladesh, the Congo, Vietnam, China, and Latin
8

For more details about the origins and administration of Pathways to Education, see Bales, 2004, Rowen
and Gosine, 2006, and Rowen, 2012.

5

America. It is difficult to obtain data to determine the extent of criminal activity by
neighborhood in Canada. However, what little data does exist suggests that Regent Park’s

residents experience significant crime and drug activity (Oreopoulos, 2008). In 1992, there
were 55 reported assaults causing bodily harm on Regent Park property, a rate of about 15
per 1,000 residents (26 per 1,000 households). That number is much higher than the 1995

rate of 1.7 assaults per 1,000 residents in the Toronto Census Metropolitan Area). 9 Nine

murders occurred in the year Pathways was introduced (Rowen, 2012). In 2010, a string of
shootings left three dead over three weeks. In 2013, a 15 year-old Pathways student was
shot and killed.

Historically, Regent Park experienced much higher dropout rates than the

rest of Toronto. A cohort of students who entered Grade 9 in 1993 in the former
Toronto Board of Education was tracked for a number of years to assess dropout

rates. This analysis revealed that, among Regent Park students, the fraction still in

school or out of school without a diploma by the end of the sixth year of high school
was 56 percent compared with 29 percent for students in the rest of the city.

In the mid-1990s, the Board of Directors for the Regent Park Community

Health Centre began to formulate an action plan for encouraging "Community

Succession", a vision of greater economic mobility involving children growing up to

take on successful careers and, in turn, giving back to the community that helped
them attain these goals.

Members of the board were heavily influenced by a

presentation from Jack Geiger at a 1995 International Conference of Community
Health Centres, held in Montreal. Geiger presented a case study of how the Tufts9

The housing project data comes from previous Metro Toronto Housing Corporation security tabulations.
Toronto and Chicago assault tabulations are from Statistics Canada (1995) respectively.

6

Delta Health Center in the late 1960s expanded its operations to take on a larger

role of community development and foster social change. 10 The expansion included

public transportation, a pre-Head Start early childhood enrichment program, a

nutritional and recreational program for elderly residents, a supplemental food

program, and a crop sharing cooperative. Geiger said the most important impact of
the expansion was a multi-faceted educational program, providing evening high

school equivalency and college preparatory courses, as well as assistance with

college and professional school applications and providing scholarship information
and university contacts. He argued that the education program increased social and
human capital and led to a positive cycle of improved community development.

Over the next five years, board and staff members from Regent Park's Health

Centre constructed the Pathways to Education program based on this idea of
community succession and a review of research of other programs that might work

in the Regent Park setting, along with discussions with community members and
other stakeholders. Members initially considered including a summer job program
for youth finishing high school to give students job experience and a larger
employment and training initiative for older youth, but decided to focus on

education to keep operations at a manageable scale. With funding from the Ontario
Trillium Foundation, the program began initially in the 2001-2002 academic school

year for approximately 115 students living in Regent Park and transitioning into
Grade 9. Each year another cohort was added. By the 2004 to 2005 academic year,
enrolment reached 615.

10

A version of the presentation was published. See Geiger (2002).

7

Eligibility for Pathways is inclusive, based only on residence. In contrast to

other programs that specifically target students based on criteria such as financial
need or initial academic ability, Pathways is available to every Regent Park youth
attending high school (beginning with students entering Grade 9 in 2001).

Participation is voluntary, and requires both students and parents to agree each
year in writing to the program's conditions and high expectations. 11 To recruit
students, Pathways developed strong ties with the five elementary schools that
include Regent Park in their catchment areas.

Schools help identify eligible

students, provide contact information, and facilitate meetings with parents.
B. Pathway's Four Pillars

There are four pillars of support to the Pathways program: Counseling,

Academic, Social, and Financial.

Each student is assigned to a Student-Parent

Support Worker (SPSW), who is employed full-time by Pathways. SPSW's serve as

the main connection between students and the program. They are responsible for
working with each student and parent to help ensure academic success.

The

relationship begins prior to the start of high school at a mandatory orientation

session. Students are required to meet with their SPSWs at least twice a month,

more if needed. Through relationships with high schools, SPSW's monitor students'
absenteeism, grades, and other participation in Pathways activities. They provide

information to students about events and community resources and distribute free

bus tickets. SPSWs often serve as the go-to people for dealing with any issues that
11

Copies of both agreements are shown in Appendix A.

8

may arise at home, school, or around the community. They are each responsible for

approximately 50 students over a school year, and end up focusing more of their
time on those who appear to need it most. If crises or issues arise, they may work

together with other facilitators to determine how best to manage these situations.

Many SPSWs maintain contact with their students after graduation on an informal
basis. 12

Pathways participants also receive extensive academic support in the form of

free local evening tutoring, provided up to four nights a week.

Tutoring is

conducted both in small groups and on a one-on-one basis. It is available in core
academic subjects, as well as for development of literacy and general study skills.

Tutoring is mandatory twice a week, with exemptions for students with previous

term grade averages above a threshold (60 percent in Grade 9, 70 percent in Grade

10 and beyond). Tutors are volunteers that receive some training and help about 5

hours per week, on average. They include accountants, retired teachers, bank
managers, parents of students, graduate students from teacher colleges, and even

current and former Pathways students. The student-tutor ratio is generally less
than 5 to 1.

In Grades 9 and 10, Pathways students receive social support in the form of

group mentoring. Students are required to participate every two weeks, choosing
from a range of activities focused on fostering social and group work skills and a

commitment to the community. Previous examples included attending sporting
12

A 2009 documentary film, "Invisible City", follows two struggling Regent Park and Pathways students
over three years, and an SPSW worker that tries to help them. The film can be viewed here:
http://www.nfb.ca/film/invisible_city/trailer/invisible_city_trailer

9

events, theatre, participating in creative arts, cooking, bowling, community recycling
projects, and martial arts. Group mentoring now includes workshops from the
"YouCan" program to teach conflict resolution. 13

Each group is comprised of

approximately 15 youth and 3 volunteer mentors, who are often university

students. By Grades 11 and 12, students may still choose from specific activities
offered, but also may play more of an active role in choosing more independent
activities based on their own talents and interests. SPSWs and students agree on
biweekly activities that may occur within or outside of the community (including
tutoring younger grades).

Social support also comes in the form of career

mentoring. Pathways offers many events for students preparing to exit high school,

including resume preparation classes, job interview practice, college and university

campus visits, and visits to potential employers. Students also receive personal
assistance from SPSWs on post secondary applications, including fee waivers.

The final pillar of Pathways support is financial. Support comes in two

forms: immediate assistance, for helping with the costs of going to school, and

longer term assistance, for helping with the costs of going to college. Free public
transportation tickets and school supplies are provided to Pathways participants,
but they must meet with their SPSWs to get them. Tickets are allocated bi-weekly
based on previous period school attendance.

The largest three attended high

schools by Pathways students are 2, 3, and 5 kilometers away. Evidence from focus

groups and staff experience suggests that the tickets provide strong motivation for

13

www.youcan.ca

10

program participation and going to school. 14

One of the most expensive

components of the Pathways program is a trust fund for each participant. For each
year of participation the program sets aside $1,000, up to a maximum of $4,000 that

can be used toward tuition and other post secondary expenses after high school
graduation.

If students in Pathways miss school, or miss mandatory SPSW meetings,

tutorial sessions, or group mentoring workshops, their SPSWs will have a

conversation with them. SPSWs will first focus on encouraging attendance before
mentioning the possibility of program withdrawal.

If lack of participation is

discussed and no meaningful response occurs, a warning letter is sent home to a

parent. If there is still no progress, they may be dropped from the program. Very

few students are ultimately dropped. As the Pathways Coordinator of Tutoring and

Mentoring previously remarked, "We do not give up easily...Our philosophy is that
you set high expectations and the kids will rise to them. If they haven't met them,

they are on their way. If they have made a mistake, we try to help them see it as a
small setback." (Bales, 2004).
C. Expansion

14

In one focus group, a student remarked, "If I don't go to school one day and like next time, I get my
tickets, my SPSW would be like, you didn't go to school these days, and so you'd get two less tickets 'cause
this day you didn't go to school so you shouldn't have those tickets and so you know, you can't skip because
you're like damn I need these tickets.". Another Grade 11 student remarked, "I have to go [to tutoring]
because of Pathways. If I don't go I'm not gonna get my tickets to go to school, if I don't get my tickets, I
can't go to school there's no other way...except...walking."

11

A pro bono evaluation by the Boston Consulting Group reported in 2007 that

Pathways led to a rapid fall in the high school dropout rate, from 56 to 10 percent.

As mentioned above, full details of the report were not made public and the pre-

pathways sample included all eligible for the program (living in Regent Park), while
the post-Pathways sample included only those in Pathways.

Nevertheless, the

report generated wide public attention and attracted various organizations,
including government, in wanting to provide further support. Other community
organizations also became interested in adopting the Pathways program for

themselves. A new charitable foundation, called Pathways Canada, was established
to raise money and oversee expansion across the country.

Pathways Canada secured funding to expand in 2007 to two more sites in

Toronto. Targeted sites were among the city's 13 "priority neighborhoods", inner

city areas with a combination of high crime activity and high social service need.
Almost all of these neighborhoods include large public housing projects.

Like

Regent Park, interest in adopting Pathways drew support from the neighborhoods'
community health centres.

Pathways Canada selected the Rexdale Community

Health Centre in Rexdale (Jamestown) and Unison Health and Community Services

in Lawrence Heights to operate the program beginning for residents from these
areas entering Grade 9 in 2007 and phased in each year with an additional Grade 9

cohort. The Rexdale catchment area and housing project, located in the northwest
end of Toronto, is about one-fourth the size of Regent Park, while the Lawrence

Heights catchment area and housing project, located north of the city centre, are
12

about one-half the size of Regent Park. 15 Both neighborhoods are comprised largely

of immigrants and low income families from ethnically diverse backgrounds. Crime
and gang activity are relatively high compared to the rest of the city.

Pathways expanded to three other sites in 2007 outside Toronto: Ottawa,

Kitchener, and Montreal. In 2009, Scarborough Village in Toronto was added, along

with another low-income community in Hamilton. In 2010, three new sites were

added in Winnipeg, Kingston, and Halifax. Shawinigan (Quebec) was added in 2012.

III. Data and Methodology

A. Toronto District School Board Data

Data compiled for this study comes from three main sources: the Toronto

District School Board (TDSB), Toronto Community Housing (TCH), and Pathways

administrators. TDSB administrative data are available for high school students that
entered Grade 9 beginning in 2000, the year prior to when Pathways was

introduced. 16 Our baseline data begins with all recorded students entering Grade 9

at a TDSB school between 2000 and 2007. 17 Background information includes
15

The Rexdale project include 554 housing units. Lawrence Heights housing project contains 1,452
housing units, while Regent Park contains 2,429 housing units. Both sites include in their catchment areas
a small fraction of nearby residential homes outside the housing projects, though we do not include students
from these outside homes in our sample.
16
Brown (2006) describes this data in more detail.
17
Students attending Catholic or private schools are therefore not included in the sample analysis. This
omission does not likely affect estimated program impacts given the small fraction attending non-TDSB

13

gender, immigrant status, an immigrant's year of arrival, language spoken at home,
age, high school attended, and residential address in Grade 9.
9.

We estimate Pathway's impact on a variety of outcomes, beginning in Grade

The TDSB data contain information on grade performance in Grade 9

mathematics and English courses.

Each subject variable indicates a students'

performance level in the course: 0 for students who had not achieved a credit by the

end of their first year (i.e. failed the course); 1 for students who completed with an
average mark of 50 to 59 percent; 2 for students with an average of 60 to 69

percent; 3 for students who completed with an average mark of 70 to 79 percent;
and 4 for students with an average mark of 80 percent or more. 18 We also create a

summary dummy variable for Grade 9 performance equal to 1 if the sum of the
English and Mathematics variables is one or less (which we call 'low Grade 9
grades'), zero otherwise.

Our data also indicates whether students passed both the Reading and

Writing components of the Ontario Secondary School Literacy Test (OSSLT) when
the test was initially taken in Grade 10. The OSSLT is a standardized test designed
to be written by all Grade 10 high school students in Ontario.

Passing both

components of this test is a requirement for high school completion. Students that
did not write for at least one of the two days of the test are treated as having not
passed.

schools (about 10 percent) and the fact that Pathways eligibility is based on location of residence, not
location of school.
18

We recode a small fraction of students with missing values as having attained 0 level.

14

We also record whether a student takes courses in grade 9 and 10 that place

him or her on a university track. Under the Ontario secondary school curriculum,

students choose a program of study that includes grade 9 and 10 courses that are

classified as academic (university-directed), applied (college-directed), or locally

developed essentials (workplace-directed). Our indicator variable takes on a value
of one if a majority of courses taken in grades 9 and 10 are academic, zero
otherwise. About three-quarters (75.8 percent) of students from the 2000 cohort

for all of Toronto are classified as on academic track, compared to about half (48.7)
for our sample of public housing tenants.

Our outcome variable for high school graduation within five years is equal to

one for students recorded as completing their Ontario Secondary School Diploma

(OSSD) by the end of their fifth year from entering high school (in Grade 9), or as
having completed at least 30 credits (a student with 30 or more credits but without

being recorded as graduated is likely due to measurement error). It is equal to zero

otherwise for students that either (i) remained in the TDSB system the following

Fall (in year 6), (ii) transferred outside TDSB to another school system, or (iii) left

school without graduating. The alternative variable of graduating or returning in
year 6 generates almost identical results.

Ontario's two central application service organizations for postsecondary

education (one for colleges, another for universities) provide TDSB with application
data and confirmations of acceptance.

We have information on whether our

entering Grade 9 students eventually applied to and accepted a college or university

program within five years. Students are only permitted to accept one offer. For
15

exposition we refer to this outcome as enrolled, since virtually everyone that
accepts an offer enrolls.

B. Public Housing Address Data

The TDSB data is matched to Toronto public housing projects using uniquely

identifiable postal codes. We focus on the 113 projects built before 1976 by the

Metro Toronto Housing Corporation Authority, now called Metro Toronto Housing

(MTC). 19 To create a publicly available dataset, some nearby and small projects are
grouped together, ending up with 57 housing project groups. Addresses for these

locations were obtained from MTC directly and cross-checked using Canada Post's
online postal code finder. Every household residing in these projects pays rent

geared to income. 20 That is, approximately 25 to 30 percent of a household's gross

total income is charged as rent.

For any given period, all MTC housing applicants use the same form. Prior to

1995, applicants were placed on a waiting list based on a point system. Households
were given points primarily based on financial need, but also on current living

conditions, welfare participation, overcrowding, and whether they were living in

emergency housing. High demand for subsidized housing meant only those families

who attained the near-maximum number of points were given offers of
19

Projects that accommodate only seniors and a small number of projects that house only aboriginals or
special needs families were omitted.
20
Smaller MTC projects built after 1976 allowed for mixed housing, with some households paying rentgeared to income, others paying market rent. We omit these residences to focus on a comparison group of
Grade 9 students whose parents only pay rent-geared to income.

16

accommodation, and even then these families waited an average of one and a half
years. Those with the most points were housed first, giving preferences to families

most in distress. Beginning in 1995, MTC adopted a more chronological order
approach to the waiting list, with special consideration given to new arrivals to

Canada, the homeless, and for those in domestically violent situations. Even for
those that qualify for special consideration, wait times for offers of accommodation

were often substantial. Average wait times in 1998 were 5 to 7 years (Toronto
Social Housing Connections, 1998).

With these long wait times, families had an incentive to remain eligible for

accommodation in as many housing projects as possible.

The ability to state

housing preferences varied over time. In the early 1980s, families could not specify
which project or area they wished to be housed. The application form in the 1990s
made it easier to indicate area preferences (across 15 to 17 possible city zones).

Families could indicate they only wanted to be listed for specific communities or
projects, however doing so would likely lead to longer wait time before an offer of

accommodation. Currently, a family that does not specify any preference on the
MTC application is automatically placed on the waiting list for housing
developments in the zone of current residence.

Pathways was not announced to residents prior to its initial recruitment,

both in Regent Park and in the expanded 2007 sites, Rexdale and Lawrence Heights..

Given the chronological approach to assigning applicants to public housing units

and the long wait times, it is unlikely that households with a preference to go to
these projects because of Pathways would be in our data (in general, applicants
17

have a preference for smaller projects to avoid living in neighbourhoods with a high

density of poor households). Movement across projects is rare and not allowed
without exceptional reasons (e.g. change in work location).

We match public housing postal code addresses, recorded when entering

Grade 9, to the TDSB data. Each code generally refers to one side of a city street,
often over only one block or a single apartment building. Approximately three-

fourths of families living in these postal codes were located in public housing
addresses with unique postal codes. To help ensure similarity across our sample,

with all families paying rent-geared to income and facing a similar application
process, we only use postal codes that uniquely match to these projects. The

baseline sample from this match is 6,901 students that began Grade 9 at a TDSB
high school between 2000 and 2007 while residing in a Toronto public housing
project in which all parents were subject to rent-geared to income.
C. Pathways Participation Data

Pathways registration and participation data were also matched to the

baseline TDSB data. Pathways administrators provided a list of all students ever

registered for the program since its inception in 2001. Information on student
name, gender, day of birth, and especially Ontario Education Number (OEN) made it
possible to link the two datasets.

We also have registration status for 2007. This allows us to examine changes

in registration status between Grades 9 and Grade 12 for the 2003 cohort, changes
18

in status between Grade 9 and Grade 11 for the 2004 cohort, and changes in status
between Grade 9 and Grade 10 for the 2005 cohort. Finally, we also have

information on recorded monthly mentoring and tutoring sessions attended in
2003, 2004, and 2007.

D. Difference-in-Difference Analysis

Intent-To-Treat (ITT) effects are estimated from a difference-in-differences

methodology, looking at the relative differences in outcomes between students from

Regent Park, Rexdale, and Lawrence Heights and students from other housing

projects before and after Pathways was introduced. Our baseline results are from
the following regression model:
(1) y

ipc

where y

= βT
+δ ' X
+e +e +e
ipc
ipc
p
c ipc

ipc

is an outcome variable for individual i , from housing project p , who

entered Grade 9 in year c . T is a dummy variable indicating whether an individual
is eligible for Pathways.

X

is a vector of the individual's demographic

characteristics, including gender, age in grade 9, immigrant status, and a dummy
variable for whether

English is the primary language spoken at home.

The

coefficient of interest is β , the average effect of being eligible to participate in
Pathways. To explore whether Pathways generated similar effects when initially
19

introduced in Regent Park and when expanded, we estimate ITT effects separately
for the 2000 to 2006 period, when only Regent Park introduced Pathways, and for

the 2001 to 2007 period, when the two expansion sites introduced the program. 21

Given the smaller sizes of Rexdale and Lawrence Heights, we combine the two sites
and refer to them collectively as Rexdale/LH. 22

Standard errors are clustered by housing project to allow for correlation in

the outcomes of students residing in the same housing project across school years 23.

We also present results using alternative inference methods based on the wild
cluster bootstrap, a synthetic control group, grouped means and with confidence
intervals computed using the method described in Conley and Taber (2011) in
Appendix B. 24

It is fortuitous from a research perspective that the program was rolled out

for successive cohorts. Grade 10 Regent Park students in 2001 and Grade 10
21

Combined average program effect estimates, over the 2000 to 2007 period are shown in the appendix.
An alternative approach of estimating separate Pathways effects for Regent Park and Rexdale/LH over the
2000 and 2007 period requires dropping observations from the other treated site and thus reducing sample
size. Results are similar, and reported in the next section.
22
We also report estimated program effects at each new site, which are generally similar but some
confidence intervals are too wide to draw precise conclusions.
23
With 57 housing projects (clusters) in the final dataset, all inference is based on 57 – 1 = 56 degrees of
freedom. As is well known (see Cameron and Miller (2013)), the CRVE are asymptotically valid as long
as the number of clusters gets large. Our final dataset with 57 clusters is consistent with Angrist and
Pischke’s (2009) “42” rule of thumb. Finally, all clusters have more than 30 observations.
24
Recent Monte Carlo evidence suggests that the cluster robust variance estimator (CVRE) may lead to
standard error estimates that are biased downwards when cluster (group) sizes are different and when the
proportion of treated clusters is very small (MacKinnon and Webb (2013)). On the other hand, existing
methods to correct for cases like ours, with different cluster sizes and small proportion of treated clusters,
may be biased towards rejecting true effects. As discussed in Appendix B, recent literature suggests
conducting inference using standard errors from a cluster wild bootstrap procedure. However, Mackinnon
and Webb (2013) show that cluster wild bootstrap standard errors severely under-reject true null hypothesis
when the proportion of treated clusters is very small, the opposite problem of the CVRE standard errors.
As a result, it is likely that the “true” standard errors are somewhere between the two. Moreover, the main
qualitative finding that eligibility for Pathways led to large and statistically significant effects on academic
outcomes is robust to these two procedures and others, as shown in the Appendix. while the data in this
application feature both different cluster sizes and small proportion of treated clusters, given the lack of
consensus in the literature we use the CVRE for our baseline estimates.

20

Rexdale/LH students in 2007 were never eligible for Pathways. The possibility
exists of spillover effects, if these earlier cohorts benefited from Pathways
improving outcomes of later cohorts. This would tend to bias estimated program

effects downwards. Given that Pathways students account for about a quarter or
less of all students in a given cohort at a given high school, aggregated spillover
effects may be small.

The difference-in-differences approach requires two main assumptions for

causal inference: 1) underlying pre-Pathways differences between projects that

eventually adopt Pathways and comparison projects remain fixed, even after the

program is introduced, and 2) the counterfactual outcome path for Pathways

projects follows same pattern as that for the comparison projects. We conduct a

number of robustness checks to assess the reliability of these assumptions. First, we
use alternative comparison groups (only very large projects, only downtown
projects, only future projects (for Regent Park), or only projects within the 13 city
designated 'at-risk' neighborhoods).

Second, we use the 1996 and 2001 micro

census files, with postal codes, to test whether a more detailed set of background

characteristics remain relatively similar for cohorts over a longer time series than
we have available from the TDSB data. Comparing program effects using more than
one program introduction over different time periods, of course, also provides a

robustness check to the overall results, and a check on external validity for whether
the impacts from the program's initial introduction can be replicated in other

locations. It also should be reassuring that we find similar significant effects for
different sub-groups, suggesting our findings are not spurious.
21

E. Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents sample size counts of our baseline data. From the total of

6,901 students entering a TDSB school in Grade 9 between 2000 and 2007 from a

Metro Toronto Community housing project, 1,274 are from Regent Park, 737 are

from Rexdale/LH, and 4890 are from other projects. We track roughly 150 students

entering Grade 9 from Regent Park each year, 90 students from Rexdale/LH each
year, and and about 600 students from other projects. 25 The 863 students in the

2000 Grade 9 cohort compares to the 18,798 students in the Toronto District School
Board (Brown, 2006).

The table also describes average demographic characteristics for the

combined sample of 2000 to 2007 cohorts in our baseline data. The table shows a

difference in language spoken at home between students from Regent Park and

other projects. The fraction of students whose language at home is not English is
the highest for those from Regent Park (74.5 percent) compared to any other

development.

The next highest are 68.0 (Quebec High Park), 66.7 (Stableford

Farm), 59.3 (Edgeley Village), 56.8 (Blake Street), 56.8 (Flemington Park), 56.4

(Alexandra Park), 56.2 (Kennedy Road), and 56.0 (Beecker Street) percent. A likely

explanation for these differences is that Regent Park contains larger unit sizes, on
25

Regent Park's cohort sample more than doubles between 2006 and 2007. While we have no background
information to explain the sharp rise, we do not have reason to believe the data are incorrect. Pathways
participation data show a proportionate rise between those years, and descriptive background variables
remain, on average, the same. In any case, our main program estimates for Regent Park exclude the 2007
cohort, and when we do include it, estimates are generally the same.

22

average, to accommodate larger families than other housing projects. Ethnic and
immigrant composition have generally not changed over cohorts. In our impact
analysis, controlling for differences in language spoken at home does not
substantially alter the results, and we find similar effects for immigrants and nonimmigrants.

F. Pathways Registration and Participation

All children living in Regent Park and entering Grade 9 beginning in the

2001-2002 school year are eligible to participate in Pathways, as are entering Grade

9 students in 2007-2008 living in Rexdale/LH. Participation requires students and
their parents to first register each year by completing an agreement form. To help

enlist households, administrators obtain Grade 8 classroom lists from local

elementary schools and go door-to-door to encourage those eligible to register.
Those introducing the program are usually community members themselves.

Registration efforts also involve advertising throughout the housing project and
word of mouth.

The Community Health Centres that deliver Pathways are

conveniently walking distance from housing project residents.

Figure 1 shows Pathways registration rates among TDSB students entering

Grade 9 between 2000 and 2007. In the first year of the program in Regent Park,

58.8 percent of eligible students registered.

In the second year the fraction

registered climbs to 80.7 percent and by the third year, 89.3 percent of all Regent
Park Pathways eligible students located in the TDSB data are matched to the
23

program registrant list. The fraction registered remains high for the remaining four
years of recorded data and even climbs to 96 percent for the 2007 cohort. This
represents a remarkably high coverage rate of eligible students. The Pathways

participation rate in the initial year at Rexdale and Lawerence Heights is also
impressive, at 83.3 and 87.7 percent respectively.

Not shown in the tables, but worth mentioning is that Grade 9 registration

rates are similar for males and females, English speaking and non-English speaking
students, and for low and high performing students. For example, Grade 9 male and

female Pathways registration rates among the 2004 Grade 9 cohort from Regent

Park are 86.4 percent and 91.3 percent respectively. Four years later, registration
rates for those still in school were 80.0 percent and 86.4 percent respectively.

Initial Pathways registration rates are also similar between eligible students
speaking English and not speaking English at home (85.2 percent and 90.1 percent

respectively). Finally, while Grade 9 math and English grade performance variables

(0 if a grade less than 50 percent, 1 if grade is 50 to 59 percent, etc…) may well be

endogenous to Pathways participation, it nevertheless is interesting to note similar

rates of participation between those whose sum of these two variables was one or
less and those whose sum was greater than one (85.7 percent versus 90.0 percent
respectively).

Participation in various Pathways activities was not well recorded. At least

up to 2007, no data was collected on public transportation ticket provision or SPSW
visits. Group mentoring and individual tutoring sessions were recorded, but even

for these cases, data quality is unclear. Tables 2A and 2B show monthly mentoring
24

and tutoring sessions attended for the 2003 Grade 9 cohort enrolled in Pathways.

Generally, participants were required in Grades 9 and 10 to attend two tutoring

sessions each week unless exempted based on grade performance, and were
required to attend two group mentoring sessions each month. Yet, the Table 2A

suggests that registrants were attending only about half of these required sessions,
on average. In the first recorded month of October in Grade 9, for example, 2003

registrants attended 3.9 tutoring sessions and 1.0 mentoring activities, on average.
Tutoring activity falls off to between 2 and 3 sessions attended each month, on

average, after December, likely due to some students becoming exempt. We find

slightly higher tutorial attendance in Rexdale/LH during its initial Pathways year in
2007, and lower group activity, relative to Regent Park.

Among those attending any tutorial sessions in a given month, Table 2B

shows the number of sessions attended remains above 4, on average.

Group

mentoring activity, among those that do go, is similar across program sites, around
1.5 times a month. Taken at face value, the data imply that registrants are not

attending all the mandatory tutoring and mentoring sessions. On the other hand,
the data do indicate significant and regular attendance throughout the school year.
IV. Impact of Pathways on High School Achievement and Postsecondary
Enrollment
A. Graphical Summary
Figures 2A and 2B summarize our high school completion results graphically.

Figure 2A shows high school completion rates by the end of 5th year for youth that
25

entered high school in Grade 9 between 2000 and 2007 from different Toronto
Public Housing Projects. 38.2 percent of students from Regent Park that entered

Grade 9 in 2000 (and not eligible for Pathways) graduated by their fifth year. 26 The
graduation rate for students entering Grade 9 a year later -- the first year of

Pathways -- rises to 52.0 percent, a 13.8 percentage point increase. The rate

increases further, to 60.0 percent for the 2002 Grade 9 cohort, and then remains

relatively stable to 2007, with the exception of a jump up in 2004 (to 68.1 percent)

and a jump down in 2005 (to 53.0 percent). Thus, the graduation rate rises steadily
for students from Regent Park corresponding exactly to the rise in Pathways
participation (58.8 percent in 2001 and 80.3 percent in 2002). In contrast, the

figure indicates, only modest and slow improvement for cohorts from other projects
(excluding Rexdale/LH).

Initially, a higher fraction of students from these other

projects go on to finish compared to Regent Park, but after Pathways is introduced,
the pattern is reversed.

By assuming graduation rates in Regent Park would have followed the same

pattern as that in other projects if Pathways had not been introduced, we can
estimate the program’s overall impact on becoming eligible. Figure 2B shows this

graphically by normalizing graduation rates by initial site differences observed in
2000. Between cohorts 2000 and 2001, the figure shows a relative rise in the

Regent Park graduation rate by 15.4 percentage points, the period Pathways is

introduced. Similarly, using all 2000 to 2007 cohorts, the relative graduation rate in
26

Another 13.5 percent remained in TDSB the following year, 7.4 percent transferred outside TDSB, and
40.5 percent dropped out.

26

Regent Park after the introduction to Pathways increases, on average, 13.5

percentage points, a significant improvement. 27

The break in trend for Rexdale/LH graduation rates in 2007 also

corresponds to the introduction of Pathways. High school graduation rates at

Rexdale/LH follow closely the rates observed for the comparison projects from
2000 to 2006, then jump from 49.0 percent to 64.4 percent in 2007, when the

program was introduced. That is a 10.6 percentage point increase in the graduation

rate relative to the rate change between 2006 and 2007 at the comparison project
sites.

B. Regression Analysis
Table 3 shows our main estimated effects of Pathways eligibility on high

school graduation for Regent Park and Rexdale/LH, both for the full sample and for
various subgroups. As outlined in equation (1) and discussed in the previous

section, outcomes are regressed on a Pathways' eligibility indicator (student is from
Regent Park and entered Grade 9 in 2001 or later or student is from Rexdale/LH
and entered Grade 9 in 2007), as well as a set of dummy variables for housing

project and cohort, along with controls for age when entered grade 9, gender,
immigrant and home language status. We drop the 2007 Grade 9 cohort when

estimating Regent Park program effects and drop the 2000 cohort when looking at
27

Also noteworthy is that the estimated treatment on the treated (TOT) effects are almost exactly the same
when using the first year of Pathways (a 23.1percentage point increase in the probability of high school
graduation [0.136/0.588] ) versus using the second year (a 20.9 percentage point increase in the probability
of graduation [0. 168/0.803]).

27

Rexdale/LH, which allows us to keep the full sample for these remaining years

(combined results are shown in the Appendix). Graduation is defined as being
recorded as obtaining a diploma while dropping out is defined as not graduating and

showing up at a TDSB or other high school the following year. Standard errors are
clustered by housing project 28.

We present similar results using alternative

standard error and confidence interval estimates in Appendix B, Table A1.

As shown, Pathways eligibility effects (Intent-to-Treat) are large both for

Regent Park and Rexdale/LH. We estimate, with statistical significance at the 1

percent level, that the 2001 introduction of Pathways in Regent Park increased the 5
year graduation rate by 15.2 percentage points (from 38.2 percent to 53.4 percent)
and the 2007 introduction in Rexdale/LH increased the rate by 9.7 percentage
points (from 47.9 percent to 57.6 percent). 29

Table 3 also shows how these effects differ by student background.

Pathways impacts females significantly more than males for both Regent Park and
Rexdale/LH, though both gender groups appear to benefit at least to some degree.
Our estimated Pathways impacts are generally similar by whether English is spoken

at home. We also compare results for low achieving Grade 9 students (measured by

whether they failed or almost failed Grade 9 Mathematics or English) to those who

did not achieve low Grade 9 grades. While this variable is likely endogenous to
28

See footnote 19.

29

Similar estimates arise when using graduation after 6 years as the outcome variable (but with data from
the 2000 and 2004 cohorts only). For Regent Park, Pathways eligibility increased 6-year high school
graduation rates by 21.7 percentage points (from 38.2 to 59.9 percent, standard error 0.025). We also find
separate eligibility effects for Rexdale (a 15.1 percentage point increase in high school graduation from a
pre-Pathways mean of 45.4 percent) and Lawrence Heights (an 8.5 percentage point increase from a mean
of 49.3 percent).

28

Pathways eligibility (as we provide evidence for in Table 5), the bias is downwards
for both subgroups if students at the margin of getting better grades are the ones

affected by the program. It seems worth noting that, nevertheless, we find positive
and significant Pathways eligibility effects at both the Regent Park and Rexdale/LH

sites. Absolute gains are larger for higher achieving students, perhaps because
students with serious initial difficulty are harder to help. This is in line with the
notion of dynamic complementarities in human capital skill formation (Cuhna and
Heckman, 2007).

If we define Pathways participation as ever signing up for the program,

participation effects (Treatment-on-the-Treated) are about 20 percent larger than

eligibility effects, since most students from both Regent Park and Rexdale/LH take-

up the program. Appendix Table A2 shows these Treatment on Treated estimates
using Pathways eligibility as an instrument for Pathways participation and the same

difference-in-differences methodology as above. They require the assumptions that
non-participants are unaffected by Pathways and that no one is made worse of by

Pathways. Under these assumptions, introducing the program led participants to

increase 5-year graduation rates by 19.1 percentage points for Regent Park, and

12.0 percentage points for Rexdale/LH. Appendix Table 2 also shows participation
effect estimates after defining participation as signing up for Pathways and

attending at least one mentoring or tutoring session in Grade 9. Here the Treatment
on the Treated effects are larger, but more so for Regent Park than Rexdale/LH.

Pathways not only focuses on helping at risk high school students graduate

but also promotes postsecondary education.
29

This is done explicitly through a

college scholarship to each participant of up to $4,000, college application assistance
and fee waivers, and organized campus visits. The program also promotes college
implicitly from helping improve grades (and eligibility), and through regular

advising. Tables 4A and 4B look at post secondary outcomes for Regent Park and
Rexdale/LH respectively.

For Regent Park, we estimate very large impacts of

Pathways on post secondary attainment, even larger than the high school

completion impacts presented above. Application rates increase by 16.8 percentage
points, up from a mean of 43.3 percent in Regent Park in 2000. This leads to a 9.8

percentage point increase in a 2-year college acceptance among Pathways' eligible

cohorts by the end of their fifth year, and a 9.4 percentage point increase in
university program acceptance. Similar to our high school attainment findings,
impacts on postsecondary acceptances appear to be significantly larger among

females than males, though significant for both. For females, Pathways in Regent

Park more than doubles college acceptances. And also similar to patterns observed
with our high school findings, Regent Park Pathways' effects on postsecondary

acceptances are large for both English and non-English home speaking students and
higher for students not initially failing their Grade 9 English or Math courses.

Table 4B shows the postsecondary results for the new Pathways sites

introduced in 2007. While college and university application rates increased by
about 10 percentage points (up from 51.1 percent), the overall effect on

postsecondary enrolment was an increase by 4.4 percentage points and not

statistically significant. Perhaps in the initial program year, Rexdale/LH students
were encouraged to apply but to programs they could not get in to, or programs
30

that, ultimately, students were not interested. Specifically for males, however, we
estimate that the program doubled college enrolment (from 12.1 to 24.1 percent). 30

Finally, we estimate Pathways eligibility effects on some intermediate

outcomes, within high school, to explore possible mechanisms by which Pathways
may improve high school completion outcomes. Table 5 shows Intent to Treat
effects from Pathways on Grade 9 Math and English grades, Grade 9 and 10

academic track status, and OSSLT Literacy Test pass rates. While these variables are

the only intermediate outcomes we observe, all three are found to be significantly
affected by Pathways' introduction, either for Regent Park or Rexdale/LH, or both.
C. Robustness Checks
We consider two robustness checks to examine how well our results hold.

First, we consider alternative comparison groups to our baseline of youth from all

Toronto Community Housing projects (other than Regent Park and Rexdale/LH)

with only tenants paying Rent Geared to Income (RGI). Some of these projects are
considerably smaller than Pathways projects, and scattered throughout the city.

Although the application procedure is centralized and generic for all projects,

applicants can specify region preferences or specific project preferences (the default
is to be considered for housing within an applicants' current census subdivision).

30

When estimating the eligibility effects for each new site separately, we find a 8.7 percentage point
increase in post secondary enrollment for Lawrence Heights, while a 1.7 percentage point decrease for
Rexdale. The Lawrence Heights effect is statistically significant using Huber-White standard errors, but
not when using other methods discussed in the Appendix.

31

Table 6 shows results from using the same regression equations for Table 3, but
with different comparison groups.

The first row of Table 6 shows the baseline results for Pathways eligibility

effects on fifth year graduation rates. The second row uses for the comparison

group only the twelve largest housing projects, aside from Regent and Rexdale/LH,
which are similar in size and notoriety. 31 The total sample drops by almost one half.

The effects remain large - about a 10 percentage point increase in graduation
attributed to Pathways eligibility.

The third row uses only the two largest

downtown projects in the same subdivision as Regent Park. Here the point estimate
for the Pathways effect on high school graduation is an increase of 7.5 percentage

points, with a large standard error of 7.7 percentage points. The last row uses a

sample with only housing projects within Toronto's “priority neighborhoods”, which

are areas with concentrated levels of crime and poverty. . Results are similar to the

baseline results in row 1 and significant. 32 The main message from the table is that

the choice in comparison group does not seem to affect the results. High school
completion rates rise modestly and slowly for all the comparison groups examined.

The rapid improvement in Regent Park and Rexdale/LH's academic outcomes
following the introduction of Pathways is what appears to drive the results.

Our school district data do not permit us to go back before 2000 and test

whether the performance gap between youth from Regent Park and other housing
31

The large projects are Alexandra Park, Bleecker Street, East Mall, Edgeley Village, Jane Finch, Firgrove
Crescent, Flemingdon Park, Lawrence Heights, Malvern, Moss Park, Pelham Park, Regent Park, Rexdale
(Thistletown) and Warden Woods.
32
We also test the robustness of the effect of Pathways eligibility for Regent Park residents using two
housing projects that later adopt the Pathways program (beginning in 2007 for Rexdale/LH). Eligibility for
Pathways is estimated to increase graduation rates by 14.0 percentage points (standard error of 2.7
percentage points), relative to this comparison group.

32

projects was relatively constant in years prior to Pathways. If performance for the

165 students from Regent Park who entered Grade 9 in 2000 was unusually poor

compared to prior years, the observed subsequent improvement to later cohorts

would incorrectly be attributed to Pathways. In an attempt to test whether the
2000 Regent Park cohort was anomalous, we obtained access to Statistics Canada's

1996 and 2001 census files with postal code identifiers to identify youth between
age 9 and 17 living in the same public housing addresses as those in our sample.

Although the timing of the censuses and their cross-section nature do not lend
themselves well to testing Pathways' effects on final education attainment, we can

instead use them to test whether background characteristics across projects
remained stable for a richer set of variables than those available from the Toronto
School Board data.

Table 7 shows mean characteristics from the census data for Regent Park and

other housing project students. We assign students to Grade 9 cohorts based when
the year they were age 14, since 92.3 percent of our TDSB sample was age 14 when
they entered Grade 9. The pattern of more Non-English speaking students from

Regent Park remains similar to that observed from the TDSB data. The census data

also indicate families from Regent Park are generally poorer than those from other
housing projects, receive more government income assistance, and are less likely
with married parents.

Due to the negative correlation between poverty and

performance, we might expect to observe worse performance for students from
Regent Park. This is not the case for the years after Pathways was introduced.
33

The last row presents coefficient estimates and standard errors for the

interaction term of being from Regent Park and entering Grade 9 in 2000 after

regressing each background characteristic on this interaction, along with fixed

effects for housing project and cohort, and clustered standard errors at the project
level. This coefficient tests whether overall differences in characteristics between
Regent Park and other projects systematically differ for the 2000 Grade 9 cohort,

our only pre-Pathways cohort in our TDSB data. All of the estimates are small and
insignificant, except for the 'parent with university' variable, which indicates
parents of the Grade 9 cohort from Regent Park are 3.8 percentage points less likely

with any university education compared to other years. This difference would not,

at least on its own, be enough to explain the much larger Pathways' effect estimates
found in our TDSB data. Together with the insignificant differences found for the
rest of the background variables, we interpret Table 7 as providing evidence against

the hypothesis that the Grade 9 Regent Park cohort in 2000 was unusual in a way to
lead to expect dramatically improved education outcomes for later cohorts.

V. Discussion and Conclusion
Pathways to Education is a comprehensive youth support program

developed to improve academic outcomes among those entering high school from
very poor social-economic backgrounds.

The program includes proactive case

workers assigned to each student at the start of Grade 9, free weekly tutoring and

group activities throughout high school, career counseling, and college transition
34

assistance, combined with immediate and long-term incentives to reinforce a

minimum degree or mandatory participation. The program is community-based, to

address poor academic performance for youth from three of Toronto's largest public
housing complexes. Since its start in 2001, Pathways has attracted national public
and media interest. An internal 2007 consulting report concluded that "Pathways is
one of the most successful programs we have found anywhere in North America".

The program has recently been expanded to 11 other communities across Canada
and efforts for further expansion continue. About half its financial support (47

percent) comes from national, provincial, and local levels of governments. The
other half comes from considerable foundation (20 percent), corporate (19
percent), individual (8 percent), and other (6 percent) support.

This paper is an attempt to more transparently present an evaluation of the

introduction of Pathways, with more convincing identification strategies and

robustness checks than earlier assessments, and with a look at whether impacts
were replicated at expanded sites. Our results remain impressive:
•

Pathways reaches a remarkably high fraction of its target group: 80 to 95

percent of eligible students entering high school and their parents register in

•

writing for the program

At the program's initial site (in Regent Park), fifth year high school

graduation rates increased from about 38 percent to 58 percent, while fifth

year post secondary enrollment rates more than 50 percent, from about 43
percent to 59 percent

35

•

The program's expansion, at two other sites in 2007, also led to impressive
gains - an immediate 10 percentage point increase in high school graduation

and about a 10 percentage point increase in post secondary enrollment for
•

males

High school impacts are larger for women and for students not failing initial

math and English classes. Impacts are similar for students with English and
•

non-English languages spoken at home

Program effects are also positive for most of the limited intermediate

outcomes we are able to look at: Grade 9 math and English grades, and taking
a set of academic track courses.

Pathways costs approximately $3,500 per year per student in 2010 Canadian

dollars, along with $1,200 in head office administrative costs (Boston Consulting
Group, 2011). Direct operating costs comprise of 20 percent public transportation

tickets, 15 percent scholarship expenditures, and the remaining towards SPPGs,
tutoring and group activity operations.

Over an average participants' entire

duration in high school, Pathways is estimated to cost $14,000 in present value
direct operating costs, plus indirect administrative costs, plus costs from extended
enrollment in school.

While substantial, if students affected by the program

experience earnings gains in the range of previous returns to schooling estimates
for marginal students, total benefits likely exceed costs, even when only looking at

36

benefits from additional tax revenue. 33 Including the many possible non-pecuniary
benefits from additional schooling (Oreopoulos and Salvanes, 2011), as well as

social benefits from reductions in crime and improvements to health (Lochner
2011) would reinforce this conclusion.

A better understanding of Pathways' mechanisms would help contain costs

and lead to more detailed theories of change. The approach used in this paper for

estimating average program effects cannot be used for trying to disentangle which
program components worked and which did not. The components themselves were

designed to work together: Student-Parent Support Workers are able to monitor

and encourage tutoring use, inform students of group activities and events. Group
activities promote social capital among Pathways participants.

Free public

transportation tickets and college scholarships are conditional on meeting with
support workers and attending tutoring and group activities.

Looking at previous research, one can find evidence of large impacts for

some of Pathways' components on their own. As discussed earlier, tutoring, afterschool assistance, and a culture of high expectations are key parts to highly effective

chartered schools (Dobbie and Fryer, 2011b). Personalized and regular coaching, at

least at the college level, has also been shown to be effective at increasing education
33

For example, suppose high school dropouts earn $25,000, on average, at age 20 and worked until age 65
with 1.5 percent real increases in wages. Suppose returns to additional high school for marginal students
are in the range of 10 percent per year (Angrist and Krueger, 1991, Oreopoulos, 2007), and that Pathways
compliers who complete high school because of the program increase their high school attainment by two
years (for a total increase in annual earnings of about 20 percent). Similarly, suppose high school graduates
earn $30,000 with the same wage profile implied above. Assume higher post secondary enrollment from
Pathways implies a 20 percent return each year (e.g. Oreopoulos and Petronijevic, 2013, and Zimmerman,
forthcoming). With Pathways increasing high school graduation by about 18 percentage points and college
enrollment by about 21 percentage points participants, this implies a net present value increase in expected
earnings of $72,789 using a 3 percent discount rate. With an average tax rate of 30 percent, this implies
additional expected tax revenue of $21,837 per Pathways eligible.

37

persistence (Bettinger and Baker, 2011). Assistance with college transition and
applications, including paying application fees, has also been shown to markedly
increase college enrollment (Bettinger et al., 2012, Carrell and Sacerdote, 2013),

although, of course, not high school completion. College trust incentives, very

similar to those offered by Pathways, have also been found effective. A study in New
Brunswick that randomly offered entering Grade 9 students college trust funds that

accumulated by $2,000 each year in high school, up to a maximum of $8,000 -

exactly double Pathways' incentive, reduced dropout rates by about 8 percentage

points and increased postsecondary enrollment rates by about 10 percentage points
(Frenette and Ford, 2012). A randomized trial in Chicago provided social-cognitive

skills training, along with mandatory daily two-on-one tutoring, to help

disadvantaged youth better self-regulate and interact (Cook et al. 2014). Impacts on

school engagement, math and, in some cases, reading scores, were some of the
largest ever estimated in the literature.

The Accelerated Study in Associate

Program, a comprehensive intervention designed to increase completion rates for

low-income community college students, features many of the same components as
Pathways including free public transportation tickets, mandatory tutoring, regular
counseling over multiple years, and career advising services. Initial results from

this program point to very positive effects on credit accumulation, as well as
postsecondary retention and graduation rates (Scrivener and Weiss, 2013).

It is not possible to tell from the results in this paper whether only a few

components of the program drive the results or whether its integration is crucial. In

the absence of being able to experiment with variations of the program, qualitative
38

research through survey and ethnographic research may help. The expansion of

additional Pathways sites outside of Toronto also provides an opportunity to test
whether these initial impacts can be replicated. Implementation quality, community

support, recruitment, communication efforts, and target population may be key
underlying ingredients for program effectiveness that could explain why some site
impacts are larger than others. Still, the program's initial introduction looks as

though it was highly effective in improving education attainment for a sample of
very poor youth. These results are promising, similar to recent intensive efforts to
target disadvantaged youth, and point to the need for further research and policy
discussion.

39

References

Abadie, Alberto, Diamond, Alexis, and Hainmueller, Jens (2010). “Synthetic Control
Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco
Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 105(490), pp.
493-505.

Abdulkadiroglu, Atila, Joshua Angrist, Susan Dynarski, Thomas J. Kane, and Parag
Pathak (2011), “Accountability in Public Schools: Evidence from Boston’s Charters
and Pilots”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 126(2), pp. 699-748.
Angrist, Joshua D., Krueger, Alan, 1991. Does compulsory school attendance affect
schooling and earnings? Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106 (4), pp. 979–1014.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Pischke, Jӧrn-Steffen (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics:
An Empiricist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Bales, Vicki (November 30, 2004). "The community succession project & Pathways
to Education," Report to the Trillium Foundation.
Bettinger, Eric, and Rachel Baker (2011). "The effects of student coaching in college:
An evaluation of a randomized experiment in student mentoring," NBER Working
Paper #16881.
Bettinger, Eric, Bridget Long, Philip Oreopoulos, and Lisa Sanbonmatsu (2012).
“Helping Complete College Financial Aid Applications: Evidence from a Randomized
Trial with H&R Block” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127(3), pp. 1205-1242.

Boston Consulting Group (2007). “BCG Assessment of Pathways to Education:
Executive Summary,” slides dated July 16, 2007.

Boston Consulting Group (2011). “BCG Assessment of Pathways to Education:
Executive Summary,” slides dated February 2011.
Brown, Robert S. (2006). "The TDSB Grade 9 Cohort Study: A Five-Year Analysis,
2000-2005), TDSB Research Report #05/06-05.

Cameron, A. Colin, Miller, Douglas L. and Gelbach, Jonah B. (2008). “BootstrapBased Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” The Review of Economics
and Statistics, vol. 90, pp. 414-427.
Cameron A. Colin, and Miller, Douglas L. (2013). “A Practitioner’s Guide to ClusterRobust Inference,” Working Paper.
40

Camilli, Gregory, Sadako Vargas, Sharon Ryan, and W. Steven Barnett (2010). "Metaanalysis of the effects of early education interventions on cognitive and social
development," Teachers College Record vol. 112(3), March 2010, pp. 579-620.
Carrell, Scott E., and Bruce Sacerdote (2013). "Late interventions matter too: The
case of college coaching New Hampshire," NBER Working Paper #19031

Conley, Timothy G., and Taber, Christopher R (2011). “Inference with ‘difference in
differences’ with a small number of policy changes,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol. 93(1), pp. 113-125.

Cook, Philip J., Kenneth Dodge, George Farkas, Roland G. Fryer Jr., Jonathan Guryan,
Jens Ludwig, Susan Mayer, Harold Pollack, and Laurence Steinberg (2014). "The
(surprising) efficacy of academic and behavioral intervention with disadvantaged
youth: Results from a randomized experiment in Chicago," NBER Working Paper No.
19882.
Cunha, Flavio, and James Heckman (2007). “The Technology of Skill Formation.”
American Economic Review, vol. 97(2): pp. 31-47.

Dearing, Eric (2008). "Psychological costs of growing up poor," Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, vol. 1136, pp. 324-332.

Dobbie, Will, and Roland G. Fryer Jr. (2009). “Are high quality schools enough to
close the achievement gap? Evidence from a social experiment in Harlem,” NBER
Working Paper #15473
Dobbie, Will and Fryer, Roland G. (2011a), “Are High Quality Schools Enough to
Increase Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence From the Harlem Children’s
Zone”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 3(3), pp. 158-187.
Dobbie, Will and Fryer, Roland G. (2011b), “Getting Beneath the Veil of Effective
Schools: Evidence from New York City”, NBER Working Paper no. 17632.

Dvorak, Petula (October 1, 2010). "The griding reality of growing up poor," The
Washington Post, Metro Section.
Frenette, Marc, and Reuben Ford (2012). "The impact of an early promise of a
means-tested grant on postsecondary enrolment: First evidence from a Randomized
Field Experiment," Working Paper.

Fryer, Roland (2012). "Injecting Successful Charter School Strategies into
Traditional Public Schools: Early Results from an Experiment in Houston," NBER
Working Paper No. 17494.
41

Geiger, H. Jack (2002). "Community-Oriented Primary Care: A Path to Community
Development," American Journal of Public Health, November 2002, vol. 92(11), pp.
1713-1716.

Heckman, James J. (2004). “Lessons from the technology of skill formation,” Annals
of the New York Academy of Sciences vol. 1038, , pp. 179-200.
Holzer, Harry J., Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Greg J. Duncan, and Jens Ludwig
(2008). "The economic costs of childhood poverty in the United States," Journal of
Children and Poverty, vol. 14(1), March 2008, pp. 41-61

Lochner, Lance, “Nonproduction Benefits of Education: Crime, Health, and Good
Citizenship,” in E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Woessmann (eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Vol. 4, Ch. 2, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, 2011.
Lynn, Laurence E. Jr., and Michael G.H. McGeary (eds) (1990). "Inner-City poverty in
the United States," National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.

MacKinnon, James G. and Webb, Matthew D. (2013). “Wild Bootstrap Inference
with Wildly Different Cluster Sizes.” Queen’s Department of Economics Working
Paper No. 1314.
McLoyd, Vonnie C. (1998). "Socioeconomic disadvantage and child development,"
American Psychologist, vol. 53(2), February 1998, pp. 185-204.
Oreopoulos, Philip and Kjell G. Salvanes "Priceless: The Non-pecuniary Benefits of
Schooling," Journal of Economic Perspectives vol. 25(1), (Winter 2011): 159–184.

Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic (2013). "Making college worth it: A review
of research on the returns to higher education," NBER Working Paper #19053.

Oreopoulos, Philip (2007). "Do dropouts drop out too soon? Wealth, health, and
happiness from compulsory schooling," Journal of Public Economics, vol. 91 pp.
2213-2229.
Oreopoulos, Philip (2008). “Neighbourhood Effects in Canada: A Critique,” Canadian
Public Policy, vol. 34(2), pp. 237-258.
Osofsky, Joy D. (1999). "The impact of violence on children," The Future of Children,
vol. 9(3), Domestic Violence and Children (Winter, 1999). pp. 33-49.

Polidano, Cain, Barbara Hanel, and Hielke Buddelmeyer (2012). "Explaining the SES
School Completion Gap," Melbourne Institute Working Paper No. 16/12.
42

Rowen, N. (2012). Pathways to Education and Its Accomplishments. In A. Cumming
(Ed.), Adolescent Literacies in a Multicultural Context (pp. 36-55). New York:
Routledge.

Rowen, Norman, and Kevin Gosine (2006). "Support that matters: A CommunityBased Response to the Challenge of Raising the Academic Achievement of
Economically Vulnerable Youth," in "Inclusion in urban educational environments:
Addressing Issues of diversity, equity, and social justice (D. Armstrong and B.
McMahon Eds.), Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing .

Schweinhart, L. J., Montie, J., Xiang, Z., Barnett, W. S., Belfield, C. R., & Nores, M.
(2005). Lifetime effects: The HighScope Perry Preschool study through age 40.
(Monographs of the HighScope Educational Research Foundation, 14). Ypsilanti, MI:
HighScope Press.
Scrivener, Susan, and Michael J. Weiss (2013). "More graduates: Two-year results
from an evaluation of Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) for
developmental education students," MDRC Policy Brief, December 2013.
Toronto Social Housing Connections (1998). "Guide to social housing in Toronto,"
Community Information Toronto, Toronto Canada.

Venkatesh, Sudhir Alladi. American Project: The Rise and Fall of a Modern Ghetto.
2000. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Zimmerman, Seth (forthcoming). "The returns to college admission for academically
marginal students," Journal of Labor Economics.

43

Appendix A

44

45

Appendix B: Robustness Checks with Alternative Inference Methods

Inference in difference in differences models with grouped (clustered) data

has been an active area of research in the past few years. 34 The primary concern in
this literature is that OLS standard error estimates are biased downward due to

possible heteroskedasticity and serial correlation (at the group level) in the error

term. This can lead to incorrect inference, over-rejection of the null hypothesis in
significance tests of individual parameter estimates and confidence intervals that

are too narrow. The standard error estimates reported in the main results above
correct for possible heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in outcomes of
students living in the same housing project. We cluster standard errors (CRVE) at

the housing project level and with 57 clusters in the final dataset, each of which

contains more than 30 observations, inference is based on the critical values of a t-

distribution with 57 degrees of freedom. Nevertheless, there may be remaining
concerns with this approach because (i) the proportion of treated projects is low

relative to the number of untreated housing projects, (ii) the variation in cluster
sizes and (iii) if the projects in our sample experience cohort specific shocks that

determine outcomes (i.e. there are project x cohort fixed effects in equation (1)). In

this Appendix we explore the robustness of the inference in the main results above
to alternative specifications.

The CRVE consistently estimates variance of the ITT effect of interest in

equation (1) if three key assumptions hold. The first assumption, that the number
34

Cameron and Miller (2013) is an example of a review and discussion about the current state of this area
of research.

46

of groups goes to infinity is well known. The “rule of 42” is a rule of thumb that
applied researchers have used to justify the reliability of CVRE estimates. However,

the consistency of the CRVE also depends on two other assumptions, specifically: (i)
a degree of within-group correlation is constant across groups and (ii) each group

contains an equal number of observations. The implications of violating these two
assumptions for the reliability of standard errors computed using the CRVE has only
recently received attention in the literature.

In a series of Monte Carlo studies,

MacKinnon and Webb (2013) show that the CRVE is unreliable when group sizes are

very different. Using simulated data with relative groups sizes that mimic the
population differences between U.S. states, they find that the CRVE severely overrejects a true-null hypothesis even when the number of groups is very large. They

find that performance is particularly poor when the proportion of treated groups is
very small or very large relative to the number of untreated groups.

In light of this evidence, the characteristics of the data in this application are

challenging for two reasons. First, there is significant variation in the sizes of the

different housing projects in our sample. Large housing projects like Regent Park
have approximately 150 observations per cohort while smaller housing projects like

Sheppard Birchmount have approximately 10 observations per cohort. Also, only
three projects (Regent Park, Rexdale and Lawrence Heights) receive treatment, in
the form of the introduction of the Pathways program.

MacKinnon and Webb find that the wild cluster bootstrap discussed in

Cameron, Miller and Gelbach (2008) performs much better than the CRVE. We test
47

the robustness of the results in the main analysis using the wild cluster bootstrap
with 999 replications by constructing bootstrap confidence intervals for the 5-year
graduation rate ITT estimates. The results for this procedure are reported in row 2

of Appendix Table 1 (ITT estimates, standard errors and 95% confidence intervals
from the main analysis are reported in row 1 as a comparison). For the 5-year

graduation rate, the distribution of ITT effects has a mean of 15.2 percentage points
which is very similar to the estimated ITT in the main analysis. The ITT estimates
at the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of this distribution imply 95% confidence intervals
that range between 6 percentage points and 24 percentage points, nearly twice the

size of the confidence intervals estimated using the CRVE. 35 While the confidence

intervals implied by the cluster wild bootstrap are much larger than those implied
by the CRVE, the empirical distribution of ITT effects implies that point estimates
are still significant at the 1 percent level36.

Similarly, the implied confidence

intervals for the ITT estimates suggest that the effect of being eligible for Pathways

at the Rexdale/LH (column 2) and three combined sites (column 3) is significant at
conventional levels.

MacKinnon and Webb find that the wild cluster bootstrap under-rejects true

null hypothesis in cases when the proportion of treated groups is below 10 percent

and above 90 percent, the opposite problem of the CRVE. In this application, the
35

The reported standard errors are the standard deviations of the estimated bootstrap distribution of ITT
estimates.
36
We also test the null hypothesis of a zero estimate for the ITT directly by imposing the null hypothesis in
the data generating process (DGP) as in MacKinnon and Webb (2013). Equation (1) is then estimated for
each bootstrap replication using the dependent variable formed by the DGP. A Wald test statistic is formed
for each replication and the symmetric bootstrap p –value is computed. The null hypothesis of a zero ITT
estimate is rejected at the α level if the symmetric bootstrap p-value is less than α. The null hypothesis is
rejected at the 1 percent level.

48

proportion of treated projects is about 2 percent. The fact that we are able to reject
the null hypothesis of a zero or a negligible ITT effect using this procedure is strong

evidence of a relatively large and statistically significant impact of being eligible for
Pathways on high school attainment rates.

As a second robustness check, we estimate the impact of eligibility for

Pathways using the synthetic control method described in Abadie et al. (2010).

This method directly addresses the case when there is only one treated group and
several potential control groups. The essence of this approach is that the ideal

control group in any comparative case study will have pre-treatment characteristics
(variables) that are as similar as possible (in levels) to those of the treatment group
of interest.

With very similar pre-treatment characteristics, the post-treatment

outcomes from this ideal control group are a reasonable estimate of the unobserved

counterfactual outcomes for the treated group. The Abadie et al. method uses pre-

treatment variables (both outcomes and covariates) from a pool of potential control
group candidates to construct a synthetic control group that is most similar to the

treated group of interest. Then, any differences in the post-treatment outcomes
between the treated group and the synthetic control group can be attributed to the
reform or event-study being analyzed.

In this application, data from the pool of control projects from the pre-

Pathways cohorts (the 2000 cohort) are used to construct the synthetic control
group 37. Each of these projects is assigned a weight so that the weighted average of
37

The synthetic control method relies on the assumption that the number of pre-treatment periods is large
relative to the scale of the transitory shocks in the residual. With only one year of pre-treatment data, it is
unclear whether this assumption is violated in this application.

49

each of the pre-Pathways characteristics from the synthetic control group mostclosely resembles the 2000 Grade 9 cohort from Regent Park. Most projects are
weighted relatively equally using this approach, with nearly all individual project

weights varying between 1.5 to 3 percent of the synthetic control group 38. This is
contrasted with the OLS estimation in the main analysis which implicitly weights the

projects with the most observations (the largest housing projects in the sample) the
highest. The average pre-treatment 5-year graduation rate for the synthetic control
group is 38.15 percent compared to 38.18 percent for Regent Park.

Row 3 in Appendix Table 1 reports the estimated impact of being eligible for

Pathways using the synthetic control group method. Following the introduction of

Pathways for the 2001-2002 academic year, the 5-year average graduation rate in
Regent Park is 9.6 percentage points higher than that of the synthetic control group.
This estimate is very similar to the difference-in-difference estimate reported in row
1.

Following Abadie et al (2010), we also evaluate whether the estimated

impact of being eligible for Pathways is rare compared to a series of placebo studies.

Specifically, we iteratively assigned each project to the treated group and
constructed a synthetic control group for each case.

The estimated placebo

treatment effects are then compared to the estimated effect for Regent Park. Of the

57 estimated treatment effects (56 placebo estimates plus the Regent Park
estimate), the 9.6 percentage point gap between Regent Park and the synthetic
Regent Park is the 9th largest.

38

Therefore, the probability of estimating a gap

The control group project with the largest weight is Yorkwoods Village (11.9%), followed by East Mall
(2.8%), Willowridge Richview (2.8%), Roywood Drive (2.6%) and Kennedy Glamorgan (2.4%).

50

between the treatment and synthetic control group greater than the magnitude of
that for Regent Park is 17 percent 39. This suggests that the estimated gap for Regent
Park is relatively rare.

The model estimated in equation (1) assumes the absence of a project x

cohort effect (equivalently, the underlying pre-treatment differences between
Regent park and each of the comparison projects remains fixed both before and
after treatment).

Conley and Taber (2011) point out that when the number of

treatment groups is finite, relaxing this assumption implies that the difference in
differences estimator is not consistent even with a large number of clusters in

total 40. However, they show that if eligibility for treatment is randomly assigned
(independent of the project x cohort effects), the limiting distribution of the

differences in differences parameter can be estimated (up to the value of the
parameter). The essence of their approach is that when the eligibility for treatment

is randomly assigned, information from the residuals of the control projects can be
used to estimate the limiting distribution of the differences in differences
parameter.

This can then be used to perform hypothesis tests and construct

confidence intervals. Using several empirical examples, they show that confidence
intervals may be much wider than those implied by traditional inference methods.

In row 4 of Appendix Table 1 we investigate whether the large and

statistically significant ITT estimates presented in section IV are robust to relaxing

this assumption. Assuming that the estimates in the main analysis represent the
39

These results are available from the authors upon request.
If the expectation of the project x cohort effect, conditional on treatment status, is equal to zero then the
difference in differences estimator is still not consistent but is unbiased.

40

51

true values of the ITT parameter, both the 95% and 90% confidence intervals are

computed using the method described in Conley and Taber (2011). The implied
confidence intervals are very large relative to those computed using standard
inference methods.

The estimated confidence intervals suggest that the 5 year

graduation rate is not statistically significant at the 5 percent level..

That being said, there are at least two reasons to believe that the assumption

of non-zero project x cohort effects is unwarranted in this application.

First, the

cohorts we study enter high school (Grade 9) in consecutive years meaning that at
any given time, each cohort will be in school at the same time as at least three other

cohorts. Therefore, any project x cohort effects would represent shocks that impact
one project-cohort but not any neighboring cohorts, even if students in the shocked

cohort have peers or classmates that are in neighboring cohorts. If peer effects are
important in determining high school outcomes, it is difficult to imagine how

project-cohort specific shocks could enter equation (1) 41. We also inspect the
family/background characteristics of students in successive cohorts from the mid-

1990s through the mid-2000s in Table 7 to check for evidence whether students

from Regent Park and other public housing projects experience cohort specific
shocks. The series appear to move together, leading us to conclude that there is no

such evidence. For example, the trends in many of the demographic variables such
as the percentage of immigrants, parent’s university attainment, family earnings,

41

Moreover, since eligibility for Pathways is determined by the housing project one lives in and not school
and because many of the housing projects in our data are very close geographically, students living in one
project have high school classmates that live in other projects. Assuming non-zero project x cohort effects
would also suggest that there are important shocks that impact the high school outcomes of students but
don’t impact peers that live in housing projects nearby that are in the same cohort even if they attend the
same school.

52

receipt of government assistance and poverty rate are similar for both Regent Park
and the comparison housing projects from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s.

Next, we explore the sensitivity of the results to ignoring the heterogeneity in

the comparison housing projects. We first collapse the high school attainment
outcome variables into their annual means and by whether they are Regent Park,

the Rexdale/LH sites or other public housing.. Row 5 in Appendix Table 1 reports
the ITT parameter estimates of regressions of these annual means on a dummy
variable equal to one if the annual mean is from a year when students from Regent
Park or Rexdale/LH were eligible for Pathways 42.

Heteroskedasticity robust

standard errors are reported in square brackets. Essentially, these regressions
formally estimate the result in Figure 2.

By grouping all comparison housing

projects into one control group, we are ignoring any heterogeneity in the pretreatment differences between the comparison projects. Similar to the main results
above, estimated ITT effects are both large and significant for each of the high school

attainment outcome variables. Eligibility for Pathways is estimated to increase the

5-year graduation rate by 14.7 percentage points in Regent Park and 9.6 percentage
points at the Rexdale/LH sites. These estimates are very similar to the baseline
results in row 1. 43

We interpret these results, taken together with the robustness checks in

section IV, as pointing to the introduction of Pathways having led to consistent and
42

Regent Park, Rexdale/LH and post-Pathways period dummies are also included in these regressions.
Differences in estimates between rows 1 and 5 are due to the fact that the group mean regressions do not
weight project means by their sampling weight.
43

53

relatively large and statistically significant improvements in the high school dropout
rate for students living in public housing in the City of Toronto.

54

Other Public Housing

Regent Park

Rexdale

LH

Rexdale/LH sites opened

Regent Park site opened

0

.1

.2

Enrollment Rates for Pathways
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8

.9

1

Figure 1
Pathways to Education Enrollment Rates
Among 2000 to 2007 Grade 9 Students from Regent Park,
Rexdale, Lawrence Heights, and Other Toronto Public Housing Projects

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Notes: The sample in this figure includes students from Toronto public housing residences
(Regent Park, Rexdale or Lawrence Heights (LH), or other public housing) that entered a
Toronto District School Board (TDSB) high school in Grade 9 between the 2000-2001 and 20072008 academic years. The figure indicates the fraction of this sample that ever enrolled in the
Pathways to Education program. Other Public Housing refers to students who enrolled in Grade
9 in the TDSB and who live in public housing projects other than Regent Park, Rexdale, and
Lawrence Heights, and whose projects have more than 30 students.

.7

.75

Figure 2A
Fraction Graduated from High School by 5th Year
Among 2000 to 2007 Grade 9 Students from Pathways
and Non-Pathways Toronto Public Housing Projects

.65

Regent Park

.45

.5

.55

.6

Rexdale/LH

.35

.4

5th Year Graduation Rate

Other Public Housing

2000

2001

2002 2003 2004 2005
Year Entered Grade 9

2006

2007

Notes: This figure shows average 5-year graduation rates for students living in Toronto public
housing who entered Grade 9 between the 2000-2001 and 2007-2008 academic years. Regent
Park refers to students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the TDSB and who live in the Regent Park
Housing Project. Rexdale/LH refers to students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the TDSB and who
live in the Rexdale or Lawrence Heights public housing project. Other Public Housing refers to
students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the TDSB and who live in public housing projects other than
these three and whose projects have more than 30 students.

.35

Figure 2B
Normalized Fraction Graduated from High School by 5th Year
Among 2000 to 2007 Grade 9 Students from Regent Park
and Non-Pathways Toronto Public Housing Projects

Other Public Housing

.3

Regent Park

.25
.2
.15
.1
0

.05

Normalized Graduation Rate

Rexdale/LH

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Year Entered Grade 9

Notes: This figure shows the same information as in Figure 2A except that the high school
graduation rate for each group for the 2000 cohort was subtracted from the actual rate for each
cohort, leading to a baseline value of zero for all groups in 2000.

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics of High School Students from Regent Park, Newsites and Other Public Housing Projects
By Year Entered Grade 9
Regent Park

Year Entered Grade 9
2000-07

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

0.509

0.515

0.5

0.527

0.489

0.5

0.478

0.592

0.493

14

14.1

14

14.1

14.1

14

14.1

14.1

14

English 2nd Language

0.734

0.745

0.757

0.72

0.641

0.804

0.754

0.692

0.741

Sample Size

1274

165

148

150

131

138

134

130

278

Female
Age

Rexdale/LH

Year Entered Grade 9
2000-07

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Female

0.495

0.584

0.547

0.54

0.471

0.429

0.536

0.423

0.446

Age

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14

English 2nd Language

0.52

0.449

0.427

0.46

0.437

0.583

0.582

0.577

0.594

Sample Size

737

89

75

87

87

84

110

104

101

Other Public Housing

Year Entered Grade 9
2000-07

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Female

0.484

0.527

0.507

0.486

0.487

0.463

0.466

0.456

0.484

Age

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14.1

14

English 2nd Language

0.443

0.376

0.419

0.412

0.417

0.433

0.478

0.495

0.505

Sample Size

4890

609

590

570

587

624

601

634

675

Notes: The top panel reports total and annual means of select demographic variables for students enrolled in Grade 9 in the Toronto District School Board (TDSB) and
who reside in the Regent Park housing project. In the middle panel, 'New Sites' refers to the sample of students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the Toronto District
School Board (TDSB) in the year(s) indicated and who reside in the Lawrence Heights (LH) or Rexdale housing projects. In the bottom panel, 'Other Public Housing'
refers to the sample of students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the Toronto District School Board (TDSB) in the year(s) indicated and who reside in non-Regent Park, nonLawrence Heights and non-Rexdale housing projects .

Table 2A
Pathways Mentoring and Tutoring Activity by Month
Among 2003 and 2007 Grade 9 Students Registered in Pathways
Registered in Pathways
Registered in Pathways
Total

October

November

December

January

February

March

April

May

June

2003 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

25.57

3.85

4.04

2.05

2.69

3.2

2.76

3.11

2.57

1.31

2003 Cohort: Gr9 Mentoring

8.58

1.02

1.13

0.53

1.16

1.32

1.22

1.11

1.09

0

2003 Cohort: Gr10 Mentoring

3.28

0.66

0.72

0.3

0

0.5

0.44

0.45

0.21

0

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

16.48

3.58

3.3

1.38

1.95

2.02

1.57

1.7

0.81

0.18

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Mentoring

0.71

0.03

0.21

0.11

0

0.14

0.07

0.09

0.06

0

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

24.32

4.38

3.67

1.67

2.86

2.61

2.27

2.85

2.53

1.48

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Mentoring

4.83

0.33

0.33

0.11

1.33

0.46

0.17

0.2

0.39

1.49

Regent Park Site

Rexdale/LH Sites

Notes: The top panel reports average annual and monthly number of tutoring and mentoring sessions attended by all students registered in the Regent Park
Pathways site for Grades 9 and 10. The bottom panel reports average annual and monthly number of tutoring and mentoring sessions attendend by all students
registered in the Lawrence Heights (LH) and Rexdale Pathways sites for Grade 9.

Table 2B
Pathways Mentoring and Tutoring Activity by Month
Among 2003 and 2007 Grade 9 Students Registered in Pathways
Only Students with At Least Some Activity in Given Month
October

November

December

January

February

March

April

May

June

Regent Park Site
2003 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

26.7

4.37

4.77

2.92

3.98

4.68

4.31

4.73

4.55

2.69

2003 Cohort: Gr9 Mentoring

9.47

1.47

1.59

1

1.62

1.61

1.68

1.63

1.59

N/A

2003 Cohort: Gr10 Mentoring

5.82

1.43

1.65

1

N/A

1.53

1.41

1.33

1

N/A

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

24.5

6.03

5.97

3.53

5.41

4.79

4.35

4.73

2.92

4

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Mentoring

6.55

1

2.33

1.53

N/A

3

1.9

2

2.13

N/A

2007 Cohort: Gr9 Tutoring

28.2

5.95

5

2.56

4.52

4.45

3.34

N/A

4.23

2.86

2007 Cohort Gr9 Mentoring

10.2

1.61

1.52

1

4.14

1.9

2.14

1.31

3.4

6.84

Rexdale/LH

Notes: The top panel reports average annual and monthly number of tutoring and mentoring sessions attended by students who attended at least one session
registered in the Regent Park Pathways site for Grades 9 and 10. The bottom panel reports average annual and monthly number of tutoring and mentoring sessions
attendend by students who attended at least one session registered in the Lawrence Heights (LH) and Rexdale Pathways sites for Grade 9. The first column in each
row reports annual means for students whose tutoring or mentoring participation is positive in at least one month. Each of the monthly columns report monthly
means for students whose tutoring or mentoring participation is positive in that month.

Table 3
Intent to Treat (ITT) Estimated Effects of Pathways on High School Graduation for Various Subgroups
by End of Fifth Year Since Starting High School

REGENT PARK (2000-2006)

REXDALE/LH (2001-2007)

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Full Sample

0.382

0.152
[0.019]***

0.479

0.097
[0.020]***

Males

0.35

0.073
[0.031]**

0.434

0.065
[0.024]***

Females

0.412

0.238
[0.022]***

0.526

0.144
[0.044]***

English 1st Lang.

0.119

0.191
[0.027]***

0.428

0.126
[0.039]***

English 2nd Lang.

0.472

0.108
[0.037]***

0.527

0.084
[0.018]***

High Gr9 Grades

0.559

0.139
[0.028]***

0.597

0.125
[0.018]***

Low Gr9 Grades

0.095

0.071
[0.024]***

0.152

0.01
[0.041]

Notes: Sample is the same as in Table 1. Each column in the table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT) effects of Pathways
to Education on 5-year high school graduation rates. Columns 1 and 3 report the Pre-Pathways means. Columns 2 and 4
report the corresponding estimated ITT effect for elligible students living in Regent Park post-Pathways (students who
enrolled in Grade 9 in the 2001-2002 to 2005-2006 academic years) and the Lawrence Heights (LH) and Rexdale sites for
the 2007-2008 academic year). All regressions include cohort (year) fixed effects and housing project fixed effects.
Regressions in the top row include the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female, immigrant, and english as a
second language. The regressions in rows 2 to 7 include the same control variables with the exception of the variable used
to define the sub-sample of interest. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. Student
immigrant status and first language is based on TDSB registration records. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

Table 4A
Regent Park (2000-06) Intent to Treat (ITT) Estimated Effects of Pathways on Post Secondary Education (PSE) Enrollment
by End of Fifth Year Since Starting High School
Outcome Variable
Applied to PSE

Enrolled in PSE

Enrolled in College

Enrolled in University

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Full Sample

0.433

0.168
[0.016]***

0.336

0.192
[0.021]***

0.119

0.098
[0.020]***

0.216

0.094
[0.018]***

Males

0.349

0.148
[0.030]***

0.317

0.12
[0.033]***

0.143

0.054
[0.026]**

0.175

0.066
[0.030]**

Females

0.507

0.191
[0.031]***

0.352

0.263
[0.029]***

0.099

0.14
[0.030]***

0.254

0.123
[0.028]***

English 1st Lang.

0.031

0.26
[0.031]***

0.031

0.209
[0.031]***

0.031

0.089
[0.025]***

0.000

0.12
[0.021]***

English 2nd Lang.

0.559

0.146
[0.034]***

0.431

0.193
[0.038]***

0.147

0.122
[0.031]***

0.284

0.072
[0.036]**

High Gr9 Grades

0.591

0.141
[0.026]***

0.466

0.198
[0.025]***

0.159

0.103
[0.023]***

0.307

0.095
[0.024]***

Low Gr9 Grades

0.13

0.108
[0.025]***

0.087

0.055
[0.019]***

0.043

0.063
[0.019]***

0.043

-0.008
[0.012]

Notes: Sample is the same as in Columns 1 and 2 of Table 3. Each column in the table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT) effects of Pathways to
Education on four post-secondary education (PSE) outcome variables. Applied to PSE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a student applied to at least
one PSE institution in the province of Ontario in their final year of high school and equal to 0 otherwise. Enrolled in PSE is a dummy variable equal
to 1 if a student accepted an offer of adminssion to a PSE institution in Ontario upon completing high school and 0 otherwise. Enrolled in PSE is a
dummy variable equal to 1 if a student accepted an offer of adminssion to a PSE institution in Ontario upon completing high school and 0 otherwise.
Each column reports the Pre-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the 2000-2001 academic year) means for the Regent Park housing
project and the corresponding estimated ITT effect for elligible students living in Regent Park Post-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 in
the 2001-2002 to 2006-2007 academic years). All regressions include cohort (year) fixed effects and housing project fixed effects. Regressions in
the top row include the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female, immigrant, and english as a second language. The regressions in rows
2 to 7 include the same control variables with the exception of the variable used to define the sub-sample of interest. Standard errors are clustered
at the housing project/development level. Student immigrant status and first language is based on TDSB registration records. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05
and *** p < 0.01.

Table 4B
Rexdale/LH (2001-07) Intent to Treat (ITT) Estimated Effects of Pathways on Post Secondary Education (PSE) Enrollment
by End of Fifth Year Since Starting High School
Outcome Variable
Applied to PSE

Enrolled in PSE

Enrolled in College

Enrolled in University

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Full Sample

0.511

0.097
[0.048]**

0.407

0.044
[0.040]

0.143

0.046
[0.053]

0.264

-0.003
[0.026]

Males

0.396

0.068
[0.076]

0.308

0.103
[0.091]

0.121

0.120
[0.051]**

0.188

-0.018
[0.045]

Females

0.628

0.155
[0.033]***

0.509

-0.010
[0.042]

0.167

-0.042
[0.051]

0.342

0.032
[0.086]

English 1st Lang.

0.424

0.054
[0.081]

0.338

0.070
[0.101]

0.134

0.060
[0.137]

0.203

0.010
[0.043]

English 2nd Lang.

0.593

0.130
[0.033]***

0.473

0.025
[0.020]

0.152

0.027
[0.020]

0.321

-0.002
[0.029]

High Gr9 Grades

0.647

0.129
[0.038]***

0.524

0.045
[0.033]

0.174

0.045
[0.049]

0.350

0.000
[0.028]

Low Gr9 Grades

0.122

-0.017
[0.098]

0.073

0.038
[0.075]

0.057

0.058
[0.082]

0.016

-0.020
[0.015]

Notes: Sample is the same as in Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3. Each column in the table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT) effects of Pathways to
Education on four post-secondary education (PSE) outcome variables. Applied to PSE is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a student applied to at
least one PSE institution in the province of Ontario in their final year of high school and equal to 0 otherwise. Enrolled in PSE is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if a student accepted an offer of adminssion to a PSE institution in Ontario upon completing high school and 0 otherwise. Enrolled in
College (University) are dummy variables equal to 1 if a student accepted an offer of admission from a 2 year community college (University) in
Ontario and 0 otherwise. Each column reports the Pre-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the 2001-2002 to 2006-2007 academic
years) means for the Rexdale and Lawrence Heights (LH) housing projects and the corresponding estimated ITT effect for elligible students living
in Rexdale/LH Post-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 in the 2007-2008 academic year). All regressions include cohort (year) fixed
effects and housing project fixed effects. Regressions in the top row include the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female,
immigrant, and english as a second language. The regressions in rows 2 to 7 include the same control variables with the exception of the variable
used to define the sub-sample of interest. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. Student immigrant status
and first language is based on TDSB registration records. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

Table 5
ITT Estimated Effects on High School Test Scores and Academic Track
Outcome Variable
Gr9 English Level (0-4)
Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

Gr9 Math Level (0-4)
Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

On Academic Track in Gr9
Pre-Pathways
Mean

Gr10 Literacy Pass

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

ITT

0.076
[0.025]***

0.35

0.016
[0.024]

0.135
[0.017]***

0.463

0.051
[0.020]**

Regent Park and Other Projects (2000-2006)
1.488

0.214
[0.049]***

1.206

0.262
[0.056]***

0.533

Rexdale/LH and Other Projects (2001-2007)
1.75

0.116
[0.074]

1.41

-0.21
[0.141]

0.503

Notes: Sample is the same as in Table 3. Each column in the table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT) effects of Pathways to Education on four
intermediate high school outcomes. Columns 1 and 2 report year end achievement levels (grades) for Grade 9 English and Math. An
achievement level of 4 corresponds to an "A" grade while an achievement level of 0 corresponds to a failing grade. On Academic Track in Grade
9 is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the stduent is enrolled in "academic stream " courses and 0 otherwise. "Academic Stream" courses prepare
high school students for university, "Applied Stream" courses preapre students for community college and "Essentials Stream" courses prepare
students to enter the labour force after high school . Gr10 Literacy Pass is an indicator variable equal to 1 if a student has paased the Ontario
Secondary School Literacy Test (OSSLT), a requirement for graduation in the Province of Ontario, on their first attempt (in Grade 10). All
regressions include cohort (year) fixed effects and housing project fixed effects. Regressions include the following control variables: age (in
Grade 9), female, immigrant, and english as a second language. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. * p <
0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

Table 6
ITT Estimated Effects for Pathways to Education Program
Using Alternative Comparisson Groups
Regent Park (2000-2006)

Rexdale/LH (2001-2007)

Graduated by
5th Year

Sample
Size

Graduated by
5th Year

Sample
Size

All (Baseline)

0.152
[0.019]***

5,847

0.097
[0.020]***

6,038

Large Density Projects

0.105
[0.020]***

2,942

0.093
[0.016]***

3,082

0.075
[0.077]

1,250

0.103
[0.015]***

2,029

0.127
[0.023]***

2468

0.096
[0.018]***

2598

Comparisson Projects

Large Downtown Projects

Designated Priority
Neighborhoods

Notes: Sample is the same as in Table 3. Each row in this table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT)
effects of Pathways to Education using alternative definitons for the comparison (control) group. The
baseline sample is the same as in Table 1. The definition of the Graduated by 5th Year outcome
variable is the same as in Table 3. Large density housing projects include Alexandra Park, Bleecker
Street, East Mall, Edgeley Village, Jane Finch, Firgrove Crescent, Flemingdon Park, Lawrence Heights,
Malvern, Moss Park, Pelham Park, Regent Park, Rexdale (Thistletown) and Warden Woods. Large
downtown projects include only Alexandra Park, Bleecker Street, and Regent Park. There are 11
additional housing projects which fall within the designedated "priority neighbourhoods". They are
Rexdale, Scarlettwoods, Duncanwoods Drive, Pelham Park, Lawrence Heights, McCowan Road,
Edgeley Village, Firgrove Crescent, Flemington Park, Yorkwoods Village and 'Other'. 'Other' refers to
a group of small housing projects which are grouped together to create a publicly available data set .
All regressions include cohort (year) fixed effects and housing project fixed effects. Regressions
include the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female, immigrant, and english as a second
language. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. * p < 0.1, ** p <
0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

TABLE 7
Descriptive Statistics on Demographic Variables for Students in Toronto Public Housing: 1993 - 2006
Variable

Female

Age

Immigrant

NonEnglish

HS
Parent

Univ.
Parent

Married

Earnings Transfer Inc. Family
(Parents) (Family)
<LICO

Family
Size

Number
of Beds

Sample

0.410
0.550
0.499
0.606
0.519
0.480
0.427
0.446
0.480
0.476
0.478
0.512
0.716
0.393
0.486

17.0
16.0
15.0
14.0
13.0
14.0
13.8
12.4
11.4
13.0
12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
12.9

0.798
0.518
0.586
0.509
0.671
0.703
0.507
0.635
0.542
0.716
0.586
0.418
0.378
0.245
0.537

0.679
0.462
0.616
0.440
0.544
0.562
0.488
0.529
0.482
0.653
0.664
0.518
0.582
0.403
0.563

0.288
0.259
0.182
0.198
0.114
0.262
0.172
0.232
0.318
0.214
0.157
0.311
0.246
0.432
0.242

0.000
0.000
0.117
0.065
0.028
0.037
0.036
0.016
0.016
0.139
0.112
0.073
0.139
0.000
0.049

0.069
0.094
0.087
0.092
0.225
0.065
0.105
0.101
0.127
0.129
0.121
0.223
0.115
0.085
0.116

11438
8251
10658
8487
11641
10942
9864
10401
13628
7885
10098
17000
18939
15206
11612

13207
16328
15875
13142
13587
13881
13694
15154
12368
14972
12713
11240
10776
12975
13590

0.894
0.829
0.909
0.926
0.926
0.925
0.909
0.885
0.843
0.947
0.977
0.852
0.833
0.848
0.894

4.842
4.849
5.125
4.821
4.889
4.742
4.993
4.884
4.905
4.892
4.356
4.989
4.606
4.584
4.828

3.095
3.147
3.596
3.360
3.368
3.038
3.292
3.286
3.131
3.085
2.657
2.899
2.900
2.726
3.112

27
38
27
27
41
64
76
65
64
39
36
37
29
32
602

0.490
0.460
0.437
0.465
0.455
0.510
0.519
0.496
0.488
0.566
0.510
0.484
0.538
0.461
0.495

17.0
16.0
15.0
14.0
13.0
14.3
13.6
12.5
11.3
13.0
12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
12.8

0.364
0.400
0.393
0.435
0.473
0.447
0.433
0.418
0.379
0.426
0.351
0.236
0.140
0.081
0.182

0.193
0.197
0.152
0.171
0.230
0.185
0.187
0.187
0.198
0.191
0.187
0.127
0.141
0.184
0.364

0.211
0.195
0.246
0.241
0.167
0.277
0.285
0.235
0.206
0.291
0.270
0.282
0.266
0.289
0.250

0.059
0.073
0.046
0.031
0.051
0.053
0.045
0.055
0.042
0.090
0.047
0.037
0.034
0.078
0.052

0.219
0.309
0.247
0.269
0.317
0.261
0.288
0.281
0.325
0.244
0.253
0.312
0.292
0.312
0.283

17163
16799
15567
14574
14776
18692
18210
17804
14874
21336
20847
16677
21791
20104
17817

10311
10838
11247
11788
11706
10027
10160
10254
10965
9195
9414
9243
9826
9700
10301

0.761
0.730
0.785
0.790
0.786
0.709
0.724
0.749
0.785
0.694
0.709
0.765
0.695
0.719
0.742

4.235
4.226
4.417
4.622
4.384
4.407
4.466
4.469
4.316
4.530
4.447
4.450
4.446
4.529
4.426

2.847
2.845
2.790
2.861
2.553
2.700
2.724
2.804
2.626
2.749
2.793
2.755
2.690
2.674
2.736

242
261
264
280
282
572
532
538
549
266
304
312
322
312
5036

-0.045
[0.057]

0.000
[0.000]

0.031
[0.040]

-0.031
[0.070]

-0.003
[0.021]

-0.038
[0.011]***

-0.009
[0.024]

-1543
[1359]

1539
[975]

-0.012
[0.021]

0.036
[0.213]

0.108
[0.085]

5667

Panel A: Regent Park
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
All Years
Panel B: Other Public Housing
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
All Years
Panel C: Regent Park
Year 2000 Interaction

Notes: Panels A and B report the annual means for background variables (descriptive statistics) for children between the ages of 9 and 17 living in Toronto public housing between 1993 and 2006.
Data are obtained from the 1996 and 2001 Census of Canada. Panel C reports the regression coefficient and corresponding standard error (in square brackets) of a regression of each demographic
variable on a dummy variable equal to 1 if the child lived in Regent Park in 2000 and 0 otherwise. All regressions include cohort (year) and housing project fixed effects . Standard errors are
clustered at the housing project/development level. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

Appendix Table 1
Intent to Treat (ITT) Estimated Effects for Pathways to Education Program
Alternative Inference Methods
Regent Park (2000-2006)

Rexdale/LH (2001-2007)

All Pathways Sites (2000-2007)

Pre-Pathways
Park Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Park Mean

ITT

Pre-Pathways
Park Mean

ITT

Baseline

0.382

0.152
[0.019]***
[0.117,0.195]

0.479

0.097
[0.020]***
[0.058,0.136]

0.452

0.127
[0.021]***
[0.085,0.173]

Wild Cluster Bootstrap

0.382

0.15
[0.043]***
[0.061,0.235]

0.479

0.096
[0.055]*
[-0.011,0.207]

0.452

0.126
[0.035]***
[0.058,0.200]

Synthetic Control Group

0.382

0.096

0.479

-

0.452

-

Conley/Taber CI

0.382

Group Means (Baseline Sample)

0.479
[-0.182,0.522]
[-0.173,0.463]

95%
90%
0.382

0.147
[0.035]***
[0.077,0.217]

0.452
[-0.342,0.681]
[-0.297,0.524]

0.479

0.096
[0.042]**
[0.014,0.177]

[-0.669,0.798]
[-0.293,0.757]
0.452

0.154
[0.028]***
[0.098,0.209]

Notes: Each column in the table reports the "Intent to Treat" (ITT) effects of Pathways to Education on the 5-year high school graduation rate. Each column reports Pre-Pathways means
and the corresponding estimated ITT effect. For column 1 the ITT is for elligible students living in Regent Park post-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 during the 2001-2002 to
2006-2007 academic years). Column 2 reports the ITT for elligible students living in the Lawrence Heights and Rexdale sites post-Pathways (students who enrolled in Grade 9 during the
2007-2008 academic year). Column 3 reports the ITT for all Pathways sites for the 2000-2001 to 2007-2008 academic years. Row 1 reports the baseline estimates (Table 3, column 1) as
a comparison. All regressions in row 1 include cohort (year) fixed effects, housing project fixed effects and the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female, immigrant english
as a second language. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. Row 2 reports mean ITT effects from 999 cluster-wild bootstrap replications along with
corresponding standard deviations and 95% confidence intervals computed from the 0.025 and 0.975 percentiles of the estimated iTT distribution. Row 3 reports average differences in
post-Pathways outcomes between treated cohorts and a synthetic cohort. Row 4 reports 95 percent and 90 percent confidence intervals, using the Conley/Taber (2011) method (see
Appendix B). In row 5 the dependent variable is the housing project/group mean for each outcome. Regressions control for cohort (year) fixed effects and weight observations by the
number of students in each housing project mean cell. For row 3, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in square brackets. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

Appendix Table 2
Treatment on Treated (TOT) Estimated Effects for Pathways to Education Program
Attended at Least 1 Mentoring or Tutoring Session in GR9
REGENT PARK (2000-2006)

Rexdale/LH (2001-2007)

REGENT PARK (2000-2006)

Rexdale/LH (2001-2007)

Pre-Pathways
Mean

TOT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

TOT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

TOT

Pre-Pathways
Mean

TOT

Full Sample

0.382

0.191
[0.024]***

0.479

0.12
[0.026]***

0.382

0.265
[0.034]***

0.479

0.124
[0.024]***

Males

0.35

0.093
[0.040]**

0.434

0.082
[0.029]***

0.35

0.138
[0.059]**

0.434

0.086
[0.032]***

Females

0.412

0.293
[0.027]***

0.526

0.175
[0.052]***

0.412

0.388
[0.036]***

0.526

0.175
[0.051]***

English 1st Lang.

0.119

0.247
[0.035]***

0.428

0.147
[0.051]***

0.119

0.371
[0.052]***

0.428

0.155
[0.046]***

English 2nd Lang.

0.472

0.133
[0.046]***

0.527

0.109
[0.024]***

0.472

0.181
[0.063]***

0.527

0.11
[0.024]***

High Gr9 Grades

0.559

0.173
[0.034]***

0.597

0.149
[0.025]***

0.559

0.23
[0.046]***

0.597

0.157
[0.021]***

Low Gr9 Grades

0.095

0.092
[0.031]***

0.152

0.015
[0.057]

0.095

0.148
[0.050]***

0.152

0.014
[0.054]

Notes: Sample is the same as in Table 3. Each column in the table reports the "Treatment on the Treated" (TOT) effects of Pathways to Education on 5-year high school graduation rates. Columns 1,
3, 5 and 7 report the Pre-Pathways means. Columns 2, 4, 6 and 8 report the corresponding estimated TOT effect for elligible students living in Regent Park post-Pathways (students who enrolled in
Grade 9 in the 2001-2002 to 2005-2006 academic years) and the New Sites (Lawrence Heights and Rexdale for the 2007-2008 academic year). In columns 2 and 4 the Pathways participation dummy
variable is instrumented with a dummy variable indicating whether the student was living in a housing project that offered Pathways when the student entered Grade 9. In columns 6 and 8 the
explanatory variable of interest is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the student attended at least one tutoring or mentoring session in Grade 9. This is instrumented with a dummy variable indicating
whether the student was elligible for Pathways (living in a housing project that offered Pathways when the student entered Grade 9). All regressions include cohort (year) fixed effects and housing
project fixed effects. Regressions in the top row include the following control variables: age (in Grade 9), female, immigrant english as a second language. The regressions in rows 2 to 7 include the
same control variables with the exception of the variable used to define the sub-sample of interest. Standard errors are clustered at the housing project/development level. Student immigrant
status and first language is based on TDSB registration records. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 and *** p < 0.01.

