NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CARRY TRADE:
RISKS AND DRAWDOWNS
Kent Daniel
Robert J. Hodrick
Zhongjin Lu
Working Paper 20433
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20433

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

This research was supported by a grant from the Network for Study on Pensions, Aging, and Retirement
to the Columbia Business School. We especially thank Pierre Collin-Dufresne for many substantive
early discussions that were fundamental to the development of the paper. We also thank Elessar Chen
for his research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Kent Daniel, Robert J. Hodrick, and Zhongjin Lu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Carry Trade: Risks and Drawdowns
Kent Daniel, Robert J. Hodrick, and Zhongjin Lu
NBER Working Paper No. 20433
August 2014
JEL No. F31,G12,G15
ABSTRACT
We examine carry trade returns formed from the G10 currencies. Performance attributes depend on
the base currency. Dynamically spread-weighting and risk-rebalancing positions improves performance.
Equity, bond, FX, volatility, and downside equity risks cannot explain profitability. Dollar-neutral
carry trades exhibit insignificant abnormal returns, while the dollar exposure part of the carry trade
earns significant abnormal returns with little skewness. Downside equity market betas of our carry
trades are not significantly different from unconditional betas. Hedging with options reduces but does
not eliminate abnormal returns. Distributions of drawdowns and maximum losses from daily data indicate
the importance of time-varying autocorrelation in determining the negative skewness of longer horizon
returns.

Kent Daniel
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
kd2371@columbia.edu
Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu

Zhongjin Lu
Terry College of Business
University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602-6269
zlu15@gsb.columbia.edu

1

Introduction

This paper examines some empirical properties of the carry trade in international currency
markets. The carry trade is defined to be an investment in a high interest rate currency that
is funded by borrowing a low interest rate currency. The ’carry’ is the ex ante observable
positive interest differential. The return to the carry trade is uncertain because the exchange
rate between the two currencies may change. The carry trade is profitable when the high
interest rate currency depreciates relative to the low interest rate currency by less than the
interest differential.1 By interest rate parity, the interest differential is linked to the forward
premium or discount. Absence of covered interest arbitrage opportunities implies that high
interest rate currencies trade at forward discounts relative to low interest rate currencies,
and low interest rate currencies trade at forward premiums. Thus, the carry trade can also
be implemented in forward foreign exchange markets by going long in currencies trading at
forward discounts and by going short in currencies trading at forward premiums. Such forward
market trades are profitable as long as the currency trading at the forward discount depreciates
less than the forward discount.
Carry trades are known to have high Sharpe ratios, as emphasized by Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleschelski, and Rebelo (2011). They are also known to do poorly in highly volatile
environments, as emphasized by Bhansali (2007), Clarida, Davis, and Pedersen (2009), and
Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling, and Schrimpf (2012). Brunnermeirer, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009)
document that returns to carry trades have negative skewness. There is a substantive debate
about whether carry trades are exposed to risk factors. Burnside, et al. (2011) argue that
carry trade returns are not exposed to standard risk factors, in sample. Many others, cited
below, find exposures to a variety of risk factors. Burnside (2012) provides a review of the
literature.
We contribute to this debate by demonstrating that non-dollar carry trades are exposed
to risks, but carry trades versus only the dollar are not, at least not unconditionally in our
sample.

We also find that downside equity market risk exposure, which has recently been

offered as an explanation for the high average carry trade profits by Lettau, Maggiori, and
Weber (2014) and Dobrynskaya (2014) or in an alernative version by Jurek (2014), does not
explain our carry trade returns.
Finally, we conclude our analysis with a study of the drawdowns to carry trades.2 We
define a drawdown to be the loss that a trader experiences from the peak (or high-water
1

Koijen, Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt (2013) explore the properties of ’carry’ trades in other asset
markets by defining ’carry’ as the expected return on an asset assuming that market conditions, including the
asset’s price, stay the same.
2
Melvin and Shand (2014) analyze carry trade drawdowns including the dates and durations of the largest
drawdowns and the contributions of individual currencies to the portfolio drawdowns.

2

mark) to the trough in the cumulative return to a trading strategy.

We also examine the

pure drawdowns, as in Sornette (2003), which are defined to be persistent decreases in an asset
price over consecutive days. We document that carry-trade drawdowns are large and occur
over substantial time intervals. We contrast these drawdowns with the characterizations of
carry trade returns by The Economist (2007) as “picking up nickels in front of a steam roller,”
and by Breedon (2001) who noted that traders view carry-trade returns as arising by “going
up the stairs and coming down the elevator.” Both of these characterizations suggest that
negative skewness in the trades is substantially due to unexpected sharp drops.

While we

do find negative skewness in daily carry trade returns, the analysis of drawdowns provides a
more nuanced view of the losses in carry trades.

2

Background Ideas and Essential Theory

Because the carry trade can be implemented in the forward market, it is intimately connected
to the forward premium anomaly – the empirical finding that the forward premium on the
foreign currency is not an unbiased forecast of the rate of appreciation of the foreign currency.
In fact, expected profits on the carry trade would be zero if the forward premium were an
unbiased predictor of the rate of appreciation of the foreign currency. Thus, the finding of
apparent non-zero profits on the carry trade can be related to the classic interpretations of the
apparent rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis. The profession has recognized that there
are four ways to interpret the rejection of unbiasedness forward rates:
1. First, the forecastability of the difference between forward rates and future spot rates
could result from an equilibrium risk premium. Hansen and Hodrick (1983) provide
an early econometric analysis of the restrictions that arise from a model of a rational,
risk averse, representative investor. Fama (1984) demonstrates that if one interprets the
econometric analysis from this efficient markets point of view, the data imply that risk
premiums are more variable than expected rates of depreciation.
2. The second interpretation of the data, first offered by Bilson (1981), is that the nature
of the predictability of future spot rates implies a market inefficiency. In this view, the
profitability of trading strategies appears to be too good to be consistent with rational
risk premiums. Froot and Thaler (1990) support this view and argue that the data are
consistent with ideas from behavioral finance.
3. The third interpretation of the findings involves relaxation of the assumption that investors have rational expectations. Lewis (1989) proposes that learning by investors
could reconcile the econometric findings with equilibrium theory.
3

4. Finally, Krasker (1980) argues that the interpretation of the econometrics could be
flawed because so-called ’peso problems’ might be present.3
Surveys of the literature by Hodrick (1987) and Engel (1996) provide extensive reviews of the
research on these issues as they relate to the forward premium anomaly.
Each of these themes plays out in the recent literature on the carry trade. Bansal and
Shaliastovich (2013) argue that an equilibrium long-run risks model is capable of explaining
the predictability of returns in bond and currency markets. Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan
(2014) develop a theory of countercyclical currency risk premiums. Carr and Wu (2007) and
Jurek and Xu (2013) develop formal theoretical models of diffusive and jump currency risk
premiums.
Several papers find empirical support for the hypothesis that returns to the carry trade
are exposed to risk factors. For example, Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) argue that
common movements in the carry trade across portfolios of currencies indicate rational risk
premiums. Rafferty (2012) relates carry trade returns to a skewness risk factor in currency
markets. Dobrynskaya (2014) and Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) argue that large average returns to high interest rate currencies are explained by their high conditional exposures
to the market return in the down state. Jurek (2014) demonstrates that the return to selling
puts, which has severe downside risk, explains the carry trade. Christiansen, Ranaldo, and
Soderlind (2011) note that carry trade returns are more positively related to equity returns
and more negatively related to bond risks the more volatile is the foreign exchange market.
Ranaldo and Soderlind (2010) argue that the funding currencies have ’safe haven’ attributes,
which implies that they tend to appreciate during times of crisis. Menkhoff, et al. (2012) argue
that carry trades are exposed to a global FX volatility risk. Beber, Breedon, and Buraschi
(2010) note that the yen-dollar carry trade performs poorly when differences of opinion are
high.

Mancini, Ranaldo, and Wrampelmeyer (2013) find that systematic variation in liq-

uidity in the foreign exchange market contributes to the returns to the carry trade. Bakshi
and Panayotov (2013) include commodity returns as well as foreign exchange volatility and
liquidity in their risk factors. Sarno, Schneider and Wagner (2012) estimate multi-currency
affine models with four dimensional latent variables. They find that such variables can explain
the predictability of currency returns, but there is a tradeoff between the ability of the models
to price the term structure of interest rates and the currency returns. Bakshi, Carr, and Wu
(2008) use option prices to infer the dynamics of risk premiums for the dollar, pound and yen
pricing kernels.
3

While peso problems were originally interpreted as large events on which agents placed prior probability
and that didn’t occur in the sample, Evans (1996) reviews the literature that broadened the definition to be
situations in which the ex post realizations of returns do not match the ex ante frequencies from investors’
subjective probability distributions.

4

In contrast to these studies that find substantive financial risks in currency markets, Burnside, et al. (2011) explore whether the carry trade has exposure to a variety of standard sources
of risk. Finding none, they conclude that peso problems explain the average returns. By hedging the carry trade with the appropriate option transaction to mitigate downside risk, they
determine that the peso state involves a very high value for the stochastic discount factor.
Jurek (2014), on the other hand, examines the hedged carry trade and finds positive, statistically significant mean returns indicating that peso states are not driving the average returns.
Farhi and Gabaix (2011) and Farhi, Fraiberger, Gabaix, Ranciere, and Verdelhan (2013) argue that the carry trade is exposed to rare crash states in which high interest rate currencies
depreciate.
Jordà and Taylor (2012) dismiss the profitability of the naive carry trade based only on
interest differentials as poor given its performance in the financial crisis of 2008, but they
advocate simple modifications of the positions based on long-run exchange rate fundamentals that enhance its profitability and protect it from downside moves indicating a market
inefficiency.

2.1

Implementing the Carry Trade

This section develops notation and provides background theory that is useful in interpreting
the empirical analysis. Let the level of the exchange rate of dollars per unit of a foreign currency be St , and let the forward exchange rate that is known today for exchange of currencies
in one period be Ft . Let the one-period dollar interest rate be i$t , and let the one-period
foreign currency interest rate be i∗t .4
In this paper, we explore several versions of the carry trade. The one most often studied
in the literature is equal weighted in that it goes long (short) one dollar in each currency for
which the interest rate is higher (lower) than the dollar interest rate. If the carry trade is
done by borrowing and lending in the money markets, the dollar payoff to the carry trade
without transaction costs can be written as
zt+1 = [(1 + i∗t )
where

(
yt =

St+1
− (1 + i$t )]yt
St

+1 if i∗t > i$t

(1)

)

−1 if i$t > i∗t

Equation (1) scales the carry trade either by borrowing one dollar and investing in the
4

When it is necessary to distinguish between the dollar exchange rate versus various currencies or the
various interest rates, we will superscript them with numbers.

5

foreign currency money market, or by borrowing the appropriate amount of foreign currency
to invest one dollar in the dollar money market. When interest rate parity holds, if i∗t > i$t ,
Ft < St , the foreign currency is at a discount in the forward market. Conversely, if i∗t < i$t ,
Ft > St , and the foreign currency is at a premium in the forward market. Thus, the carrytrade can also be implemented by going long (short) in the foreign currency in the forward
market when the foreign currency is at a discount (premium)in terms of the dollar. Let wt
be the amount of foreign currency bought in the forward market. The dollar payoff to this
strategy is
zt+1 = wt (St+1 − Ft )

(2)

To scale the forward positions to be either long or short in the forward market an amount of
dollars equal to one dollar in the spot market as in equation (1), let
(
wt =

1
(1 + i$t )
Ft
− F1t (1 + i$t )

if Ft < St

)

if Ft > St

(3)

When covered interest rate parity holds, and in the absence of transaction costs, the
forward market strategy for implementing the carry trade in equation (2) is exactly equivalent
to the carry trade strategy in equation (1). Unbiasedness of forward rates and uncovered
interest rate parity imply that carry trade profits should average to zero.
Uncovered interest rate parity ignores the possibility that changes in the values of currencies are exposed to risk factors, in which case risk premiums can arise. To incorporate risk
aversion, we need to examine pricing kernels.

2.2

Pricing Kernels

One of the fundamentals of no-arbitrage pricing is that there is a dollar pricing kernel or
stochastic discount factor, Mt+1 , that prices all dollar returns, Rt+1 , from the investment of
one dollar:
Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1

(4)

Because implementing the carry trade in the forward market does not require an investment
at time t, the no-arbitrage condition is
Et (Mt+1 zt+1 ) = 0

6

(5)

Taking the unconditional expectation of equation (5) and rearranging gives
E(zt+1 ) =

−Cov(Mt+1 , zt+1 )
E(Mt+1 )

(6)

The expected value of the unconditional return on the carry trade could be non-zero if the
dollar payoff on the carry trade covaries negatively with the innovation to the dollar pricing
kernel.5

2.3

The Hedged Carry Trade

Burnside, et al. (2011), Caballero and Doyle (2012), Farhi, et al. (2013), and Jurek (2014)
examine hedging the downside risks of the carry trade by purchasing insurance in the foreign
currency option markets. To examine this analysis, let Ct and Pt be the dollar prices of
one-period foreign currency call and put options with strike price K on one unit of foreign
currency. Buying one unit of foreign currency in the forward market costs Ft dollars in one
period, which is an unconditional future cost. One can also unconditionally buy the foreign
currency forward by buying a call option with strike price K and selling a put option with
the same strike price in which case the future cost is K + Ct (1 + i$t ) − Pt (1 + i$t ). To prevent
arbitrage, these two unconditional future costs of purchasing the foreign currency in one period
must be the same. Hence,
Ft = K + Ct (1 + i$t ) − Pt (1 + i$t )

(7)

which is put-call parity for foreign currency options.
Now, suppose a dollar-based speculator wants to be long wt = (1 + i$t )/Ft units of foreign
currency in the forward market, which, as above, is the foreign currency equivalent of one
dollar spot. The payoff is negative if the realized future spot exchange rate of dollars per
foreign currency is less than the forward rate. To place a floor on losses from a depreciation
of the foreign currency, the speculator can hedge by purchasing out-of-the-money put options
on the foreign currency. If the speculator borrows the funds to buy put options on wt units of
foreign currency, the option payoff is [max(0, K − St+1 ) − Pt (1 + i$t )]wt . The dollar payoff from
the hedged long position in the forward market is therefore the sum of the forward purchase
5

Examples of such models include Nielsen and Saá-Requejo (1993) and Frachot (1996), who develop the
first no arbitrage pricing models; Backus, Gavazzoni, Telmer and Zin (2010), who offer an explanation in
terms of monetary policy conducted through Taylor Rules; Farhi and Gabaix (2011), who develop a crash risk
model; Bansal and Shaliastovich (2013), who develop a long run risks explanation; and Lustig, Roussanov,
and Verdelhan (2014), who calibrate a no-arbitrage model of countercyclical currency risks.

7

of foreign currency and the option payoff:
H
zt+1
= [St+1 − Ft + max (0, K − St+1 ) − Pt (1 + i$t )]wt

Substituting from put-call parity gives
H
= [St+1 − K + max (0, K − St+1 ) − Ct (1 + i$t )]wt
zt+1

(8)

When St+1 < K, [St+1 −K+max (0, K − St+1 )] = 0; and if St+1 > K, max(0, K−St+1 ) = 0.
Hence, we can write equation (8) as
H
zt+1
= [max (0, St+1 − K) − Ct (1 + i$t )]wt

which is the return to borrowing enough dollars to buy call options on wt units of foreign
currency. Thus, hedging a long forward position by buying out-of-the-money put options with
borrowed dollars is equivalent to implementing the trade by directly borrowing dollars to buy
the same foreign currency amount of in-the-money call options with the same strike price.
Now, suppose the dollar-based speculator wants to sell wt units of the foreign currency
in the forward market. An analogous argument can be used to demonstrate that hedging a
short forward position by buying out-of-the-money call options is equivalent to implementing
the trade by directly buying in-the-money foreign currency put options with the same strike
price.
When implementing the hedged carry trade, we examine two choices of strike prices corresponding to 10∆ and 25∆ options, where ∆ measures the sensitivity of the option price to
movements in the underlying exchange rate.6 Because the hedged carry trades are also zero
net investment strategies, they must also satisfy equation (5).

3

Data for the Carry Trades

In constructing our carry trade returns, we only use data on the G-10 currencies: the Australian dollar, AUD; the British pound, GBP; the Canadian dollar, CAD; the euro, EUR,
spliced with historical data from the Deutsche mark; the Japanese yen, JPY; the New Zealand
dollar, NZD; the Norwegian krone, NOK; the Swedish krona, SEK; the Swiss franc, CHF; and
the U.S. dollar, USD. All spot and forward exchange rates are dollar denominated and are
from Datastream and IHS Global Insight. For most currencies, the beginning of the sample is
6

The ∆ of an option is the derivative of the value of the option with respect to a change in the underlying
spot rate. A 10∆ (25∆) call option increases in price by 0.10 (0.25) times the small increase in the spot rate.
The ∆ of a put option is negative.

8

January 1976, and the end of the sample is August 2013, which provides a total of 451 observations on the carry trade. Data for the AUD and the NZD start in October 1986. Interest
rate data are eurocurrency interest rates from Datastream.
We explicitly exclude the European currencies other than the euro (and its precursor, the
Deutsche mark), because we know that several of these currencies, such as the Italian lira, the
Portuguese escudo, and the Spanish peseta, were relatively high interest rate currencies prior
to the creation of the euro. At that time traders engaged in the “convergence trade,”which
was a form of carry trade predicated on a bet that the euro would be created in which case
the interest rates in the high interest rate countries would come down and those currencies
would strengthen relative to the Deutsche mark. An obvious peso problem exists in these
data because there was uncertainty about whether the euro would indeed be created. If the
euro had not succeeded, the lira, escudo, and peseta would have suffered large devaluations
relative to the Deutsche mark.
We also avoid emerging market currencies because nominal interest rates denominated in
these currencies also incorporate substantive sovereign risk premiums. The essence of the carry
trade is that the investor bears pure foreign exchange risk, not sovereign risk. Furthermore,
Longstaff, Pan, Pedersen, and Singleton (2011) demonstrate that sovereign risk premiums, as
measured by credit default swaps, are not idiosyncratic because they covary with the U.S.
stock and high-yield credit markets. Thus, including emerging market currencies could bias
the analysis toward finding that the average returns to the broadly defined carry trade are
due to exposure to risks.
Our foreign currency options data are from JP Morgan.7 After evaluating the quality of the
data, we decided that high quality, actively traded, data were only available from September
2000 to August 2013. We also only had data for eight currencies versus the USD as option
data for the SEK were not available.
We describe the data on various risk factors as they are introduced below. Table A.1 in
Appendix A provides distributional information on the risk factors.

4

Unconditional Results on the Carry Trade

Table 1 reports basic unconditional sample statistics for five dollar-based carry trades from the
G10 currencies. All of the statistics refer to annualized returns, and all the strategies invest
in every currency in each period, if data are available. For the basic carry trade, labeled EQ,
7

We thank Tracy Johnson at JP Morgan for her assistance in obtaining the data.

9

the weight on currency j is
EQ
wj,t
=

sign(ijt − i$t )
Nt

where Nt is the number of currencies. Thus, if the interest rate in currency j is higher (lower)
than the dollar interest rate, the dollar-based investor goes long (short) 1/Nt -th of a dollar
in the forward market of currency j. This equal-weight approach is the way most academic
articles implement the carry trade.
Our second strategy is ‘spread-weighted’ and is denoted SPD. The long or short position
is again determined by the interest differential versus the dollar, but the fraction of a dollar
invested in a particular currency is determined by the interest differential divided by the sum
of the absolute values of the interest differentials:
SP D
wj,t
=

ijt − i$t
Nt
P
ijt − i$t
j=1

The SPD strategy thus invests more in currencies that have larger interest differentials
while retaining the idea that the investment is scaled to have a total of one dollar spread
across the absolute values of the long and short positions.
Although it is often said that only one dollar is at risk in such a situation, this is not true
when the trader shorts a foreign currency. When a trader borrows a dollar to invest in the
foreign currency, the most the trader can lose is the one dollar if the foreign currency becomes
worthless, but when a trader borrows the foreign currency equivalent of one dollar to invest
in the U.S. money market, the amount of dollars that must be repaid could theoretically go
to infinity if the foreign currency strengthens massively versus the dollar, as inspection of
equation (1) indicates. Traders would consequently be unlikely to follow the EQ and SPD
strategies because they take more risk when the volatility of the foreign exchange market is
high than when it is low. In actual markets, traders typically face value-at-risk limits in which
the possible loss of a particular amount on their portfolio of positions is calibrated to be a
certain probability. For example, a typical value-at-risk model constrains a trader to take
positions such that the probability of losing, say more than $1 million on any given day, is
no larger than 1%. Implementing such a strategy requires a conditional covariance matrix of
the returns on the nine currencies versus the dollar.
To calculate this conditional covariance matrix, we construct simple IGARCH models from
daily data. Let Ht denote the conditional covariance matrix of returns at time t with typical
element, hij
t , which denotes the conditional covariance between the i − th and j − th currency

10

returns realized at time t + 1. Then, the IGARCH model is
ij
i j
hij
t = α(rt rt ) + (1 − α)ht−1

(9)

where we treat the product of the returns as equivalent to the product of the innovations in
the returns. We set α = 0.06, as suggested in RiskMetrics (1996). To obtain the monthly
covariance matrixes we multiply the daily IGARCH estimates of Ht by 22.
We use these conditional covariance matrixes in two strategies. In the first strategy, we
√
target a fixed monthly standard deviation of 5%/ 12, which corresponds to an approximate
annualized standard deviation of 5%, and we adjust the dollar scale of the EQ and SPD
carry trades accordingly. These strategies are labeled EQ-RR and SPD-RR to indicate risk
rebalancing. In the second strategy, we use the conditional covariance matrixes in successive one-month mean-variance maximizations.

Beginning with the analysis of Meese and

Rogoff (1983), it is often argued that expected rates of currency appreciation are essentially
unforecastable. Hence, we take the vector of interest differentials, here labeled µt , to be the
conditional means of the carry trade returns, and we take positions wtOP T = ωt Ht−1 µt , where
Ht is the conditional covariance matrix, and ωt is a scaling factor. We label this strategy OPT.
As with the risk-rebalanced strategies, we target a constant annualized standard deviation of
5%. Thus, the weights in our portfolio are
wtOP T

√ 
0.05/ 12
−1
=
0.5 Ht µt
0 −1
µt Ht µt

(10)

If the models of the conditional moments are correct, the conditional Sharpe ratio would
0.5
equal µ0t Ht−1 µt .8
Table 1 reports the first four moments of the various carry trade strategies as well as their
Sharpe ratios and first order autocorrelations. Standard errors are in parenthesis and are
based on Hansen’s (1982) Generalized Method of Moments, as explained in Appendix B.9
For the full sample, the carry trades for the USD-based investor have statistically significant
average annual returns ranging from 2.10% (0.47) for the OPT strategy, to 3.96% (0.91) for
the EQ strategy, and to 6.60% (1.31) for the SPD strategy. The strategies also have impressive
Sharpe ratios, which range from 0.78 (0.19) for the EQ strategy to 1.02 (0.19) for the SPDRR strategy. As Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen (2009) note, each of these strategies is
8

Ackermann, Pohl, and Schmedders (2012) also use conditional mean variance modeling so their positions
are also proportional to Ht−1 µt , but they target a constant mean return of 5% per annum. Hence, their
0.5
−1
positions satisfy wtAP S = µ(0.05/12)
µt . While their conditional Sharpe ratio is also µ0t Ht−1 µt
, their
0 H −1 µ Ht
t
t t
scaling factor responds more aggressively to perceived changes in the conditional Sharpe ratio than ours.
9
Throughout the paper, when we discuss estimated parameters, standard errors will be in parentheses and
t-statistics will be in square brackets.

11

significantly negatively skewed, with the OPT strategy having the most negative skewness of
-0.89 (0.34). Table 1 also reports positive excess kurtosis that is statistically significant for
all strategies. The first order autocorrelations of the strategies are low, as would be expected
in currency markets, and only for the EQ-RR strategy can we reject that the first order
autocorrelation is zero. Of course, it is well known that this test has very low power against
interesting alternatives. The minimum monthly returns for the strategies are all quite large,
ranging from -4.01% for the OPT strategy to -7.26% for the SPD. The maximum monthly
returns range from 3.21% for the OPT to 8.07% for the SPD. Finally, Table 1 indicates that
the carry trade strategies are profitable on between 288 months for the EQ strategy and 303
months for the OPT strategy out of the total of 451 months.10
Table 2 presents results for the various equal-weighted carry trades in which each currency
is considered to be the base currency and the returns are denominated in that base currency.
For each strategy, if the interest rate in currency j is higher (lower) than the interest rate of
the base currency, the investor goes long (short) in the forward market of currency j as in
the dollar-based EQ strategy. The average annualized profits of these carry trades range from
2.33% (1.02) for the SEK to 3.92% (1.50) for the NZD. These mean returns are all less than
the 3.96% (0.88) for the USD although given their standard errors it is unlikely that we would
be able to reject equivalence of the means. For all base currencies, the average profitability is
statistically significance at the .06 marginal level of significance or smaller. The Sharpe ratios
of the alternative base-currency carry trades are also smaller than the USD-based Sharpe ratio
of 0.78 (0.19). The lowest Sharpe ratio of the alternative base-currency carry trades is 0.36
(0.19) for the JPY, and the highest is 0.71 (0.18) for the CAD. The point estimates of skewness
for the alternative base-currency carry trades are all negative, except for the EUR, and the
statistical significance of skewness is high for the JPY, NOK, SEK, NZD, and AUD. All of these
alternative-currency-based carry trades have positive, statistically significant, excess kurtosis.
Only the GBP-based carry trade shows any sign of first-order autocorrelation. The maximum
gains and losses on these strategies generally exceed those of the USD-based strategy. Only
the CAD and EUR have smaller maximum monthly losses that the USD-based strategy, and
the maximum monthly losses for the JPY, SEK, NZD, and AUD carry trades exceed 10%.
The alternative base-currency carry trades are also profitable on slightly fewer days than the
USD-based EQ trade, and the percentage of profitable days for the NZD and AUD is slightly
smaller than for the USD.
10

The strategies are all positively correlated. Correlations range from .63 for EQ and OPT to .90 for EQ
and SPD. The correlations of EQ and EQ-RR and SPD and SPD-RR are .88 and .89, respectively.

12

5

Carry-Trade Exposures to Risk Factors

This section examines whether the average returns to the carry trades described above can
be explained by exposures to a variety of risk factors. We include equity market, foreign
exchange market, bond market, and volatility risk factors. In each case we run a regression
of a carry-trade return, Rt , on returns on assets or portfolios, Ft , that represent the sources
of risks, as in
R t = α + β 0 F t + εt

(11)

Because we use returns as risk factors, the constant term in the regression, α, measures
the average performance of the carry trade that is not explained by unconditional exposure
of the carry trades to the market traded risks included in the regression.

5.1

Equity Market Risks

Table 3 presents the results of regressions of our carry-trade returns on the three Fama-French
(1993) equity market risk factors: the excess market return, Rm,t , proxied by the return on the
value-weighted NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ markets over the T-bill return; the return on a
portfolio of small market capitalization stocks minus the return on a portfolio of big stocks,
RSM B,t ; and the return on a portfolio of high book-to-market stocks minus the return on a
portfolio of low book-to-market stocks, RHM L,t .11 Although the Fama-French (1993) factors
exhibit some modest explanatory power with nine of the 15 coefficients having t-statistics that
are greater than 1.88, the overall impression is that these equity market factors essentially
leave most of the average returns of the carry trades unexplained, as the exposures to the risk
factors are quite small which allows that constants in the regressions to range from 1.83% with
a t-statistic of 3.72 for the OPT strategy, to 5.55% with a t-statistic of 4.84 for the SPD-RR
strategy.

The largest R2 is also only .05. These equity market risk factors clearly do not

explain the average carry trade returns.

5.2

Pure FX Risks

Table 4 presents the results of regressions of our carry-trade portfolio returns on the two pure
foreign exchange market risk factors proposed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011)
who sort 35 currencies into six portfolios based on their interest rates relative to the dollar
interest rate, with portfolio one containing the lowest interest rate currencies and portfolio
six containing the highest interest rate currencies.
11

Their two risk factors are the average

The Fama-French risk factors were obtained from Kenneth French’s web site which also describes the
construction of these portfolios.

13

return on all six currency portfolios, denoted RF X,t , which has a correlation of 0.99 with
the first principal component of the six returns, and RHM L−F X,t , which is the difference in
the returns on portfolio 6 and portfolio 1 and has a correlation of 0.94 with the second
principal component of the returns. The data are from Adrien Verdelhan’s web site, and the
sample period is 1983:11-2013:08 for 358 observations. Given its construction as the difference
in returns on high and low interest rate portfolios, it is unsurprising that RHM L−F X,t has
significant explanatory power for our carry-trade returns with robust t-statistics between 6.22
for the OPT portfolio to 8.85 for the EQ-RR portfolio. The R2 ’s are also higher than with
the equity risk factors, ranging between 0.13 and 0.34. Nevertheless, this pure FX risk model
does not explain the average returns to our strategies as the constant terms in the regressions
remain highly significant and range from a low of 1.29% for the OPT portfolio to 3.60% for
the SPD-RR portfolio.

5.3

Bond Market Risks

Because exchange rates are the relative prices of currencies and relative rates of currency
depreciation are in theory driven by all sources of aggregate risks in the stochastic discount
factors of the two currencies, it is logical that bond market risk factors should have explanatory
power for the carry trade as the bond markets must price the important risks of changes in
the stochastic discount factor. Table 5 presents the results of regressions of the carry trade
returns on the excess equity market return and the excess return on the 10-year bond over
the one-month bill rate, which represents the risk arising from changes in the level of interest
rates, and the difference in returns between the 10-year bond and the 2-year note, which
represents the risk arising from changes in the slope of the term structure of interest rates.
The bond market returns are from CRSP. The coefficients on both of the bond market factors
are highly significant. Positive returns on the 10-year bond that are matched by the return
on the 2-year note, which would be caused by unanticipated decreases in the level of the USD
yield curve, are bad for the USD-based carry trades. Notice also that the coefficients on the
two excess bond returns are close to being equal and opposite in sign indicating that positive
increases the return on the two-year note are bad for the carry trades. Notice, though, that
the R20 s of the regressions remain between .02 and .05, as in the equity market regressions,
and that the constants in the regressions indicate that the means of the carry trade strategies
remain statistically significant after these risk adjustment, with values between 2.15% for the
OPT strategy to 6.71% for the SPD strategy.

14

5.4

Volatility Risk

To capture possible exposure of the carry trade to equity market volatility, we introduce the
return on a variance swap as a risk factor. This return is calculated as
N days 

RV S,t+1 =

X
d=1

Pt+1,d
ln
Pt+1,d−1

2 

30
N days



− V IXt2

where N days represents the number of trading days in a month and Pt+1,d is the value of
the S&P 500 index on day d of month t + 1. Data for V IX are obtained from the web site of
the CBOE. The availability of data on the V IX limits the sample to 283 observations. The
regression results are presented in Tables 6 and 7. Because RV S,t+1 is an excess return, we
can continue to examine the constant terms in the regressions to assess whether exposure of
the carry trade to risks explains the average returns. When we add RV S,t+1 to the regressions
in Tables 6 to 7, very little changes as the absolute values of the largest t-statistics associated
with the coefficients on RV S,t+1 are 1.40 for the equity market risks specification and 1.76 for
the bond market risks, and the constant terms in these regressions remain highly significant.
The coefficients on RV S,t+1 are negative in the specifications with the equity and bond market
risks indicating that the carry trades do tend to do badly when equity volatility increases, but
this exposure is not enough to explain the profitability of the trades.

6

Dollar Neutral and Pure Dollar Carry Trades

In the basic EQ carry trade analysis discussed above, we take equal sized positions in nine
currencies versus the dollar, either long or short, depending on whether a currency’s interest
rate is greater than the dollar interest rate or less than the dollar interest rate. Because there
are nine currencies, the EQ portfolio is always either long or short some fraction of a dollar
versus some set of currencies. To develop a dollar-neutral carry trade, we exclude the dollar
interest rate and calculate the median interest rate of the remaining nine currencies. We then
take equal long (short) positions versus the dollar in the four currencies whose interest rates
are greater (less) than the median interest rate, and we scale the size of the equal-weighted
positions to be the same magnitude as that of EQ. We use EQ0 to denote this portfolio which
has zero direct dollar exposure.
The second columns of Panels A and B of Table 8 report the first four moments of the EQ0
carry trade as well as the Sharpe ratio and the first order autocorrelation. Panel A reports
the full sample results, and Panel B reports the results over the later part of the sample when
V IX data become available (1990:02-2013:08). Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors

15

are in parenthesis. For ease of comparison, we list the same set of statistics for EQ in Column
1. The EQ0 portfolio has statistically significant average annual returns in both samples,
1.61% (0.58) for the full sample and 1.72% (0.72) for the later sample. While these average
returns are lower than that of the EQ strategy, the volatility of the EQ0 strategy is also lower,
and its Sharpe ratio is 0.49 (0.19) in the full sample and 0.52 (0.23) in the later sample. These
point estimates are about 30% lower than the respective Sharpe ratios of the EQ strategy.
The skewness of the EQ0 strategy is -0.47(0.19) and -0.47 (0.28) for the full sample and the
later sample, respectively. The autocorrelation of the EQ0 strategy is negligible, and the
maximum losses are smaller than those of the EQ strategy. The next question is whether the
EQ0 strategy is exposed to risks.
Column 2 of Table 9 presents the results of regressions of the EQ0 returns on the three
Fama-French (1993) equity market risk factors. Notice that EQ0 loads significantly on the
market return and the HML factor, with t-statistics of 5.29 and 2.83, respectively. The loading
on the market return explains approximately 30% of the average return, and the loading on
the HML factor explains another 15% of the average return. The resulting constant in the
regression has a t-statistic of 1.54, and the R2 is .10. In comparison, the regression of EQ
returns on the same equity risk factors has an estimated constant of 3.39 with a t-statistic of
3.76 and an R2 of only .04. The Fama-French (1993) three factor model clearly does a better
job of explaining the average return of EQ0 strategy.
These results are surprising for two reasons. First, the EQ0 strategy follows the same
“carry” strategy using the G10 currencies as in the commonly studied EQ portfolio. The only
difference is the dollar exposure, which makes an important difference in abnormal returns
and risk factor loadings. Second, the literature currently leans toward the belief that FX
carry trades cannot be explained by equity risk factors, but we find that the average returns
to a typical FX carry trade can be explained by commonly used equity risk factors, with the
caveat that the portfolio has zero direct exposure to the dollar.

6.1

Decomposition of Carry Trade

To understand the difference between EQ and EQ0, we subtract the EQ0 positions from the
EQ positions to obtain another portfolio, which we label EQ-minus. The currency positions
in the EQ0 portfolio are
(
wj,t =


+ N1t if ijt > med ikt

− N1t if ijt < med ikt

)


where med ikt indicates the median of the interest rates excluding the dollar.

16

Subtracting the currency positions in the EQ0 strategy from those in EQ strategy gives
the positions in EQ-minus, which goes long (short) the dollar when the dollar interest rate is
higher (lower) than the median interest rate but only against currencies with interest rates
between the median and dollar interest rates. The exact positions of the portfolio are the
following:

If i$t < med ikt , then








0 if ijt > med ikt

1
if ijt = med ikt
j
Nt
yt =
k
j
2
$

<
i
<
med
it
if
i

t
t
Nt



j
$
0 if it ≤ it














If i$t > median ikt , then

ytj =













0 if ijt > i$t

− N1t if ijt = med ikt
k
−2
if
med
it < ijt ≤ i$t
Nt

0 if ijt ≤ med ikt













The EQ0 and EQ-minus portfolios decompose the EQ carry trade into two components: a
dollar neutral component and a dollar component.
Column 3 of Panels A and B in Table 8 presents the first four moments of the EQ-minus
strategy. which has statistically significant average annual returns in both samples, 2.35 (0.66)
for the full sample and 2.11 (0.92) for the later sample. The Sharpe ratio of the EQ-minus
strategy is higher than that of the EQ0 strategy in the full sample, 0.61 versus 0.49; but in
later half of the sample, the EQ-minus strategy has a slightly lower Sharpe ratio, 0.49 versus
0.52, than the EQ0 strategy. Given the standard errors, one could argue that the Sharpe
ratios are the same.
Skewness of EQ-minus is quite negative -0.65 (0.44) and -0.76 (0.45) for the full sample and
the later sample, respectively, although we note that the estimates of skewness are actually
statistically insignificant due to the large standard error in both samples. In terms of the
Sharpe ratio and skewness, the EQ-minus strategy appears no better than the EQ0 strategy.
Nevertheless, the EQ-minus strategy has a correlation of -.11 with the EQ0 strategy, and the
following results illustrate that the EQ-minus strategy also differs significantly from the EQ0
strategy in its risk exposures.
Column 3 of Table 9 presents the results of regressions of the EQ-minus returns on the
three Fama-French (1993) equity market risk factors. Unlike EQ0, only the SMB factor shows
any explanatory power for the EQ-minus returns. The constant in the regression is 2.36%
17

with a t-statistic of 3.60. The R2 is .04. The equity market risk factors clearly do not explain
the average returns to the EQ-minus strategy.
Columns 1 to 3 of Table 10 present regressions of the returns to the EQ strategy and
its two components, EQ0 and EQ-minus, on the equity market excess return and two bond
market risk factors. Similar to our previous findings, the market excess return and the bond
risk factors have significant explanatory power for the returns of EQ0 and a relatively high
R2 of .12. By comparison, none of the risk factors has any significant explanatory power for
the returns on the EQ-minus strategy, and the resulting R2 is only .02.
Finally, Columns 1 to 3 of Table 11 present regressions of the returns of EQ and its two
components, EQ0 and EQ-minus, on the two FX risk factors. The two factor FX model
completely explains the average returns of the EQ0 strategy while explaining only 25% of the
average returns of EQ-minus. The constant term in the EQ-minus regression also is significant
with a value of 1.49% and a t-statistic of 1.86 in the FX two factor model.
In summary, these results suggest that for the G10 currencies, conditional dollar exposure
contributes more to the carry trade “puzzle” than does the non-dollar component.

6.2

Pure Dollar Factor

As noted above, the EQ-minus strategy goes long (short) the dollar when the dollar interest
rate is above (below) the G10 median interest rate. It has the nice property of complementing
the EQ0 strategy to become the commonly studied equally weighted carry trade. However,
the other leg of the EQ-minus portfolio goes short (long) the currencies with interest rates
between the G10 median rate and the dollar interest rate. It takes positions in relatively
few currencies and thus seems under-diversified, which could explain its large kurtosis. Since
the results just presented indicate that the abnormal returns of EQ hinge on the conditional
dollar exposure, which is distinct from “carry”, we now expand the other leg of EQ-minus to
all foreign currencies. We thus create the following strategy EQ-USD:
(
ytj

=

)

+ N1 if med ikt > i$t

− N1 if med ikt ≤i$t

The EQ-USD strategy focuses on the conditional exposure of the dollar. It goes long
(short) the dollar against all nine foreign currencies when the dollar interest rate is higher
(lower) than the global median interest rate. The fourth columns of Panels A and B of Table
8 present the first four moments of the returns to the EQ-USD strategy for the full sample
and the sample for which equity volatility is available. We find that EQ-USD has statistically
significant average annual returns in both samples, 5.54% (1.37) for the full sample and 5.21%

18

(1.60) for the later sample. Although its volatility is also higher than the EQ strategy, its
Sharpe ratio of 0.68 (0.18) in the full sample and 0.66 (0.21) in the later sample are larger
although not significantly different from those of the EQ strategy. Skewness of the EQ-USD
strategy is insignificant as we find estimates of -0.11(0.17) for the full sample and -0.05 (0.22)
for the later sample. Thus, the EQ-USD strategy does not suffer from the extreme negative
skewness often mentioned as the hallmark of carry trade. The fourth columns of Tables 9
and 11 report regressions of the returns of EQ-USD on the Fama-French (1993) three factors,
the bond factors, and the FX risk factors. The only significant loading is on RF X,t , which
goes long all foreign currencies. The constants in these regressions range from 5.18% with a
t-statistic of 3.40 in the FX market risks regression to 5.82% with a t-statistic of 4.01 for the
bond market risks regression. When we use all of the risk factors simultaneously in Table 12
for the shorter sample period, the foreign exchange risk factors and the volatility factor have
significant loadings, but the constant in the regression is 4.52% with a a t-statistic of 2.79.
In summary, a large fraction of the premium earned by the EQ carry strategy can be
attributed to its conditional dollar exposure. What is more, the EQ-USD portfolio built on
this conditional dollar exposure earns a large premium, exhibits small exposures to standard
risk factors, which cannot explain its return,and has insignificant negative skewness, indicating
that negative skewness is not an explanation for the abnormal excess return of this strategy.

6.3

The Downside Market Risk Explanation

Our last investigation of the potential risks of the carry trade considers two recent studies that
offer exposure to downside equity market risk as the explanation of carry trade profitability.
The first is by Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014), and the second is by Jurek (2014).
6.3.1

The Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) Analysis

Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) first note that although portfolios of high interest rate
currencies have higher market betas than portfolios of low interest rate currencies, these
market-beta differentials are insufficiently large to explain the magnitude of carry trade returns.12 To develop a market-return risk based explanation of the average carry trade returns,
12

Dobrynskaya (2014) uses a slightly different specification than Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) but
reaches similar conclusions. Unfortunately, her GMM system of equations includes redundant orthogonality
conditions as she includes the returns on 10 portfolios sorted on the interest differential as well as the 10-1
portfolio return differential. While this should result in a collinear set of orthogonality conditions, the 10 1 differential portfolio does not appear to be exactly equal to the difference in the returns on portfolio 10
minus portfolio 1 as the average returns are slightly different. If the covariance matrix of the orthogonality
conditions is nearly singular, the resulting standard errors are not reliable. The reported efficient GMM
estimates are also likely to be unreliable. Because the approaches are so similar, we focus our discussion on
the approach taken by Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014).

19

Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) modify the downside market risk model of Ang, Chen,
and Xing (2006) and argue that the exposure of the carry trade to the return on the market
is larger, conditional on the market return being down. In their empirical analysis, Lettau,
−
Maggiori, and Weber (2014) define the downside market return, which we denote Rm,t
, as

equal to the market return when the market return is one standard deviation below the average market return and zero otherwise.13 Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) find that the
down-market-beta differential between the high and low interest rate sorted portfolios combined with a high price of down market risk is sufficient to explain the average returns to the
−
carry trade. To examine whether the Rm,t
risk factor explains our G10 carry trade strate-

gies, we investigate whether our six currency portfolios have significant betas with respect to
−
Rm,t
and whether these downside betas are significantly different from the standard betas We

show that our portfolios as well as other currency portfolios more generally, have statistically
insignificant beta differentials which invalidates the explanation of Lettau, Maggiori, Weber
(2014) for these carry trades.
In their econometric analysis, Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) run separate univariate
−
OLS regressions of portfolio returns, Rt , on Rm,t and Rm,t
to define the risk exposures, β

and β − . Then, they impose that the price of Rm,t risk is the average return on the market,
−
E (Rm,t ), and they use a cross-sectional regression to estimate a separate price of risk for Rm,t
,
−
denoted λ− , which is necessary because Rm,t
is not a traded risk factor. The unconditional

expected return on an asset is therefore predicted to be
E (Rt ) = βE (Rm,t ) + (β − − β)λ−
To test this explanation of our carry trades we first run a bivariate regression of a carry
−
trade return on a constant; an indicator dummy variable, I − , that is one when Rm,t
is non-zero
−
and zero otherwise; and the two risk factors, Rm,t and Rm,t
. Thus, we estimate
−
+ εt
Rt = α1 + α2 I − + β1 Rm,t + β2 Rm,t

(12)

In equation (12), β1 measures the asset’s basic exposure to the market excess return given that
there is additional adjustment for when the market is in the downstate; and β2 measures the
asset’s additional exposure to the market excess return when the market is in the downstate,
that is β2 = (β − − β1 ). We then test the significance of β2 using heteroskedasticity and
−
Because the definition of Rm,t
used by Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) seemed arbitrary to us, we
also considered two alternative more intuitive definitions which are the market return being less than the
unconditional average market return and the market return being negative. The results are similar to the
reported results and are available in an internet appendix.
13

20

autocorrelation consistent standard errors, as in Newey and West (1987) with 3 lags.14
Table 13 presents the results of these regressions for our six carry trade portfolios. We
first present the estimates of the usual β to establish the unconditional exposures when Rm,t
is the only risk factor. We find that the five basic carry trade portfolios have small positive
β 0 s, but only the SPD portfolio has a statistically significant β. The EQ-USD strategy, on the
other hand, has a slightly negative β. Because the risk factor in these regressions is a return,
the constant terms can be interpreted as abnormal returns, and all the constants are highly
−
significant as the smallest t-statistic is 4.01. When we add Rm,t
and the downside indicator

dummy to the regressions, we find that the β20 s for the five basic carry trade portfolios are
indeed positive, indicating that the point estimates of β − are indeed slightly larger than those
of β1 , but we cannot reject the hypothesis that β2 = (β − − β1 ) = 0 as the largest t-statistic
is 1.43. Moreover, the estimated β2 in the EQ-USD regression is actually negative indicating
that this currency strategy is less exposed to the market’s downside risk than to the upside
of market returns.15
−
Because Rm,t
is not a return, one cannot interpret the intercepts in these regressions

as abnormal returns, which is why Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) perform the crosssectional analysis that is required to estimate the price of downside market risk. To determine
how much our estimated exposures to downside risk could possibly explain the average returns
to the carry trade, we use the estimates of the price of downside risk from Lettau, Maggiori,
and Weber (2014) rather than our own cross-sectional analysis.
Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) include assets other than currencies in their crosssectional analysis and find a large positive price of downside market risk. When they include
currencies and equities with returns measured in percentage points per month, they find an
estimate of λ− equal to 1.41%, or 16.92% per annum. When they include only currencies, they
find an estimate of λ− equal to 2.18%, or 26.2% per annum. To determine the explanatory
power of (β − − β)λ− for our carry trade portfolios, we first add the estimates of β1 and β2
to get an estimate of β − from which we subtract the unconditional estimate of β from the
first regression. The last two rows of Panel C in Table 13 multiply our estimates of (β − − β)
by 16.92% or 26.2% to provide the explained part of the average carry trade returns that
is due to downside risk exposure. Compared to the constant terms in Panel A, the extra
return explained by downside risk exposure is minimal for the EQ and EQ-RR strategies.
14

When there is additional covariance of a return with the market given that the market is down, the
standard beta measures a mixture of the basic beta and the downside beta. Thus, (β − − β) is actually
smaller than (β − − β1 ) .
15
Of course, since the EQ-USD strategy takes positions in all foreign currencies relative to the dollar based
only on the position of the USD interest rate relative to the median interest rate, it is not strictly a carry
trade, and the return on the portfolio when the market is down could be driven by movements in currencies
whose interest rates are more extreme relative to the median than the USD interest rate.

21

The downside risk premium explains between 0% and 5% of the CAPM alphas of these two
strategies, respectively. For the SPD and SPD-RR strategies, the downside risk premium
explains between 20% and 40% of the CAPM alphas. Notice also that the negative β2 for
the EQ-USD strategy implies that the downside market risk theory cannot explain the excess
return of the EQ-USD strategy as the additional expected return from downside risk exposure
is actually -2.12% or -3.28%, depending on the value of λ− .
As a check on the sensitivity of our conclusions about the inability of downside risk to
explain the carry trade, we run the same regressions using the six interest rate sorted portfolios
of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) who place the lowest interest rate currencies in
portfolio P1 and the highest interest rate currencies in portfolio P6. The average returns on
these portfolios increase monotonically from P1 to P6. Panel A of Table 14 shows the CAPM
regression results. The β 0 s on Rm,t for portfolios P1 to P6 are small but monotonically
increasing, and the excess return, P6 - P1, is significantly explained by Rm,t with a t-statistic
of 5.62. Nevertheless, consistent with our previous results, the market β of the P6 - P1 return
is only 0.18, which is too small to explain the average return. The CAPM α0 s on these
portfolios increase monotonically from P1 to P6, and the α of P6 - P1 portfolio is 6.46% with
a t-statistic of 3.67.
Panel B of Table 14 presents the regression results in the presence of downside market risk.
The slope coefficients on Rm,t are close to monotonically increasing; but the slope coefficients
−
on Rm,t
do not increase monotonically. The β20 s of portfolios P4 and P5 are smaller than

those of portfolios P1 to P3. More importantly, the β20 s are all insignificantly different from
zero as the largest t-statistic is 0.56 indicating that all the coefficients are smaller than their
standard errors. Although the downside risk explanation requires statistical significance of
the beta differential implying that insignificance could be taken at face value to indicate
that downside risk cannot be the explanation of the carry trade, failure to reject zero is not
sufficient to reject the theory. Thus, we also perform the necessary calculations as above to
derive the explanatory power of the downside risk premium taking the coefficients at their
point estimates. We find that the downside risk effect is not monotonic as portfolios P2, P4
and P5 are predicted to have more negative downside risk premiums than portfolio P1 even
though the CAPM α0 s of P2, P4, and P5 are larger than P1. At the extreme end, the P6 - P1
portfolio has a positive though insignificant β2 . With an annualized downside risk premium of
26.2%, the difference between the downside beta and the unconditional beta helps to explain
about a quarter of the CAPM α of the P6 - P1 portfolio.
The fact that the six portfolios of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) have β2 =
−

(β − β1 ) slope coefficients that are insignificantly different from zero and not monotonic is
surprising because Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) use six similarly constructed currency
22

portfolios from a comparably large number of countries and show that these portfolios have
−
monotonically increasing directly estimated loadings on Rm,t
. Two things are important to

note. First, while the methodologies may seem different because Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber
(2014) estimate the β −0 s directly in separate univariate regressions and we add our two slope
coefficients, β1 and β2 , to find estimates of β −0 s, the estimated values of β − are the same.
The differences arise because Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) use different currencies in
their analysis than Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) and a different but overlapping
time period. For the time period over which the two data sets coincide, the correlation of the
returns to the two P6 - P1 portfolios is actually only .4. For the smaller developed currencies
sample, both studies sort currencies into five portfolios, and the correlation of the returns to
the two P5 - P1 portfolios rises to .8. We therefore further explore our approach with the
Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) developed country portfolios for a sample which starts
in 1983:11, when the Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) sample starts, and ends in
2010:03.
Panel A of Table 15 demonstrates that the CAPM α0 s are monotonically increasing from
P1 to P5 and the P5-P1 portfolio has a CAPM α of 4.52% with a t-statistic of 2.68. Similar
to the previous results, Panel B of Table 15 shows that the point estimates of the β20 s of all
the portfolios are insignificantly different from zero as the largest t-statistic is 1.14 indicating
that the downside beta is not significantly different from the basic beta. Panel C of Table
15 shows that the predicted downside risk premium is not monotonically increasing from P1
to P5. The P1 portfolio has a larger downside risk premium than the P2 and P3 portfolios,
even though the CAPM α of the P1 portfolio is -0.35% and the CAPM α’s of the P2 and P3
portfolios are 0.45% and 2.64%, respectively. Nevertheless, we note that 57% of the CAPM
α of the P5 - P1 portfolio can be explained by the difference between the downside beta and
the unconditional beta using the point estimate of the annualized downside risk premium of
26.2%. Overall, these results highlight our concerns that the downside betas are small and
are imprecisely estimated. The relation of the downside betas across the interest rate sorted
portfolios is not monotonic in most of the results, which implies that downside market risk
cannot explain the average returns to the portfolios, which are monotonically increasing.
6.3.2

The Jurek (2014) Analysis

Jurek (2014) uses the return to selling S&P 500 puts as a downside risk index (DRI) to explain
the returns to the carry trade. The DRI is developed and explored in Jurek and Stafford (2014)
who argue that it can be thought of as a straightforward way to express downside risk, and that

23

the average return to the DRI can therefore be considered to be a risk premium.16 Jurek and
Stafford (2014) show that an appropriately levered investment in the DRI accurately matches
the pre-fee risks and returns of broad hedge fund indices such as the HFRI Fund-Weighted
Composite and the Credit Suisse Broad Hedge Fund Index.
We follow Jurek’s description of the development of the DRI to obtain a sample from
January 1990 to August 2013.17 The last column of Table A.1 shows summary statistics for
the DRI. The mean return is an annualized 9.42%, which is highly statistically significant
given its standard error of 1.43. The DRI is also highly non-normally distributed as evidenced
by its skewness of -2.92 and its excess kurtosis of 13.57. The returns are mostly positive as
losses occur in less than 18% of the months.
Jurek (2014) examines a sample from 1990:1 to 2012:06 and reports that the slope coefficients [t-statistics] from regressions of spread-weighted and dollar-neutral, spread-weighted
carry trades on the DRI are 0.3514 [6.41] and 0.3250 [5.85], respectively, and the constant
terms in the regressions are 0.0019 [0.14] and -0.0032 [-0.22], respectively. Jurek (2014) interprets the strong significance of the slopes and the fact that the intercepts are smaller than their
standard errors as evidence that this measure of downside risk explains the average returns of
the carry trades quite well.
Table 16 presents our analysis using the DRI index. In regressions that just include the
DRI as an explanatory variable, the slope coefficients are generally significant, except for the
EQ-USD portfolio for which the DRI has no explanatory power. The estimated constant
terms with heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics in brackets range from 1.26 [2.17] for the
OPT portfolio to 5.37 [2.83] for the EQ-USD portfolio. The constant terms for the EQ-RR
and SPD-RR portfolios also have t-statistics greater than 2.6.

Returns to the pure dollar

portfolio, which was demonstrated above to be unrelated to general market risk, is again
shown to be immune to downside market risk proxied by the return from selling put options.
We consequently conclude that while our carry trade portfolios, other than the pure dollar
portfolio, have some exposure to the downside risk index of Jurek and Stafford (2014), such
exposures are insufficient to explain the returns to the carry trades. When we include the
16

Caballero and Doyle (2014) use the return from shorting VIX futures as an indicator of systemic risk to
explain the carry trade. Because VIX futures only began trading in 2004, we prefer the Jurek and Stafford
(2013) downside risk index, as we can construct returns for a much longer sample.
17
Jurek and Stafford (2013) note that the maximum loss from selling a put is the strike price. They
investigate strategies in which the seller of the put places capital equal to X% of the maximum loss in the
bank in addition to the capital from the funds obtained from the sale of the put. The return from selling
puts is then the capital gain or loss on the puts plus the accrued interest on the invested capital divided by
the invested capital. We follow Jurek (2014) in using options that have strike prices one standard deviation
below the current index value, and we place 50% of the maximum loss in the bank. Jurek and Stafford (2013)
use the OptionMetrics database which begins in 1996. Jurek (2014) extends the data back to 1990 by using
the Berkeley Options Database. We are grateful to Jurek for providing his data, and we updated the series to
August 2013.

24

DRI with the three Fama-French (1993) risk factors in Panel B, we find that none of the
slope coefficients on DRI is significantly different from zero, and the intercepts all retain their
magnitude and statistical significance.

7

Results for the Hedged Carry Trade

This section considers results for hedged carry trades. As noted in the Data section, our foreign
currency options sample is for the much shorter period from September 2000 to August 2013,
for which we have high quality options data. We also only employ USD-denominated foreign
currency options. Jurek (2014) is able to utilize a full set of 45 bilateral put and call currency
options for the G10 currencies, and he notes correctly that using only put and call options
versus the USD overstates the cost of hedging because it does not take advantage of the
offsetting exposures that arise from being long some currencies other than the USD, short
other currencies, and directly hedging this non-USD exposure with the appropriate bilateral
option for which both the volatility of the cross-rate and hence the cost of the options are lower.
We simply do not have the data to implement this more efficient approach to hedging. Thus,
the changes in profitability from our hedged strategies overstate the reductions in profitability
that traders would actually have experienced.
Table 17 reports the results for the hedged carry trades. We consider the equal weighted
hedged carry trade and the spread weighted hedged carry trade as well as the EQ-USD trade.
For comparison, the statistics for the corresponding unhedged carry trades over the same
sample are also reported. The first thing to notice is that the profitability of the unhedged
carry trades in the shorter sample is not as large as in the full sample. The average returns
(standard errors) are only 2.22% (1.43) for the EQ strategy, 5.55% (2.50) for the SPD strategy,
and 4.58% (2.27) for the EQ-USD strategy. The Sharpe ratios are also slightly lower at 0.47
(0.31), 0.66 (0.31), and 0.53 (0.26), respectively, and they are less precisely estimated given
the shorter sample. While the point estimates of unconditional skewness of the unhedged EQ
and SPD strategies remain negative, they are insignificantly different from zero. Skewness of
the EQ-USD strategy is positive but insignificantly different from zero.
The average returns for the hedged carry trades are reported for 10∆ and 25∆ option
strategies. In each case, the average hedged returns are lower than the corresponding unhedged
returns. For the 10∆ strategies, the average profitability of the hedged EQ trade is 38 basis
points less than its unhedged counterpart, the average profitability of the hedged SPD trade
is 34 basis points less than its unhedged counterpart, and the average profitability of the EQUSD trade is 61 basis points less than its unhedged counterpart. For the 25∆ strategies, the
average profitabilities of the hedged EQ trade is 87 basis points less, that of the hedged SPD
25

trade is 129 basis points less, and that of the EQ-USD trade is 145 basis points less than their
respective unhedged counterparts. The statistical significance of the average returns of the
hedged EQ strategies are questionable as the p-values of the hedged EQ strategies increase
from .12 for the unhedged to .132 and .198 for the 10∆ and 25∆ trades, respectively. On
the other hand, the p-values of the 10∆ and 25∆ hedged SPD strategies remain quite low, at
.017 and .022, respectively. Hedging the EQ-USD strategy causes a slight deterioration in the
statistical significance of the mean return as the p-values of the hedged EQ-USD strategies
rise from the .043 of the unhedged to .055 and .083 for the 10∆ and 25∆ trades, respectively.
In comparing the maximum losses across the unhedged and hedged strategies, one sees
that hedging only provides limited protection against substantive losses for the EQ and SPD
strategies since the maximum losses of the hedged trades are similar to the maximum losses
from the respective unhedged trades.

The maximum monthly loss for the EQ strategy is

4.12%, and the maximum losses for the EQ hedged 10∆ and 25∆ strategies are 2.93% and
3.52%, respectively. Similarly, the maximum monthly unhedged loss for the SPD strategy is
7.44%, and the maximum losses for the SPD hedged 10∆ and 25∆ strategies are 6.30% and
4.75%, respectively. Hedging the EQ-USD strategy with the 25∆ strategy did help to avoid a
substantive loss as the maximum losses for this strategy are 7.15% for the unhedged strategy
and 5.30% and 3.68% for the 10∆ and 25∆ strategies, respectively.

7.1

Risk Exposures of the Hedged Carry Trades

We begin the examination of the exposures of the hedged carry trades to risk factors in Panel
A of Table 18 where we consider the basic equity market risk exposures to the three FamaFrench (1993) factors. For the shorter sample, the unhedged EQ strategy has an insignificant
constant term and statistically significant exposure to the market return with an R2 of .20.
The corresponding results for the SPD strategy also indicate stronger and statistically more
significant exposures to the market return and the HML factor than in the full sample, as
well as a higher R2 of .26. Nevertheless, the constant term in the SPD regression remains
important and statistically significant at 4.23% [2.13] . Hedging these carry trades has very
little influence on the results as the constant terms in the EQ-10∆ and EQ-25∆ strategies are
both smaller with smaller t-statistics while the constant terms in the SPD-10∆ and SPD-25∆
strategies are also both slightly smaller but with statistically significant t-statistics.

The

statistically significant exposures to the market return and HML remain in the hedged SPD
regressions.
The unhedged EQ-USD strategy has no exposure to the Fama-French (1993) factors in
the shorter sample and the constant term is 3.88% with a t-statistic of 1.72. Hedging the

26

EQ-USD trades results in insignificant exposures to the Fama-French (2013) risk factors, and
the constant terms in the regressions remain relatively large in magnitude but with reduced
statistical significance. Panel B of Table 18 adds the return to the variance swap as a risk
factor to the equity risks. With the equity market factors, the return to the variance swap
only has explanatory power for the EQ-USD strategy where it is statistically significant for
both the unhedged and hedged returns.

The constant terms in these regressions remain

statistically significantly different from zero.
Panel A of Table 19 considers exposures to the equity market excess return and the two
bond market excess returns as in Table 6. We see significant differences between the shorter
sample results and the full sample results for both the EQ and SPD strategies. For the EQ
carry trade, the significance of the bond market factors is now gone, while the return on the
equity market is strong, as was just reported. For the SPD trade, the bond market factors are
now statistically significant as before, but with the opposite signs of the full sample results.
Hedging these carry trades causes very little change in the slope coefficients or the tstatistics but reduces the magnitude of constant terms in the regressions.

None of the

constants has a t-statistic larger than 1.57. For the EQ-USD strategy, the bond market risk
factors are statistically significant and nearly equal and opposite in sign indicating that an
innovation in the two-year return is associated with a decrease in the return to the trade.
Panel B of Table 19 adds the return to the variance swap as a risk factor to the bond risks. In
conjunction with the bond market factors, the return to the variance swap only has explanatory
power for the hedged EQ-USD strategies, and the constant terms in these regressions have
reduced statistical significance.
Table 20 demonstrates that the downside risk indicator (DRI) of Jurek and Stafford (2014)
has strong significance for the EQ and SPD strategies, both in their unhedged and hedged
forms, for the shorter sample. The constant terms in these regressions are also insignificantly
different from zero indicating that the DRI alone has the power to explain these carry trades.
In contrast, the DRI has no ability to explain the unhedged EQ-USD strategy leaving an
intercept of 4.58%, albeit with a t-statistic that has a p-value of .10. The DRI has no ability
to explain the return to the hedged EQ-USD strategy, and the t-statistics for the constant
terms remain marginally significant.

8

Drawdown Analysis Using the Daily Frequency

Carry trades are generally found to have negative skewness. The literature has associated this
negative skewness with crash risk. However, negative skewness at the monthly level can stem
from extreme negatively skewed daily returns or from a sequence of persistent, negative daily
27

returns that are not negatively skewed. These two cases have different implications for risk
management and for theoretical explanations of the carry trade. If persistent negative returns
are the explanation, the detection of increased serial dependence could potentially be used to
limit losses. While the literature has almost exclusively focused on the characteristics of carry
trade returns at the monthly frequency, we now characterize the downside risks of carry trade
returns at the daily frequency while retaining the monthly decision interval.18
To calculate daily returns for a carry trade strategy, we consider that a trader has one
dollar of capital that is deposited in the bank at the end of month t − 1. The trader earns
the one-month dollar interest rate, i$t , prorated per day. We use the one month euro-currency
interest rates as the interest rates at which traders borrow and lend, and we infer the foreign
interest rates from the USD interest rate and covered interest rate parity. At time t − 1, the
trader also enters one of the four carry trade strategies, EQ, EQ-RR, SPD, or SPD-RR, which
are rebalanced at the end of month t. Let Pt,τ represent the cumulative dollar carry trade
profit realized on day τ during month t. The accrued interest on the one dollar of committed
τ
capital is 1 + i$t Dt by the τ th trading day of month t with Dt being the number of trading
days within the month. Then, the excess daily return can then be calculated as follows:

rxt,τ =

Pt,τ + 1 +

i$t

Pt,τ −1 + 1 +

 Dτ 

i$t

t



τ −1
Dt

− 1 + i$t

 D1

t

Panel A of Table 21 shows the summary statistics of these daily returns from our four carry
trade strategies annualized for ease of comparison to the corresponding annualized monthly
returns in Panel B. If the daily returns of a portfolio were independently and identically
distributed, the annualized moments at the daily and monthly levels would scale such that
with 21 trading days in a month, the means and standard deviations would be the same.
√
Standardized daily skewness would equal 21 times standardized monthly skewness, and
standardized daily kurtosis would equal 21 times standardized monthly kurtosis.For ease of
comparison, Panel C takes ratios of monthly central moments to the daily central moments
and normalize them by the corresponding ratios under the I.I.D assumption. If the daily
returns independently and identically distributed, the normalized ratios would equal 1.
Table 21 shows that the annualized average returns for the daily carry trades and their
corresponding monthly counterparts are almost identical. The annualized daily standard deviations of the four strategies are all slightly below the annualized monthly standard deviations,
18

While traders in foreign exchange markets can easily adjust their carry trade strategies at the daily
frequency if not intradaily with minimal transaction costs, we choose to examine the daily returns to carry
trades that are rebalanced monthly to maintain consistency with the academic literature and because we do
not have quotes on forward rates for arbitrary maturities that are necessary to close out positions within the
month.

28

which is consistent with small positive autocorrelations at the daily frequency. Ratios of standardized monthly skewness relative to daily skewness vary considerably across the portfolios.
For the EQ and SPD portfolios, the normalized ratios are 7.1 and 2.4, indicating that the
monthly skewness are well above the value if the daily returns were i.i.d.. On the other hand,
the same ratios for the risk rebalancing portfolios are markedly closer to 1, 1.7 for EQ-RR and
1.3 for SPD-RR. This is not surprising because risk rebalancing targets a constant IGARCH
predicted variance over time, thereby reducing the serial dependence in the conditional variance of the return. As a result, the data generating process of the risk rebalancing portfolios
conforms better to the i.i.d. assumption. Similarly, normalized ratios between monthly and
daily kurtosis are far above the value implied by the i.i.d. assumption for the EQ and SPD
portfolios whereas the same ratios for the EQ-RR and SPD-RR portfolios are again much
closer to 1. Risk rebalancing tilts the data generating process towards the i.i.d. distribution,
and it reveals substantial negative skewness at the daily level. The daily skewness of the EQRR and SPD-RR strategies is -1.01 and -1.62, respectively. Lastly, the minimum (actual, not
annualized) daily returns are of similar size to the minimum (actual, not annualized) monthly
returns for all four strategies. In this sense, it may seem that much of the risk of the carry
trade is realized at the daily level, yet the months with the largest daily losses are not the
months with the largest monthly losses.
We use three measures to capture the downside risks of carry trade portfolios. The first
is its drawdown, which is defined as the percentage loss from the previous high-water mark
to the following lowest point. The second is its pure drawdown, which is defined as the
percentage loss from consecutive daily negative returns. The third is its maximum loss, which
is defined as the minimum cumulative return over a given period of time. We calculate
the distributions of drawdowns and pure drawdowns, which are defined as the number of
drawdowns (pure drawdowns) more severe than a certain value. For maximum losses, we
calculate the distribution as the maximum loss versus a particular time horizon.
We compare these distributions to counterfactual models under the assumption that the
returns are independent across time by simulating daily excess returns of the four strategies.
This first model assumes a normal distribution with the corresponding unconditional mean
and standard deviation of the data.19 The second model captures non-normalities while retaining the independence assumption by simulating the daily excess returns using independent
bootstrapping with replacement. We simulate 10,000 trials of the same size as the data, and
we calculate the probability of observing the observed empirical patterns under these two
simulation methods, which we report as p-values.
19

Chernov, Graveline, and Zviadadze (2013) use historical currency return processes and option data to
estimate stochastic volatility jump-diffusion models. We have not attempted to simulate from these more
complex and realistic models to generate distributions of drawdowns and maximum losses.

29

8.0.1

Drawdowns

Table 22 reports the magnitudes of the 20 worst drawdowns, their p-values under the simulations from the normal distribution (labeled as “p n”) and from the bootstrap (labeled as
“p b”) as well as the number of days it took to experience that particular drawdown. The
worst drawdown from the EQ strategy is 12.0%, which corresponds to a p-value of .13 under
either the normal or the bootstrap distribution. Because these values exceed the .05 threshold,
the probability of observing one drawdown worse than 12.0% is not inconsistent with those
statistical models. This large drawdown was not a crash, though. It took 94 days to go from
the peak to trough. The second worst EQ drawdown is 10.8%, which took 107 days from
peak to trough. The p-values for this drawdown indicate that the probability of observing
two drawdowns worse than 10.8% is .016 under the normal distribution and .018 under the
bootstrap. Therefore, while a single worst drawdown of 12.0% is not uncommon under the assumption of either of the simulated distributions, for less extreme but still severe drawdowns,
the EQ strategy suffers such drawdowns more frequently than the i.i.d. distributions suggest.
Examining the remaining 18 worst drawdowns indicates that almost all of them took more
than a month to experience.
For the SPD strategy, the worst drawdown is 21.5%, which has p-values of .017 for the
normal distribution and .023 for the bootstrap distribution. This worst drawdown was experienced over 163 days. Drawdowns for the SPD strategy with magnitudes between 8.2%
and 8.9% happen more frequently in the data than both simulation models would suggest
with p-values of .05. The number of days it took to experience the 10 worst drawdowns also
exceeds 50. The effect of risk-rebalancing on the drawdowns of the EQ strategy is minimal,
while risk rebalancing the SPD strategy cuts the largest drawdown in half. The distributions
of drawdowns for the risk rebalanced strategies, EQ-RR and SPD-RR, often reach p-values
below .05 under both simulation methods. Risk rebalancing also tends to lengthen the period
over which the maximum drawdowns are experienced.
8.0.2

Maximum Losses

Table 23 reports the magnitudes of the maximum losses and their p-values under the two
simulations. For the EQ strategy, the maximum one-day loss is 2.7%. The p-value for the oneday loss clearly rejects the assumption of a normal distribution, which is not surprising because
the portfolio has significant negative skewness and excess kurtosis. In fact the simulations
under a normal distribution fail to match the empirical distribution of maximum losses over all
horizons for all four strategies, indicating the limitations of using the normal distribution when
studying the most extreme tail events. Thus, we focus our discussion on the bootstrapping

30

results. Bootstrapping captures these higher moments, and using this simulation method, the
maximum daily loss of 2.7% has a p-value of .594 indicating that across the 10,000 simulations
this loss was drawn at least once in over half of the simulations. As we move towards longer
horizons, the maximum loss in the data increases steadily until 180 days. After that, the
maximum losses generally decrease because even though longer horizons mean the losing streak
could be longer, the tendency for larger losses is offset by the positive average returns.20
For the EQ strategy, the maximum losses within periods shorter than one, two, and three
days obtain p-values larger than .05 for the bootstrap simulation. For longer horizons, the
maximum losses usually are much more severe than what the .05 bootstrapping bound suggests. Maximum losses for SPD over periods shorter than 35 days are well within the .05
bound of the bootstrap distribution. But, for periods longer than 40 days, the maximum
losses for SPD start to exceed the .05 bound. This suggests that even taking account of the
daily skewness and kurtosis, the distributions of maximum losses for EQ and SPD at longer
horizons reject the independence assumption underlying the bootstrapping. The rejection
could come from serial dependence of a variety of moments. We know that volatility of daily
returns is quite persistent, and thus controlling for serial dependency in the second moment
seems to be a natural, first step to determining why the i.i.d. bootstrapping fails to match the
empirical maximum loss.21 The EQ-RR and SPD-RR strategies should avoid some of these
problems as they are rebalanced monthly to achieve a constant IGARCH predicted volatility and hence have less serial dependence in their second moments. Table 23 demonstrates
that once we take account of stochastic volatility in this way, the maximum losses observed
in the data largely lie within the .05 bounds of the bootstrap distributions. Therefore, even
though the drawdown analysis shows that risk rebalancing is not effective at regulating the
distribution of drawdowns to what would be implied by an i.i.d. assumption, risk-rebalancing
certainly helps to align the maximum losses with what is implied by an i.i.d. return.
8.0.3

Pure Drawdown

Table 24 reports statistics for the 20 worst pure drawdowns, their p-values under the two
simulations, and the number of days over which the pure drawdown occurred. The i.i.d. normal
distribution fails to match the empirical distributions of the pure drawdowns for virtually all
magnitudes and frequencies, where frequency k means that there are at least k pure drawdowns
greater than or equal to a particular magnitude. We thus focus on the p-values from the
bootstrap distributions. For the EQ strategy, the worst pure drawdown is 5.2% with a p-value
20

The maximum drawdown for the EQ strategy is 12% which took 94 days. This is not reported as a
maximum loss because 94 days is not reported in Table 23.
21
Bootstrapping a block of returns to better capture the conditional heteroskedasticity in the data would
potentially improve our approach.

31

of .014, and it was experienced over 7 trading days. For less severe pure drawdowns, we see
that the bootstrap simulations also fail to match the frequencies at these thresholds. For
example, there are 10 pure drawdowns greater than or equal in magnitude to 3% which never
occurs in the simulations. The pure drawdowns occur between 3 and 12 business days.
Similar observations can be made for the SPD strategy. Observing pure drawdowns greater
than or equal to 4.4% never occurs in either simulation.

In results available in the online

appendix, we observe that the durations of the pure drawdowns, that is, the number of days
with consecutive negative returns, are well within the .05 bounds implied by two simulations.
These results suggest that the low p-values of the empirical distributions of the magnitudes
of pure drawdowns stem mainly from the fact that the consecutive negative returns tend to
have larger variances than the typical returns.22
When we apply the risk-rebalancing strategies in EQ-RR and SPD-RR, we find that the
worst five pure drawdowns lie well within the .05 bounds, while less extreme pure drawdowns
happen more frequently than is implied by the bootstrap’s .05 bound. For example, the fifth
worst pure drawdown of the SPD-RR strategy is 4.2%, and we observed five pure drawdowns
of this magnitude or larger in 22.1% of the bootstrap simulations. Recall that the distribution
of maximum losses of EQ-RR and SPD-RR lie within the bootstrap’s .05 bound also, while the
distributions of drawdowns of the two EQ and SPD strategies do not. These results together
suggest that controlling for serial dependence in volatility greatly improves the accuracy of an
i.i.d. approximation for studying the extreme downside risks, but to fully match the frequencies
of less extreme but still severe downside events, we need a richer model to capture the serial
dependence in the data.
To sum up, studying these four carry trade strategies at the daily level conveys rich information regarding downside risks. Although the minimum daily returns are of similar size to
the minimum monthly returns, they do not occur in the same months. Maximum drawdowns
occur over substantial periods of time, often in highly volatile environments, suggesting that
extreme negative returns do not happen suddenly and could possibly be avoided by traders
who can re-balance daily. Drawdowns are much larger than the daily losses, and simulations using a normal distribution fail to match the empirical frequencies of downside events in
most cases. This is consistent with the significant, negative skewness at the daily frequency.
Bootstrapping helps to capture the negative skewness and excess kurtosis of the empirical
distributions, and bootstrapping with a volatility forecasting model helps to match the frequencies of the most extreme tail events in the data, but it fails to match the frequencies of
less extreme but still severe tail events.
22

Similarly, we find larger values of pure run-ups than is implied by the simulations.

32

9

Conclusions

This paper provides some perspectives on the risks of currency carry trades that differ from
the conventional wisdom in the literature. First, it is generally argued that exposure to the
three Fama-French (1993) equity market risk factors cannot explain the returns to the carry
trade. We find that these equity market risks do significantly explain the returns to an equally
weighted carry trade that has no direct exposure to the dollar. Our second finding is also at
variance with the literature. We find that our carry trade strategies with alternative weighting
schemes are not fully priced by the HMLFX risk factor proposed by Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2011), which is basically a carry trade return across a broader set of currencies.
Third, we argue that the time varying dollar exposure of the carry trade is at the core of carry
trade puzzle. A dollar carry factor earns a significant abnormal return in the presence of
equity market risks, bond market risks, FX risks, and a volatility risk factor. The dollar carry
factor also has insignificant skewness, indicating crash risk cannot explain its abnormal return.
Our fourth finding that is inconsistent with the literature is that the exposure of our carry
trades to downside market risk is not statistically significantly different from the unconditional
exposure. Thus, the downside risk explanation of Dobrynskaya (2014) and Lettau, Maggiori,
and Weber (2014) does not explain the average returns to our strategies. We do find that the
downside risk explanation of Jurek (2014) explains the non-dollar carry trade, but it also fails
to explain our dollar carry factor.
We also show that spread-weighting and risk-rebalancing the currency positions improve
the Sharpe ratios of the carry trades, and the returns to these strategies earn significant
abnormal returns in presence of the HMLFX risk factor proposed by Lustig, Roussanov, and
Verdelhan (2011). The choice of benchmark currency also matters. We show that equally
weighted carry trades can have a Sharpe ratio as low as 0.36 when the JPY is chosen as
the benchmark currency and as high as 0.78 when the USD is chosen as the benchmark
currency. Currency exposure explains the difference between these carry trade strategies. We
thus decompose the equally weighted USD based carry trade into two components: one has
zero direct exposure to the dollar and the other contains the strategy’s dollar exposure. We
find that the dollar-neutral part of carry trade exhibits an insignificant alpha in the FamaFrench (1993) three-factor model. On the other hand, a USD carry factor based on the carry
trade’s time varying exposure to the dollar cannot be priced by a combination of equity, bond,
FX, and volatility risk factors, commanding insignificant loadings on these risk factors and a
significant alpha.
We also initiate a discussion of the attributes of the distributions of the drawdowns of
different strategies using daily data while maintaining at a monthly rebalancing strategy.

33

We do so in an intuitive way using simulations, as the statistical properties of drawdowns
are less developed than other measures of risk, such as standard deviation and skewness.
Although we correct for time varying heteroskedasticity with our risk rebalancing model, we
still find that most of the time the empirical distributions of the drawdowns of our carry trade
strategies lie outside of the 95% confidence band based on a normal distribution that matches
the unconditional mean and standard deviation of the strategy. Simulating from an i.i.d.
bootstrap does a much better job of predicting the distributions of carry trade drawdowns,
but it cannot fully capture the severity of the drawdowns. Adding conditional autocorrelation,
especially in down states, seems necessary to fully characterize the distributions of drawdowns
and the negative skewness that characterizes the monthly data.
We began the paper by noting the parallels between the returns to the carry trade and
the rejections of the unbiasedness hypothesis. As with any study of market efficiency, there
are four possible explanations. We do find that the profitability of the basic carry trade
has decreased over time, which suggests the possibility that market inefficiency explains the
relatively larger early period returns that are not associated with exposures to risks. But,
we also find significant risk exposures which suggests a role for risk aversion. The risks may
change over time in which case there is room for learning as a possible explanation requiring
a deviation from the basic rational expectations econometric paradigm.

The performance

of the hedged carry trade suggests that a single unrealized peso state is probably not the
explanation of the data, although generalized peso problems in which the ex post distribution
of returns differs for the ex ante distribution that rational investors perceived certainly cannot
be ruled out.

10

References

Ackermann, Fabian, Walt Pohl, and Karl Schmedders, 2012, On the risk and return of the
carry trade, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper Series No. 12-36.
Ang, Andrew, Joseph Chen, and Yuhang Xing, 2006, Downside risk, Review of Financial
Studies 19, 1191-1239.
Backus, David K., Federico Gavazzoni, Chris Telmer and Stanley E. Zin, 2010, Monetary
policy and the uncovered interest rate parity puzzle, manuscript, Stern School of Business,
New York University.
Bakshi, Gurdip, Peter Carr, and Liuren Wu, 2008, Stochastic risk premiums, stochastic skewness in currency options, and stochastic discount factors in international economies,
Journal of Financial Economics, 87, 132-156.
Bakshi, Gurdip and George Panayotov, 2013, Predictability of currency carry trades and
34

asset pricing implications, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 139-163.
Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2013, A long-run risks explanation of predictability
puzzles in bond and currency markets. Review of Financial Studies 26,1-33.
Beber, Alessandro, Francis Breedon, and Andrea Buraschi, 2010, Differences in beliefs and
currency risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics 98, 415-438.
Bhansali, Vineer, 2007, Volatility and the carry trade, The Journal of Fixed Income 17,
72-84.
Bilson, John F.O., 1981, The ’speculative efficiency’ hypothesis, Journal of Business 54,
435-451.
Breedon, Francis, 2001, Market liquidity under stress: Observations from the FX market,
Bank for International Settlements Papers No. 2, Proceedings of a workshop on Market
Liquidity, April.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Carry trade and
currency crashes, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 23, 313-347.
Burnside, Craig, 2012, Carry trades and risk, in Jessica James, Ian W. Marsh, and Lucio
Sarno, eds. Handbook of Exchange Rates. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Burnside Craig, Martin S. Eichenbaum, Isaac Kleshchelski, S. Rebelo, 2011, Do peso
problems explain the returns to the carry trade? Review of Financial Studies 24, 853-891.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Joseph B. Doyle, 2012, Carry Trade and Systemic Risk: Why
are FX Options so Cheap? manuscript, MIT.
Carr, Peter and Liuren Wu, 2007, Stochastic Skew for Currency Options, Journal of Financial Economics, 86(1), p. 213-247.
Chernov, Mikhail, Jeremy Graveline,and Irina Zviadadze, 2013, Sources of risk in currency
returns, manuscript, UCLA.
Christiansen, Charlotte, Angelo Ranaldo, and Paul Soderlind, 2011, The time-varying
systematic risk of carry trade strategies, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46,
1107-1125.
Clarida, Richard, Josh Davis, and Niels Pedersen, 2009, Currency carry trade regimes:
Beyond the Fama regression, Journal of International Money and Finance 28, 1375-1389.
Carry on speculating: How traders have been triumphing over economic theory, (2007),
The Economist, February 22.
Dobrynskaya, Victoria, 2014, Downside market risk of carry trades, Review of Finance 24,
1-29.
Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: a survey of
recent evidence, Journal of Empirical Finance 3, 123-192.
Evans, Martin D.D., 1996, Peso problems: Their theoretical and empirical implications.
35

In G.S. Maddala and C.R. Rao, eds., Handbook of Statistics, Volume 14. Elsevier Science:
Amsterdam, 613-646.
Fama, Eugene, 1984, Forward and spot exchange rates, Journal of Monetary Economics
14, 319-348.
Fama, Eugene and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks
and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix, 2011, Rare disasters and exchange rates, manuscript,
Harvard University.
Farhi, Emmanuel, Samuel P. Fraiberger, Xavier Gabaix, Romain Ranciere, and Adrien
Verdelhan, 2013, Crash risk in currency markets, manuscript, Harvard University.
Froot, Kenneth and Richard Thaler, 1990, Anomalies: foreign exchange, Journal of Economic Perspectives 4, 179-192.
Hansen, Lars Peter, 1982, Large sample properties of generalized method of moments
estimators, Econometrica 50, 1029-1054.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Robert J. Hodrick, 1983, Risk averse speculation in the forward
foreign exchange market: An econometric analysis of linear models, Chapter 4 in Jacob A.
Frenkel, ed., Exchange Rates and International Macroeconomics, NBER and the University
of Chicago Press, 113-142.
Hodrick, Robert J., 1987, The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and Futures
Foreign Exchange Markets, Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor, 2012, The carry trade and fundamentals: Nothing to
fear but FEER itself, Journal of International Economics 88, 74-90.
Jurek, Jakub W., 2014, Crash-neutral currency carry trades, forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Jurek, Jakub W., and Eric Stafford, 2014, The cost of capital for alternative investments,
forthcoming Journal of Finance.
J.P. Morgan, 1996, RiskMetrics Technical Document, Part II: Statistics of Financial Market Returns, 4th edition, New York.
Koijen, Ralph S.J., Tobias J. Moskowitz, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Evert B. Vrugt, 2013,
Carry, manuscript, London Business School.
Krasker, William S., 1980, The ’peso problem’ in testing the efficiency of forward foreign
exchange markets, Journal of Monetary Economics 6, 269-276.
Lettau, Martin, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber, 2014, Conditional currency risk
premia, manuscript, forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
Lewis, Karen K., 1989, Can learning affect exchange-rate behavior?: The case of the dollar
in the early 1980s, Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 79-100.
36

Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2011, How
sovereign is sovereign credit risk? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 75-103.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2011, Common risk factors in
currency markets, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3731-3777.
Lustig, Hanno, Nikolai Roussanov, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2014, Countercyclical currency
risk premia, Journal of Financial Economics 111, 527-553.
Mancini, Loriano, Angelo Ranaldo, Jan Wrampelmeyer, 2013, Liquidity in the foreign
exchange market: Measurement, commonality, and risk premiums, Journal of Finance 68,
1805-1841.
Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983, Empirical exchange rate models of the
seventies: Do they fit out of sample? Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
Melvin, Michael, and Duncan Shand, 2014, When carry goes bad: The when, how, and
why of currency carry unwinds, manuscript, BlackRock, San Francisco.
Menkhoff, Lukas, Lucio Sarno, Maik Schmeling, and Andreas Schrimpf, 2012, Carry trades
and global fx volatility, Journal of Finance 67, 681-718.
Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.
Rafferty, Barry, 2012, Currency returns, skewness, and crash risk, manuscript, Duke University
Ranaldo, Angelo and Paul Soderlind, 2010, Safe haven currencies, Review of Finance 10,
385-407.
Sarno, Lucio, Paul Schneider and Christian Wagner, 2012, Properties of foreign exchange
risk premiums, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 279-310.
Sornette, Didier, 2003, Why Stock Markets Crash: Critical Events in Complex Financial
Systems. Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

37

Table 1: Summary Statistics of USD Carry Trade Returns
This table presents summary statistics on the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns for
five carry-trade strategies. The strategies are the basic equal-weighted (EQ) and spreadweighted (SPD) strategies, and their risk-rebalanced versions (labeled “-RR”) as well as a
mean-variance optimized strategy (OPT). The weights in the basic strategies are calibrated
to have one dollar at risk each month. The risk-rebalanced strategies rescale the basic weights
by IGARCH estimates of a covariance matrix to target an annualized 5% standard deviation.
The OPT strategy is a conditional mean-variance efficient strategy at the beginning of each
month, based on the IGARCH conditional covariance matrix and the assumption that the
expected future excess currency return equals the interest rate differential.
The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October 1986. The reported parameters, (mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis,
and autocorrelation coefficient) and their associated standard errors are simultaneous GMM
estimates. The Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the annualized mean and standard deviation, and
its standard error is calculated using the delta method (see Appendix B).
Carry Trade Weighting Method
EQ
EQ-RR SPD SPD-RR OPT
Ave Ret (% p.a.)
3.96
5.44
6.60
6.18
2.10
(std. err.)
(0.91) (1.13) (1.31)
(1.09)
(0.47)
Standard Deviation
5.06
5.90
7.62
6.08
2.62
(std. err.)
(0.28) (0.22) (0.41)
(0.24)
(0.17)
Sharpe Ratio
0.78
0.92
0.87
1.02
0.80
(std. err.)
(0.19) (0.20) (0.19)
(0.19)
(0.20)
Skewness
-0.49
-0.37
-0.31
-0.44
-0.89
(std. err.)
(0.21) (0.11) (0.19)
(0.14)
(0.34)
Excess Kurtosis
2.01
0.40
1.78
0.90
3.91
(std. err.)
(0.53) (0.21) (0.35)
(0.29)
(1.22)
Autocorrelation
0.08
0.16
0.02
0.09
0.06
(std. err.)
(0.07) (0.05) (0.07)
(0.05)
(0.07)
Max (% per month) 4.78
5.71
8.07
5.96
3.21
Min (% per month) -6.01
-4.90
-7.26
-5.88
-4.01
No. Positive
288
288
297
297
303
No. Negative
163
163
154
154
148

38

Table 2: Summary Statistics of the Carry Trade by Currency of Investor
This table presents summary statistics on the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns to the
equal weight strategy with each currency as the base. The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08
except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October 1986. The reported parameters,
(mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and autocorrelation coefficient) and
their associated standard errors are simultaneous GMM estimates. The Sharpe ratio is the
ratio of the annualized mean and standard deviation, and its standard error is calculated using
the delta method (see Appendix B).

CAD
Average Return
3.02
(std. err.)
(0.73)
Standard Deviation 4.26
(std. err.)
(0.21)
Sharpe Ratio
0.71
(std. err.)
(0.18)
Skewness
-0.11
(std. err.)
(0.20)
Excess Kurtosis
1.53
(std. err.)
(0.36)
Autocorrelation
0.03
(std. err.)
(0.07)
Max % per month
4.71
Min % per month
-4.24
No. Positive
283
No. Negative
168

EUR
2.69
(0.90)
5.33
(0.26)
0.50
(0.17)
0.14
(0.19)
1.43
(0.46)
0.02
(0.06)
6.61
-4.87
274
177

Carry Trade Base
JPY NOK SEK
3.40
2.67
2.33
(1.70) (0.84) (1.02)
9.58
5.09
5.97
(0.61) (0.31) (0.80)
0.36
0.52
0.39
(0.19) (0.18) (0.21)
-0.79 -0.64 -3.77
(0.38) (0.38) (0.92)
3.68
3.71
30.24
(1.64) (1.24) (7.37)
0.07
0.01
0.07
(0.08) (0.06) (0.05)
9.09
6.95
5.04
-16.02 -7.74 -16.47
268
274
285
183
177
166

39

Currency
CHF GBP
3.05
3.09
(1.21) (0.97)
7.20
5.60
(0.40) (0.37)
0.42
0.55
(0.17) (0.18)
-0.34 -0.26
(0.31) (0.45)
2.41
4.41
(0.87) (1.48)
-0.02
0.10
(0.06) (0.06)
9.85
8.53
-9.69 -8.69
258
276
193
175

NZD
3.92
(1.50)
8.47
(0.80)
0.46
(0.19)
-0.90
(0.36)
5.57
(1.58)
-0.11
(0.10)
9.28
-13.55
192
130

AUD
3.23
(1.41)
7.61
(0.63)
0.42
(0.20)
-0.97
(0.32)
4.15
(1.87)
-0.07
(0.11)
7.55
-12.28
194
128

USD
3.96
(0.88)
5.06
(0.27)
0.78
(0.19)
-0.49
(0.21)
2.01
(0.53)
0.08
(0.06)
4.78
-6.01
288
163

Table 3: Carry Trade Exposures to Basic Equity Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of five different strategies on three
equity market risk factors postulated by Fama and French (1993): the excess return on the
market portfolio; the excess return on small market capitalization stocks over big capitalization
stocks; and the excess return of high book-to-market stocks over low book-to-market stocks
as in the following. The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + εt
The Fama-French factors are from Ken French’s data library. The sample period is 1976:022013:08 (451 observations) except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October 1986.
The reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity
consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
R2

EQ
SPD EQ-RR
3.39
5.34
4.95
[3.76] [4.00] [4.27]
0.05
0.10
0.05
[2.46] [2.88] [2.25]
-0.03
0.00
-0.03
[-0.90] [0.06] [-0.89]
0.07
0.13
0.05
[2.21] [2.93] [1.62]
0.04
0.05
0.02

40

SPD-RR OPT
5.55
1.83
[4.84]
[3.72]
0.06
0.02
[2.33]
[1.88]
-0.01
0.01
[-0.18]
[0.96]
0.07
0.03
[2.27]
[1.98]
0.02
0.02

Table 4: Carry Trade Exposures to FX Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of five different strategies on the two
pure foreign exchange risk factors constructed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011):
the average return on six carry trade portfolios sorted by currency interest differential versus
the dollar, RRX ; and the excess return of the highest interest differential portfolio over the
lowest interest differential portfolio, RHM L−F X . The regression specification is
Rt = α + βRX · RRX,t + βHM L−F X · RHM L−F X,t + εt
The RX and HML-FX factor return data are from Adrien Verdelhan’s web site, and the
sample period is 1983:11-2013:08 (358 observations). The reported alphas are in annualized
percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM
are in square brackets.

α
t-stat
βRX
t-stat
βHML−FX
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.47
[1.73]
0.14
[2.27]
0.28
[8.24]
0.31

SPD EQ-RR
2.86
2.86
[2.34] [2.81]
0.31
0.01
[3.33] [0.24]
0.39
0.34
[7.04] [8.85]
0.34
0.29

41

SPD-RR
3.60
[3.44]
0.11
[1.56]
0.32
[6.57]
0.28

OPT
1.29
[2.87]
0.01
[0.45]
0.09
[6.22]
0.13

Table 5: Carry Trade Exposures to Bond Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of five different strategies on the
excess return on the U.S. equity market and two USD bond market risk factors: the excess
return on the 10-year Treasury bond, R10y ; and the excess return of the 10-year bond over the
two-year Treasury note, R10y−2y . The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + β10y · R10y,t + β10y−2y · (R10y,t −R2y,t ) + εt
The reported alphas are in annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets. The sample period is
1976:01-2013:08 (451 observations).

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
R2

EQ
4.19
[4.51]
0.04
[1.81]
-0.39
[-2.97]
0.46
[2.46]
0.05

SPD
6.71
[4.97]
0.08
[2.36]
-0.51
[-2.72]
0.59
[2.21]
0.05

EQ-RR
5.74
[5.03]
0.04
[1.92]
-0.44
[-4.25]
0.50
[3.26]
0.05

42

SPD-RR OPT
6.43
2.15
[5.74]
[4.65]
0.04
0.02
[2.01]
[1.74]
-0.41
-0.12
[-3.74]
[-2.97]
0.47
0.14
[2.93]
[2.30]
0.04
0.02

43

d=1

Pt+1,d
ln
Pt+1,d−1

2 
30
N days


− V IXt2

EQ
EQ-RR
α
3.11
4.15
t-stat [2.76]
[2.50]
βMKT
0.09
0.16
t-stat [3.03]
[3.66]
βSMB
-0.04
-0.01
t-stat [-0.92] [-0.15]
βHML
0.06
0.14
t-stat [1.75]
[2.77]
βVS
t-stat
R2
0.07
0.10

SPD-RR
4.54
[3.34]
0.07
[2.66]
-0.02
[-0.36]
0.07
[1.99]

0.04

SPD
4.51
[3.58]
0.06
[2.42]
-0.04
[-1.00]
0.04
[1.25]

0.04

0.04

OPT
1.38
[2.65]
0.03
[2.58]
0.01
[1.01]
0.03
[2.48]

EQ
EQ-RR SPD SPD-RR OPT
2.87
3.76
4.22
4.20
1.32
[2.56]
[2.32]
[3.41]
[3.14]
[2.40]
0.08
0.15
0.05
0.06
0.02
[2.42]
[2.92]
[1.81]
[1.96]
[1.98]
-0.04
-0.01
-0.04
-0.02
0.01
[-0.97] [-0.22] [-1.08]
[-0.45]
[0.94]
0.06
0.13
0.04
0.06
0.03
[1.60]
[2.52]
[1.11]
[1.81]
[2.37]
-0.02
-0.03
-0.02
-0.03
-0.01
[-0.94] [-0.90] [-1.24]
[-1.40]
[-0.41]
0.07
0.11
0.04
0.05
0.04

where N days represents the number of trading days in a month and Pt+1,d is the value of the S&P 500 index on day d of month t + 1.
Data for V IX are obtained from the web site of the CBOE. For explanations of equity risk factors, pleaser refer to Table 3.
The sample period is 1990:02-2013:08 (283 observations). The reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and
heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.

RV S,t+1 =

X

N days 

This table includes the return on a variance swap as a risk factor. This return is calculated as

Table 6: Carry Trades Exposures to Equity and Volatility Risks

44

d=1

Pt+1,d
ln
Pt+1,d−1

2 
30
N days


− V IXt2

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
βVS
t-stat
R2
0.04

0.08

0.02

EQ
EQ-RR SPD
2.83
3.77
4.75
[2.19]
[2.08]
[3.69]
0.07
0.15
0.05
[2.38]
[3.05]
[1.73]
0.31
0.63
-0.07
[1.05]
[1.57] [-0.26]
-0.35
-0.73
0.08
[-0.97] [-1.48] [0.24]

0.02

0.02

SPD-RR OPT
4.71
1.60
[3.43]
[2.98]
0.06
0.02
[2.11]
[2.26]
0.08
-0.02
[0.28]
[-0.15]
-0.10
0.01
[-0.29]
[0.06]

EQ
EQ-RR
2.32
2.79
[1.72]
[1.55]
0.06
0.12
[1.85]
[2.32]
0.39
0.78
[1.26]
[1.85]
-0.44
-0.91
[-1.17] [-1.74]
-0.03
-0.06
[-1.39] [-1.69]
0.05
0.09

SPD SPD-RR OPT
4.38
4.13
1.45
[3.40]
[3.06]
[2.61]
0.04
0.04
0.02
[1.27]
[1.43]
[1.59]
-0.01
0.16
0.01
[-0.05]
[0.58]
[0.04]
0.01
-0.20
-0.02
[0.03]
[-0.59]
[-0.13]
-0.02
-0.04
-0.01
[-1.25]
[-1.76]
[-0.70]
0.02
0.03
0.02

where N days represents the number of trading days in a month and Pt+1,d is the value of the S&P 500 index on day d of month t + 1.
Data for V IX are obtained from the web site of the CBOE. For explanations of bond risk factors, pleaser refer to Table 5.
The sample period is 1990:02-2013:08 (283 observations). The reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and
heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.

RV S,t+1 =

X

N days 

This table includes the return on a variance swap as a risk factor. This return is calculated as

Table 7: Carry Trades Exposures to Bond and Volatility Risks

45

Panel A: 1976/02-2013/08
EQ
Ave Ret (% p.a.)
3.96
(std. err.)
(0.91)
Standard Deviation
5.06
(std. err.)
(0.28)
Sharpe Ratio
0.78
(std. err.)
(0.19)
Skewness
-0.49
(std. err.)
(0.21)
Excess Kurtosis
2.01
(std. err.)
(0.53)
Autocorrelation
0.08
(std. err.)
(0.07)
Max (% per month) 4.78
Min (% per month) -6.01
No. Positive
288
No. Negative
163
EQ0 EQ-minus
1.61
2.35
(0.58)
(0.66)
3.28
3.85
(0.16)
(0.28)
0.49
0.61
(0.19)
(0.18)
-0.47
-0.65
(0.19)
(0.44)
1.34
4.84
(0.51)
(2.00)
0.05
0.05
(0.06)
(0.06)
3.28
3.83
-3.92
-6.69
275
264
176
187

EQ-USD
5.54
(1.37)
8.18
(0.38)
0.68
(0.18)
-0.11
(0.17)
0.86
(0.31)
0.00
(0.06)
9.03
-8.27
273
178

EQ
3.83
(1.17)
5.43
(0.36)
0.70
(0.24)
-0.60
(0.22)
1.68
(0.57)
0.05
(0.08)
4.60
-6.01
182
101

Panel B: 1990/2-2013/8
EQ0 EQ-minus EQ-USD
1.72
2.11
5.21
(0.72)
(0.92)
(1.60)
3.30
4.31
7.89
(0.21)
(0.35)
(0.47)
0.52
0.49
0.66
(0.23)
(0.23)
(0.21)
-0.47
-0.76
-0.05
(0.28)
(0.45)
(0.22)
1.66
3.87
1.04
(0.71)
(1.86)
(0.38)
0.05
0.05
-0.03
(0.07)
(0.06)
(0.07)
3.28
3.80
9.03
-3.92
-6.69
-7.22
179
164
168
104
119
115

This table presents summary statistics on the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns for four carry-trade strategies. The strategies
are the basic equal-weighted (EQ) and dollar-neutral (EQ0) strategies, as well as the strategy (EQ-minus) which is the difference
between EQ and EQ0. The fourth portfolio is pure dollar carry (EQ-USD). The weights in the strategies are discussed in the main
text.
The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October 1986. The reported parameters, (mean,
standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and autocorrelation coefficient) and their associated standard errors are simultaneous
GMM estimates. The Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the annualized mean and standard deviation, and its standard error is calculated
using the delta method (see Appendix B.) Panel A reports the results for the full sample, while Panel B reports results for the later
half of the sample 1990:02-2013:08 when variance swap data become available.

Table 8: Summary Statistics of Dollar-Neutral and Pure-Dollar Trades

Table 9: Dollar Neutral and Pure Dollar Carry Trades Exposures to Basic Equity Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of four different strategies on three
equity market risk factors postulated by Fama and French (1993): the excess return on the
market portfolio; the excess return on small market capitalization stocks over big capitalization
stocks; and the excess return of high book-to-market stocks over low book-to-market stocks
as in the following. The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + εt
The Fama-French factors are from Ken French’s data library. The sample period is 1976:022013:08 (451 observations). The reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
R2

EQ
EQ0 EQ-minus
3.39
1.03
2.36
[3.76] [1.54]
[3.60]
0.05
0.08
-0.02
[2.46] [5.29]
[-1.24]
-0.03
0.02
-0.05
[-0.90] [1.00]
[-1.84]
0.07
0.05
0.02
[2.21] [2.83]
[0.84]
0.04
0.10
0.04

46

EQ-USD
5.41
[3.70]
0.01
[0.21]
-0.05
[-1.04]
0.06
[1.08]
0.01

Table 10: Dollar Neutral and Pure Dollar Carry Trades Exposures to Basic Bond Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of four different strategies on the
excess return on the U.S. equity market and two USD bond market risk factors: the excess
return on the 10-year Treasury bond, R10y ; and the excess return of the 10-year bond over the
two-year Treasury note, R10y−2y . The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + β10y · R10y,t + β10y−2y · (R10y,t −R2y,t ) + εt
The reported alphas are in annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets. The sample period is
1976:01-2013:08 (451 observations). Data for AUD and the NZD start in October 1986.

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
R2

EQ
4.19
[4.51]
0.04
[1.81]
-0.39
[-2.97]
0.46
[2.46]
0.05

EQ0
1.50
[2.77]
0.06
[5.48]
-0.25
[-4.42]
0.29
[3.52]
0.12

EQ-minus
2.69
[3.88]
-0.03
[-1.60]
-0.14
[-1.16]
0.17
[1.02]
0.02

EQ-USD
5.82
[4.01]
-0.01
[-0.35]
-0.22
[-0.92]
0.32
[0.93]
0.01

Table 11: Dollar Neutral and Pure Dollar Carry Trades Exposures to FX Risks
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of five different strategies on the two
pure foreign exchange risk factors constructed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011]:
the average return on six carry trade portfolios sorted by currency interest differential versus
the dollar, RRX ; and the excess return of the highest interest differential portfolio over the
lowest interest differential portfolio, RHM L−F X . The regression specification is
Rt = α + βRX · RRX,t + βHM L−F X · RHM L−F X,t + εt
The RRX and RHM L−F X factor return data are from Adrien Verdelhan’s web site, and the
sample period is 1983:11-2013:08 (358 observations). The reported alphas are in annualized
percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM
are in square brackets.
α
t-stat
βRX
t-stat
βHML−FX
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.47
[1.73]
0.14
[2.27]
0.28
[8.24]
0.31

EQ0 EQ-minus
-0.03
1.49
[-0.06]
[1.86]
-0.02
0.15
[-0.50]
[2.80]
0.24
0.04
[11.03]
[1.58]
0.41
0.09
47

EQ-USD
5.18
[3.40]
0.52
[4.31]
0.00
[-0.01]
0.20

Table 12: All Risk Factors
This table presents regressions of the EQ-USD returns on the Fama-French three factors, two
pure foreign exchange risk factors constructed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011),
and two USD bond market risk factors. The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + β10y · R10y,t + β10y−2y · (R10y,t −R2y,t )
+ βRX · RRX,t + βHM L−F X · RHM L−F X,t + βV S RV S,t + εt
The sample period is 1990:02-2013:08 (283 observations). The reported alphas are in annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from
GMM are in square brackets.
EQ-USD
4.52
[2.79]
0.02
[0.62]
-0.02
[-0.36]
0.06
[1.15]
0.43
[1.47]
-0.57
[-1.53]
0.44
[3.14]
0.14
[2.03]
0.13
[2.67]
0.19

α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
βRX
t-stat
βHML−FX
t-stat
βvs
t-stat
R2

48

Table 13: Carry Trade Exposures to Downside Market Risk
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of six different strategies on the
market return and the downside market return defined by Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014).
The market return Rm,t is the excess return on the market, the value-weight excess return of
all CRSP firms incorporated in the US and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ;
the

−
downside market return Rm,t
= Rm,t × I − where I − = I Rm,t < Rm,t − std (Rm,t ) is the
indicator function equal to 1 when the market return is one standard deviation below the
average market return and zero elsewhere. The regression specification is
−
Rt = α1 + α2 I − + β1 · Rm,t + β2 · Rm,t
+ εt
Cov (Rm,t , Rt |I − =1)
m,t , Rt )
in which β2 = β − − β1 and β − = V ar(Rm,t |I − =1) . We define β = Cov(R
.
V ar(Rm,t )
The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 (451 observations). Excess returns are annualized. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.
Panel A:
EQ
SPD EQ-RR SPD-RR OPT EQ-USD
α
3.72
6.08
5.17
5.91
1.99
5.63
t-stat
[4.01] [4.55] [4.49]
[5.28]
[4.16]
[4.03]
β
0.03
0.07
0.04
0.04
0.02
-0.01
t-stat
[1.55] [2.13] [1.59]
[1.71]
[1.51]
[-0.36]
2
R
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00

Panel B:
α
t-stat
α−
t-stat
β1
t-stat
β2
t-stat
R2

EQ
SPD EQ-RR
4.08
6.19
5.94
[3.86] [4.13] [4.50]
-1.26
7.02
-1.74
[-0.20] [0.91] [-0.19]
0.02
0.06
0.01
[0.87] [1.51] [0.57]
0.01
0.09
0.03
[0.15] [0.98] [0.28]
0.01
0.02
0.01

Panel C:
β− − β

EQ
0.00

λ− = 16.9
λ− = 26.2

0.00
0.00

SPD-RR
6.38
[4.82]
7.67
[1.12]
0.02
[0.73]
0.12
[1.43]
0.02

OPT EQ-USD
2.22
4.86
[4.69]
[3.13]
-0.73
-9.36
[-0.21]
[-0.89]
0.01
0.02
[0.66]
[0.45]
0.01
-0.16
[0.17]
[-1.31]
0.01
0.01

SPD EQ-RR SPD-RR OPT EQ-USD
0.08
0.01
0.10
0.00
-0.13
Downside Risk Premium(β − − β) × λ−
1.31
0.16
1.63
0.01
-2.12
2.02
0.25
2.53
0.02
-3.28

49

Table 14: Carry Trade Exposures to Downside Market Risk- LRV Six Portfolios
This table presents regressions of Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011) six interest rate
sorted portfolios returns on the market return and the downside market return defined by
Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014). The market return Rm,t is the excess return on the
market, the value-weight excess return of all CRSP firms incorporated in the US and listed
−
on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ; the downside market return Rm,t
= Rm,t × I − where

−
I = I Rm,t < Rm,t − std (Rm,t ) is the indicator function equal to 1 when the market return
is one standard deviation below the average market return and zero elsewhere. The regression
specification is
−
Rt = α1 + α2 I − + β1 · Rm,t + β2 · Rm,t
+ εt
Cov (Rm,t , Rt |I − =1)
m,t , Rt )
.
in which β2 = β − − β1 and β − = V ar(Rm,t |I − =1) . We define β = Cov(R
V ar(Rm,t )
The sample period is 1983:11-2013:08 (358 observations). Excess returns are annualized. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.
Panel A:
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P6-P1
α
-1.59
-0.32
0.99
2.97
3.25
4.88
6.46
t-stat
[-1.00] [-0.22] [0.66] [1.79] [1.75] [2.39] [3.67]
β
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.07
0.12
0.20
0.18
t-stat
[0.42] [1.09] [1.49] [1.73] [2.45] [4.39] [5.62]
2
R
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.10
0.10

Panel B:
α
t-stat
α−
t-stat
β1
t-stat
β2
t-stat
R2

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P6-P1
-2.83
-0.44
0.72
2.50
3.49
4.09
6.92
[-1.55] [-0.26] [0.44] [1.47] [1.68] [1.87] [3.50]
6.16
-0.87
3.86
-4.52
-7.78 10.70 4.55
[0.49] [-0.06] [0.28] [-0.44] [-0.55] [0.73] [0.38]
0.05
0.04
0.06
0.09
0.11
0.21
0.17
[1.21] [1.16] [1.43] [2.09] [2.15] [4.34] [3.76]
-0.01
-0.02
0.02
-0.08
-0.07
0.06
0.08
[-0.08] [-0.09] [0.14] [-0.55] [-0.35] [0.34] [0.56]
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.10

Panel C:
β− − β

P1
0.02

λ− = 16.9
λ− = 26.2

0.33
0.51

P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P6-P1
-0.01
0.03
-0.06
-0.07
0.08
0.06
−
−
Downside Risk Premium(β − β) × λ
-0.21
0.50
-1.04
-1.19
1.37
1.04
-0.33
0.78
-1.61
-1.83
2.12
1.61

50

Table 15: Carry Trade Exposures to Downside Market Risk-LMW Five Portfolios
This table presents regressions of Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014) five interest rate sorted
portfolios returns on the market return and the downside market return. The market return
Rm,t is the excess return on the market, the value-weight excess return of all CRSP firms
incorporated in the US and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ;
the downside market

−
return Rm,t
= Rm,t × I − where I − = I Rm,t < Rm,t − std (Rm,t ) is the indicator function
equal to 1 when the market return is one standard deviation below the average market return
and zero elsewhere. The regression specification is
−
+ εt
Rt = α1 + α2 I − + β1 · Rm,t + β2 · Rm,t
Cov (Rm,t , Rt |I − =1)
m,t , Rt )
in which β2 = β − − β1 and β − = V ar(Rm,t |I − =1) . We define β = Cov(R
. The sample
V ar(Rm,t )
period is 1983:11-2010:03 (317 observations). Excess returns are annualized. Autocorrelation
and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.

Panel A:
α
t-stat
β
t-stat
R2
NOBS

P1
-0.35
[-0.21]
-0.03
[-0.87]
0.00
317

Panel B:
α
t-stat
α−
t-stat
β1
t-stat
β2
t-stat
R2
NOBS

P1
P2
-1.34
1.22
[-0.72] [0.54]
5.64
-4.62
[0.44] [-0.33]
0.00
0.00
[-0.12] [0.07]
-0.01
0.00
[-0.03] [0.01]
0.01
0.00
317
317

Panel C:
β− − β
λ− = 16.9
λ− = 26.2

P2
0.45
[0.22]
0.02
[0.60]
0.00
317

P3
2.64
[1.29]
0.03
[0.59]
0.00
317

P4
3.48
[1.80]
0.06
[1.44]
0.01
317

P5
P5-P1
4.17
4.52
[1.75] [2.68]
0.12
0.15
[1.90] [3.85]
0.04
0.10
317
317

P3
P4
P5
P5-P1
2.31
3.66
5.36
6.70
[1.03] [1.71] [2.36] [4.19]
1.39 10.12 8.07
2.44
[0.09] [0.79] [0.41] [0.23]
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.08
[0.72] [0.97] [1.39] [2.00]
-0.01
0.12
0.16
0.17
[-0.03] [0.81] [0.58] [1.14]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.12
317
317
317
317

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P5-P1
0.02
-0.02
0.00
0.11
0.12
0.10
Downside Risk Premium(β − − β) × λ−
0.36
-0.33
0.04
1.78
2.03
1.66
0.56
-0.50
0.06
2.75
3.13
2.57

51

Table 16: Carry Trade Exposures to Downside Risk Index
Panel A of this table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of five different strategies,
the pure dollar carry trade, the non-dollar and dollar components of equally weighted carry
trade on downside risk index (DRI) reported by Jurek and Stafford (2013). The regression
specification is
Rt = α + βDRI · RDRI,t + εt
.
Panel B augments the DRI with Fama-French three factors. The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + βDRI · RDRI,t + εt
.
The sample period is 1990:01-2013:07 (283 observations). Jurek provides us with the DRI
return from 1990:01 to 2012:06. We use Option Metrics data to construct the DRI returns
from 2012:07 to 2013:07 using the methodology reported in Jurek and Stafford (2013). The
reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity
consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.
Panel A:
α
t-stat
βDRI
t-stat
R2

EQ
2.59
[2.05]
0.14
[2.45]
0.03

SPD
3.22
[1.74]
0.28
[2.90]
0.06

EQ-RR
4.18
[2.99]
0.10
[1.89]
0.02

SPD-RR
4.07
[2.67]
0.13
[2.36]
0.03

OPT
1.26
[2.17]
0.05
[2.26]
0.02

Panel B:
α
t-stat
βDRI
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
R2

EQ
2.90
[2.31]
0.05
[0.64]
0.07
[1.63]
-0.04
[-0.90]
0.06
[1.68]
0.06

SPD
3.70
[1.98]
0.09
[0.79]
0.13
[2.07]
-0.01
[-0.13]
0.13
[2.65]
0.10

EQ-RR
4.33
[3.04]
0.05
[0.73]
0.04
[1.04]
-0.04
[-0.99]
0.04
[1.16]
0.03

SPD-RR
4.09
[2.60]
0.08
[1.08]
0.04
[1.01]
-0.01
[-0.33]
0.06
[1.89]
0.04

OPT EQ-USD EQ0 EQ-minus
1.22
6.07
0.45
2.45
[2.08]
[3.05]
[0.51]
[2.33]
0.03
-0.19
0.09
-0.04
[0.85]
[-1.33]
[1.49]
[-0.53]
0.02
0.11
0.05
0.01
[0.99]
[1.86]
[2.54]
[0.41]
0.01
-0.04
0.01
-0.05
[1.05]
[-0.71]
[0.74]
[-1.48]
0.03
0.07
0.03
0.03
[2.41]
[1.18]
[1.85]
[0.96]
0.04
0.02
0.17
0.03

52

EQ-USD EQ0 EQ-minus
5.37
0.10
2.49
[2.83]
[0.13]
[2.39]
-0.01
0.18
-0.04
[-0.11]
[5.14]
[-0.76]
0.00
0.14
0.00

Table 17: Hedged Carry Trade Performance
This table presents summary statistics for the currency-hedged carry trades for the EQ, SPD,
EQ-USD strategies. The currency return data are monthly from 2000:10-2013:08. The sample
includes G10 currencies other than Swedish Krona, for which we don’t have option data. The
reported parameters (mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and autocorrelation
coefficient) and their associated standard errors are simultaneous GMM estimates. The Sharpe
ratio is the ratio of the annualized mean and standard deviation, and its standard error is
calculated using the delta method (see Appendix B.) The hedging strategy is described in
Section 2.3.
Unhedged
Ave Ret (% p.a.)
(std. err.)
Standard Dev,
(std. err.)
Sharpe Ratio
(std. err.)
Skewness
(std. err.)
Excess Kurtosis
(std. err.)
Autocorrelation
(std. err.)
Max (%)
Min (%)
No. Positive
No. Negative

Hedged

EQ

SPD

EQ-USD

EQ-10∆

EQ-25∆

SPD-10∆

SPD-25∆

USD-10∆

USD-25∆

2.22
(1.43)
4.75
(0.38)
0.47
(0.31)
-0.32
(0.20)
0.71
(0.43)
0.01
(0.12)
4.04
-4.12
93
62

5.55
(2.50)
8.39
(0.79)
0.66
(0.31)
-0.23
(0.28)
1.88
(0.60)
0.02
(0.11)
8.01
-7.44
99
56

4.58
(2.27)
8.59
(0.66)
0.20
(0.26)
0.84
(0.42)
-0.11
(0.08)
0.53
(0.26)
0.09
-0.07
85
70

1.84
(1.22)
4.32
(0.32)
0.42
(0.29)
0.02
(0.19)
0.36
(0.33)
-0.07
(0.10)
3.75
-2.93
94
61

1.35
(1.05)
3.96
(0.31)
0.34
(0.26)
0.27
(0.27)
0.65
(0.40)
-0.13
(0.10)
3.48
-3.52
86
69

5.21
(2.19)
7.53
(0.69)
0.69
(0.29)
0.28
(0.25)
1.40
(0.57)
-0.02
(0.10)
7.67
-6.30
97
58

4.26
(1.87)
6.65
(0.62)
0.64
(0.27)
0.70
(0.26)
1.54
(0.60)
-0.07
(0.09)
7.01
-4.75
91
64

3.97
(2.07)
7.95
(0.61)
0.54
(0.23)
0.65
(0.53)
-0.13
(0.09)
0.50
(0.25)
0.09
-0.05
84
71

3.13
(1.81)
7.07
(0.61)
0.93
(0.23)
1.22
(0.87)
-0.16
(0.10)
0.44
(0.24)
0.08
-0.04
76
79

53

Table 18: Hedged Carry Trades Exposures to Equity Risks
This table presents regressions of the hedged carry trade returns of EQ, SPD, and EQ-USD
strategies on three equity market risk factors postulated by Fama and French (1993). The
regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + εt .
The second specification includes the return on a variance swap.
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + βHM L · RHM L,t + βSM B · RSM B,t + βV S V St + εt .
The Fama-French factors are from Ken French’s data library. The sample period is 2000:102013:08 (155 observations) and includes G10 currencies other than Swedish Krona, for which
we don’t have option data. Results for unhedged returns over the same sample are reported for
the ease of comparison. The reported alphas are annualized percentage terms. Autocorrelation
and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.
Panel A:
α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.80
[1.55]
0.13
[5.26]
0.00
[-0.00]
0.03
[1.17]
0.20

SPD
4.23
[2.13]
0.26
[4.99]
-0.02
[-0.35]
0.14
[3.14]
0.26

EQ-USD
3.88
[1.72]
0.07
[1.05]
0.04
[0.57]
0.08
[1.18]
0.03

EQ-10∆
1.45
[1.43]
0.11
[5.00]
0.01
[0.15]
0.03
[1.11]
0.18

EQ-25∆
1.01
[1.10]
0.09
[3.71]
0.01
[0.25]
0.03
[1.17]
0.13

SPD-10∆
3.95
[2.23]
0.23
[4.92]
-0.01
[-0.12]
0.13
[3.19]
0.26

SPD-25∆
3.18
[2.04]
0.18
[4.20]
0.00
[0.01]
0.11
[3.27]
0.22

USD-10∆
3.29
[1.60]
0.07
[1.00]
0.04
[0.57]
0.08
[1.27]
0.03

USD-25∆
2.54
[1.41]
0.05
[0.81]
0.04
[0.59]
0.07
[1.32]
0.03

Panel B:
α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
βSMB
t-stat
βHML
t-stat
βVS
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.58
[1.42]
0.12
[3.74]
-0.01
[-0.12]
0.03
[0.99]
-0.03
[-1.30]
0.21

SPD
4.07
[2.07]
0.25
[3.96]
-0.03
[-0.41]
0.14
[3.01]
-0.02
[-0.45]
0.26

EQ-USD
4.76
[2.10]
0.14
[2.20]
0.06
[0.80]
0.10
[1.56]
0.11
[2.10]
0.07

EQ-10∆
1.43
[1.42]
0.11
[3.95]
0.01
[0.13]
0.03
[1.08]
0.00
[-0.11]
0.18

EQ-25∆
1.15
[1.24]
0.10
[3.72]
0.01
[0.34]
0.03
[1.32]
0.02
[0.74]
0.14

SPD-10∆
3.92
[2.22]
0.22
[4.08]
-0.01
[-0.14]
0.13
[3.13]
0.00
[-0.09]
0.26

SPD-25∆
3.30
[2.08]
0.19
[3.85]
0.00
[0.07]
0.12
[3.39]
0.01
[0.37]
0.22

USD-10∆
4.17
[2.02]
0.13
[2.24]
0.06
[0.82]
0.10
[1.69]
0.11
[2.18]
0.08

USD-25∆
3.39
[1.89]
0.11
[2.21]
0.06
[0.88]
0.09
[1.80]
0.10
[2.29]
0.08

54

Table 19: Hedged Carry Trades Exposures to Bond Risks
This table presents regressions of the hedged carry trade returns of EQ, SPD, and EQ-USD
strategies on on the excess return on the U.S. equity market and two USD bond market risk
factors: the excess return on the 10-year Treasury bond; and the excess return of the 10-year
bond over the two-year Treasury note. The regression specification is
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + β10y · R10y,t + β10y−2y · (R10y,t −R2y,t ) + εt
The second specification includes the return on a variance swap.
Rt = α + βM KT · Rm,t + β10y · R10y,t + β10y−2y · (R10y,t −R2y,t ) + βV S V St + εt .
The sample period is 2000:10-2013:08 (155 observations) and includes G10 currencies other
than Swedish Krona, for which we don’t have option data. Results for unhedged returns over
the same sample are reported for the ease of comparison. The reported alphas are annualized
percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM
are in square brackets.
Panel A:
α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.51
[1.22]
0.14
[4.85]
0.16
[0.56]
-0.10
[-0.30]
0.21

SPD
3.00
[1.44]
0.30
[5.14]
0.99
[2.12]
-0.96
[-1.76]
0.27

EQ-USD
2.13
[0.95]
0.13
[1.89]
1.47
[2.36]
-1.61
[-2.11]
0.08

EQ-10∆
1.09
[1.03]
0.13
[4.71]
0.24
[0.90]
-0.21
[-0.66]
0.19

EQ-25∆
0.60
[0.66]
0.10
[4.07]
0.36
[1.47]
-0.38
[-1.24]
0.14

SPD-10∆
2.80
[1.57]
0.27
[5.13]
0.96
[2.23]
-0.94
[-1.87]
0.27

SPD-25∆
2.11
[1.42]
0.22
[4.74]
0.99
[2.66]
-1.04
[-2.29]
0.24

USD-10∆
1.67
[0.82]
0.12
[1.84]
1.39
[2.39]
-1.52
[-2.12]
0.08

USD-25∆
1.15
[0.66]
0.09
[1.64]
1.27
[2.49]
-1.43
[-2.20]
0.08

Panel B:
α
t-stat
βMKT
t-stat
β10y
t-stat
β10y−2y
t-stat
βV S
t-stat
R2

EQ
1.15
[0.97]
0.13
[3.71]
0.24
[0.83]
-0.21
[-0.60]
-0.03
[-1.45]
0.22

SPD
2.46
[1.27]
0.27
[3.92]
1.11
[2.39]
-1.11
[-2.04]
-0.04
[-0.97]
0.27

EQ-USD
3.14
[1.39]
0.18
[2.55]
1.25
[2.29]
-1.32
[-2.04]
0.08
[1.53]
0.10

EQ-10∆
1.01
[0.97]
0.12
[4.01]
0.26
[0.95]
-0.23
[-0.71]
-0.01
[-0.27]
0.19

EQ-25∆
0.71
[0.79]
0.11
[3.86]
0.33
[1.39]
-0.34
[-1.17]
0.01
[0.40]
0.14

SPD-10∆
2.48
[1.49]
0.25
[4.01]
1.03
[2.39]
-1.03
[-2.03]
-0.02
[-0.61]
0.27

SPD-25∆
1.98
[1.39]
0.21
[3.82]
1.02
[2.75]
-1.08
[-2.39]
-0.01
[-0.26]
0.24

USD-10∆
2.68
[1.32]
0.17
[2.56]
1.17
[2.36]
-1.23
[-2.10]
0.08
[1.59]
0.10

USD-25∆
2.14
[1.23]
0.14
[2.51]
1.05
[2.51]
-1.15
[-2.26]
0.08
[1.70]
0.10

55

Table 20: Hedged Carry Trades Exposures to Downside Risk Index
This table presents regressions of the hedged carry trade returns of EQ, SPD, and EQ-USD
strategies on downside risk index (DRI) reported by Jurek and Stafford (2013). The regression
specification is
Rt = α + βDRI · RDRI,t + εt
The sample period is 2000:10-2013:08 (155 observations) and includes G10 currencies other
than Swedish Krona, for which we don’t have option data. Results for unhedged returns over
the same sample are reported for the ease of comparison. The reported alphas are annualized
percentage terms. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM
are in square brackets.

α
t-stat
βDRI
t-stat
R2

EQ
0.12
[0.10]
0.25
[4.97]
0.16

SPD
1.73
[0.75]
0.45
[3.40]
0.16

EQ-USD
4.58
[1.66]
0.03
[0.20]
0.00

EQ-10∆
0.31
[0.28]
0.19
[3.54]
0.11

EQ-25∆
0.51
[0.48]
0.11
[1.94]
0.05

56

SPD-10∆
2.15
[1.09]
0.37
[3.17]
0.14

SPD-25∆
2.18
[1.28]
0.26
[2.41]
0.09

USD-10∆
4.21
[1.66]
0.01
[0.04]
0.00

USD-25∆
3.72
[1.65]
-0.03
[-0.25]
0.00

57

Panel B: Monthly Carry Trade Returns
EQ
EQ-RR SPD
SPD-RR
3.96
5.44
6.60
6.18
(0.91) (1.13) (1.31)
(1.09)
5.06
5.90
7.62
6.08
(0.28) (0.22) (0.41)
(0.24)
0.78
0.92
0.87
1.02
(0.19) (0.20) (0.19)
(0.19)
-0.49
-0.37
-0.31
-0.44
(0.21) (0.11) (0.19)
(0.14)
2.01
0.40
1.78
0.90
(0.53) (0.21) (0.35)
(0.29)
0.08
0.16
0.02
0.09
(0.07) (0.05) (0.07)
(0.05)
4.78
5.71
8.07
5.96
-6.01
-4.90
-7.26
-5.88
288
288
297
297
163
163
154
154

Panel C: Normalized Ratios of Higher Central Moments
EQ EQ-RR SPD
SPD-RR
Ave Ret (% p.a.)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Standard Deviation 1.0
0.9
1.0
0.9
Sharpe Ratio
1.0
1.1
1.0
1.1
Skewness
7.1
1.7
2.4
1.3
Kurtosis
5.7
0.7
3.7
0.8

Panel A: Daily Carry Trade Returns
EQ
EQ-RR SPD SPD-RR
Ave Ret (% p.a.) 3.92
5.38
6.53
6.13
(std. err.)
(0.82) (0.91) (1.18)
(0.93)
Standard Dev.
5.06
5.54
7.25
5.65
(std. err.)
(0.10) (0.11) (0.15)
(0.15)
Sharpe Ratio
0.77
0.97
0.90
1.08
(std. err.)
(0.17) (0.17) (0.17)
(0.18)
Skewness
-0.32
-1.01
-0.59
-1.62
(std. err.)
(0.17) (0.43) (0.33)
(0.71)
Excess Kurt.
7.46
11.90
10.25
24.43
(std. err.)
(1.16) (6.61) (4.05) (12.02)
Autocorr.
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.02
(std. err.)
(0.02) (0.01) (0.01)
(0.01)
Max (%)
3.12
2.13
4.52
2.58
Min (% )
-2.78
-5.64
-6.57
-6.61
No. Positive
5230
5230
5223
5223
No. Negative
4342
4342
4349
4349

Panels A and B present summary statistics on the daily zero-investment portfolio returns for five carry-trade strategies. The sample
period is 1976:02-2013:08. The reported parameters, (mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and autocorrelation
coefficient) and their associated standard errors are simultaneous GMM estimates. The Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the annualized
mean and standard deviation, and its standard error is calculated using the delta method (see Appendix B).
Panel C takes the ratios of the monthly central moments to the daily central moments and normalize these ratios by the expected
ratios if daily returns were I.I.D. Therefore, if daily returns are indeed I.I.D., the normalized ratios should be 1.

Table 21: Summary Statistics of Daily Carry Trade Returns

58

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

12.0%
10.8%
9.6%
7.8%
5.8%
5.2%
5.2%
4.9%
4.8%
4.7%
4.7%
4.5%
4.4%
3.8%
3.8%
3.8%
3.7%
3.5%
3.2%
3.1%

12.6%
1.6%
0.3%
1.1%
21.9%
34.1%
17.8%
20.4%
10.5%
6.9%
4.3%
4.9%
3.0%
25.8%
20.3%
12.6%
12.5%
16.8%
52.5%
54.0%

13.0%
1.8%
0.5%
1.4%
24.0%
36.0%
19.6%
22.3%
12.0%
8.1%
4.9%
5.4%
3.3%
25.9%
20.6%
12.8%
12.9%
16.3%
49.9%
50.2%

94
107
98
112
37
22
49
32
78
136
59
62
23
19
6
13
86
52
28
23

21.5%
13.2%
9.5%
9.4%
9.4%
9.0%
8.9%
8.4%
8.2%
8.2%
6.4%
6.3%
6.1%
5.8%
5.8%
5.5%
5.5%
4.8%
4.7%
4.5%

1.7%
7.4%
39.4%
16.4%
6.1%
3.4%
1.2%
1.0%
0.5%
0.1%
17.5%
15.3%
12.8%
17.5%
11.0%
15.5%
8.9%
63.7%
56.7%
70.9%

2.3%
9.8%
46.0%
21.8%
8.9%
5.1%
1.9%
2.0%
0.9%
0.2%
20.4%
17.5%
14.4%
17.9%
11.5%
14.7%
8.5%
55.5%
47.5%
61.3%

163
60
134
96
51
62
38
305
67
65
23
80
113
47
70
111
18
69
33
17

14.1%
10.5%
9.0%
8.6%
7.8%
6.6%
6.5%
5.6%
5.5%
5.5%
5.5%
5.5%
5.1%
4.6%
4.6%
4.0%
3.8%
3.7%
3.6%
3.5%

4.2%
2.4%
1.5%
0.3%
0.3%
1.7%
0.5%
5.6%
2.2%
0.7%
0.2%
0.1%
0.2%
2.2%
1.0%
17.0%
28.9%
26.7%
34.5%
35.4%

6.4%
4.9%
3.6%
0.9%
1.1%
5.3%
2.6%
13.5%
6.9%
2.9%
1.1%
0.4%
0.8%
4.6%
2.2%
21.8%
33.0%
29.8%
35.2%
35.1%

353
340
69
305
68
53
98
60
37
6
128
17
67
112
32
85
17
23
33
23

10.2%
9.7%
8.4%
7.6%
7.2%
7.1%
6.7%
6.4%
5.8%
5.6%
5.6%
5.4%
5.3%
5.2%
5.0%
4.4%
4.2%
4.0%
3.7%
3.6%

25.8%
5.2%
3.4%
2.8%
1.5%
0.3%
0.2%
0.2%
0.6%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
1.4%
2.8%
4.6%
27.2%
28.7%

40.3%
14.3%
13.4%
13.4%
8.8%
3.2%
2.6%
2.1%
3.8%
2.5%
1.0%
0.7%
0.4%
0.2%
0.2%
2.0%
3.4%
4.9%
19.9%
20.2%

69
340
80
68
62
114
96
18
6
2
220
38
113
56
17
70
14
60
36
67

This table presents p-value of the cumulative distribution of Drawdowns of the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns for four carry-trade
strategies under two simulation methods. The p-value under simulations of a normal distribution is labeled “p n” and the p-value under
simulations of bootstrapping method is labeled “p b”. “days” indicates how many days the nth worst drawdown lasts. The strategies are the
basic equal-weighted (EQ) and spread-weighted (SPD) strategies, and their risk-rebalanced versions (labeled “-RR”). The weights in the basic
strategies are calibrated to have one dollar at risk each month. The risk-rebalanced strategies rescale the basic weights by IGARCH estimates
of a covariance matrix to target a 5% volatility. The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October
1986.
Worst 20 Drawdowns
EQ
SPD
EQ-RR
SPD-RR
Freq Mag.
p-n
p-b
days Mag.
p-n
p-b
days Mag.
p-n
p-b
days Mag.
p-n
p-b
days

Table 22: Drawdowns

59

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
60
120
180

-2.7%
-3.5%
-4.0%
-4.4%
-5.0%
-5.2%
-4.9%
-5.2%
-5.5%
-6.0%
-6.7%
-7.0%
-7.0%
-5.5%
-5.1%
-5.9%
-6.7%
-7.6%
-8.2%
-8.4%
-8.9%
-9.2%
-10.0%
-11.0%
-11.3%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.9%
0.5%
0.4%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
1.0%
2.8%

59.4%
8.1%
5.4%
2.9%
1.2%
1.3%
3.9%
2.7%
1.7%
0.8%
0.2%
0.1%
0.2%
6.6%
18.2%
9.0%
4.8%
1.6%
1.1%
1.3%
0.8%
0.8%
0.5%
1.6%
3.3%

-6.5%
-6.4%
-6.6%
-6.5%
-6.8%
-7.3%
-6.7%
-7.2%
-7.7%
-8.1%
-8.8%
-9.2%
-9.2%
-8.4%
-8.0%
-8.7%
-8.7%
-10.2%
-10.7%
-12.1%
-12.2%
-11.8%
-13.3%
-17.4%
-20.2%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.3%
1.7%
0.3%
0.4%
0.1%
0.3%
0.8%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%

44.6%
56.9%
48.0%
54.3%
43.3%
28.9%
50.4%
37.0%
27.2%
18.6%
10.3%
6.8%
8.4%
19.4%
28.8%
22.9%
28.4%
10.9%
9.3%
3.6%
4.3%
7.1%
3.3%
0.8%
0.4%

-5.6%
-5.5%
-6.0%
-5.8%
-5.8%
-5.9%
-5.9%
-6.1%
-6.3%
-6.4%
-6.2%
-6.2%
-6.3%
-6.1%
-6.1%
-6.0%
-6.0%
-7.3%
-7.6%
-8.4%
-8.3%
-9.0%
-9.6%
-10.2%
-10.3%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.2%
2.1%
8.2%
1.0%
1.3%
0.5%
1.2%
0.8%
0.6%
4.3%
8.1%

43.5%
55.6%
23.9%
42.3%
45.1%
41.9%
41.2%
36.7%
30.2%
29.0%
38.0%
39.7%
38.0%
44.5%
45.1%
53.7%
59.3%
25.6%
22.0%
11.9%
14.3%
9.5%
6.7%
9.8%
12.7%

-6.6%
-6.5%
-6.6%
-6.5%
-6.5%
-6.5%
-6.4%
-6.4%
-6.3%
-6.3%
-6.3%
-6.3%
-6.3%
-6.3%
-6.2%
-6.2%
-6.6%
-6.7%
-7.1%
-8.1%
-8.2%
-8.0%
-9.1%
-8.3%
-8.4%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
1.3%
2.1%
4.6%
4.4%
1.1%
1.8%
4.7%
1.8%
23.7%
24.8%

43.5%
57.2%
48.7%
58.4%
62.2%
62.4%
65.7%
67.3%
69.1%
69.8%
70.6%
71.0%
71.5%
72.1%
73.5%
74.9%
67.2%
66.1%
57.4%
32.6%
33.0%
39.3%
21.1%
40.7%
34.7%

This table presents p-value of maximum losses over a certain number of days of the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns for four carrytrade strategies under two simulation methods. The p-value under simulations of a normal distribution is labeled “p n” and the p-value under
simulations of bootstrapping method is labeled “p b”. The strategies are the basic equal-weighted (EQ) and spread-weighted (SPD) strategies,
and their risk-rebalanced versions (labeled “-RR”). The weights in the basic strategies are calibrated to have one dollar at risk each month.
The risk-rebalanced strategies rescale the basic weights by IGARCH estimates of a covariance matrix to target a 5% volatility. The sample
period is 1976:02-2013:08 except for the AUD and the NZD, which start in October 1986.
Maximum Losses
EQ
SPD
EQ-RR
SPD-RR
Horizon (days) Mag.
p-n
p-b
Mag.
p-n
p-b
Mag.
p-n
p-b
Mag.
p-n
p-b

Table 23: Maximum Losses

60

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

5.2%
4.4%
3.8%
3.8%
3.5%
3.5%
3.3%
3.2%
3.2%
3.1%
3.0%
3.0%
2.9%
2.9%
2.8%
2.8%
2.8%
2.8%
2.8%
2.7%

0.3%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

1.4%
0.5%
0.5%
0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

7
12
5
6
5
3
4
8
7
8
6
3
6
8
5
3
4
4
6
4

7.3%
6.9%
6.5%
6.2%
5.8%
4.8%
4.7%
4.6%
4.4%
4.4%
4.4%
4.3%
4.2%
4.1%
3.9%
3.8%
3.7%
3.7%
3.7%
3.6%

0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

19.1%
6.4%
5.9%
2.4%
0.7%
0.8%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

7
7
2
6
8
9
6
4
8
4
4
7
7
8
6
8
6
3
5
6

5.6%
5.5%
4.6%
4.1%
3.7%
3.7%
3.3%
3.3%
3.1%
3.0%
2.8%
2.8%
2.8%
2.7%
2.7%
2.7%
2.6%
2.5%
2.5%
2.5%

0.3%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

57.9%
28.3%
14.4%
13.1%
14.3%
6.6%
9.3%
4.6%
4.9%
4.3%
8.1%
4.4%
2.3%
1.3%
1.4%
0.7%
0.5%
1.1%
0.8%
0.6%

2
6
8
8
8
6
2
7
5
5
5
12
4
5
5
8
4
4
7
5

6.6%
5.8%
5.6%
4.5%
4.2%
3.7%
3.6%
3.5%
3.4%
3.2%
3.1%
2.9%
2.9%
2.8%
2.7%
2.7%
2.7%
2.6%
2.6%
2.6%

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

61.3%
44.0%
29.0%
27.3%
22.1%
14.7%
8.2%
4.5%
2.3%
1.8%
1.4%
3.2%
1.8%
1.3%
1.6%
0.9%
0.7%
0.5%
0.3%
0.2%

2
6
2
6
8
6
7
10
8
7
5
5
5
5
5
6
5
4
4
7

This table presents p-value of the cumulative distribution of Pure Drawdowns of the monthly zero-investment portfolio returns for four carrytrade strategies under two simulation methods. The p-value under simulations of a normal distribution is labeled “p n” and the p-value under
simulations of bootstrapping method is labeled “p b”. “days” indicates how many days the nth worst pure drawdown lasts. The strategies
are the basic equal-weighted (EQ) and spread-weighted (SPD) strategies, and their risk-rebalanced versions (labeled “-RR”). The weights in
the basic strategies are calibrated to have one dollar at risk each month. The risk-rebalanced strategies rescale the basic weights by IGARCH
estimates of a covariance matrix to target a 5% volatility. The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 except for the AUD and the NZD, which start
in October 1986.
Worst 20 Pure Drawdowns
EQ
SPD
EQ-RR
SPD-RR
Freq Mag. p-n
p-b days Mag. p-n
p-b
days Mag. p-n
p-b
days Mag. p-n
p-b
days

Table 24: Pure Drawdowns

A

Appendix Tables

61

62
-23.2
270
181

Min (% )

No. Positive

No. Negative

(1.14)

(std. err.)

12.5

2.20

Excess Kurt.

Max (%)

(0.27)

(std. err.)

0.08

-0.73

Skewness

(0.05)

(0.18)

(std. err.)

(std. err.)

0.45

Sharpe Ratio

Autocorr.

15.54
(0.84)

(std. err.)

(2.62)

(std. err.)

Standard Dev.

7.01

Mkt

Ave Ret (% p.a.)

212

239

-16.4

22.0

(0.06)

0.00

(3.73)

8.00

(0.47)

0.55

(0.16)

0.29

(1.08)

10.49

(1.70)

3.04

SMB

203

248

-12.7

13.9

(0.06)

0.16

(0.68)

2.72

(0.33)

0.02

(0.19)

0.37

(0.74)

10.25

(1.91)

3.75

HML

208

243

-7.6

9.5

(0.05)

0.08

(0.36)

1.07

(0.18)

0.18

(0.17)

0.38

(0.41)

8.11

(1.37)

3.08

10y-1M

1976/02-2013/08

215

236

-6.0

7.3

(0.05)

0.01

(0.46)

1.29

(0.19)

0.23

(0.16)

0.25

(0.32)

6.04

(0.96)

1.49

10y-2y

107

176

-17.2

11.3

(0.07)

0.09

(0.62)

1.11

(0.21)

-0.65

(0.24)

0.47

(0.98)

15.29

(3.37)

7.20

Mkt

139

144

-16.4

22.0

(0.07)

-0.04

(3.21)

8.17

(0.48)

0.82

(0.19)

0.22

(1.53)

11.55

(2.25)

2.51

SMB

134

149

-12.7

13.9

(0.08)

0.15

(0.70)

2.86

(0.40)

0.08

(0.23)

0.27

(1.04)

11.04

(2.60)

2.95

HML

125

158

-6.7

8.5

(0.05)

0.08

(0.59)

1.06

(0.26)

0.03

(0.21)

0.56

(0.42)

6.95

(1.44)

3.92

10y-1M

1990/2-2013/8

126

157

-6.0

7.3

(0.06)

0.04

(0.74)

1.72

(0.30)

0.05

(0.20)

0.38

(0.42)

5.70

(1.13)

2.14

10y-2y

241

42

-10.8

48.1

(0.27)

0.44

(212.58)

117.16

(9.98)

8.63

(0.92)

-1.42

(5.37)

12.15

(3.93)

-17.24

V Swap

158

200

-6.9

5.8

(0.06)

0.00

(0.28)

0.69

(0.14)

-0.25

(0.21)

0.35

(0.35)

7.02

(1.42)

2.47

RX

122

236

-10.4

8.8

(0.07)

0.11

(0.59)

1.29

(0.21)

-0.59

(0.23)

0.88

(0.50)

8.97

(1.82)

7.85

HML FX

1983/11-2013/8

44

239

-13.0

5.2

(0.08)

0.12

(3.79)

13.57

(0.48)

-2.92

(0.38)

1.41

(0.94)

6.70

(1.43)

9.42

DRI

1990/1-2013/7

This table reports the summary statistics of the risk factors used in this study. That includes Fama-French three factors, two pure foreign exchange risk
factors constructed by Lustig, Roussanov, and Verdelhan (2011), and two USD bond market risk factors, the return on variance swap, as well as the downside
risk return constructed by Jurek and Stafford (2013).
The reported parameters, (mean, standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis, and autocorrelation coefficient) and their associated standard errors are
simultaneous GMM estimates. The Sharpe ratio is the ratio of the annualized mean and standard deviation, and its standard error is calculated using the
delta method (see Appendix B.) Variance swap data and option data used to calculate the DRI return become available since 1990.

Table A.1: Summary Statistics of Factors (Monthly Returns)

Table A.2: Carry Trade Exposures to Downside Market Risk (Alternative Cutoff Value in the
Definition of Downside)
This table presents regressions of the carry trade returns of six different strategies on the
market return and the downside market return defined by Lettau, Maggiori, and Weber (2014).
The market return Rm,t is the excess return on the market, the value-weight excess return of
all CRSP firms incorporated in the US and listed on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ; the
−
downside market return Rm,t
= Rm,t × I − where I − is the indicator function. The regression
specification is
−
Rt = α1 + α2 I − + β1 · Rm,t + β2 · Rm,t
+ εt
Cov (Rm,t , Rt |I − =1)
m,t , Rt )
.
in which β2 = β − − β1 andβ − = V ar(Rm,t |I − =1) . We define β = Cov(R
V ar(Rm,t )
The sample period is 1976:02-2013:08 (451 observations). Excess returns are annualized. Autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity consistent t-statistics from GMM are in square brackets.23

α
t-stat
α−
t-stat
β1
t-stat
β2
t-stat
R2

α
t-stat
α−
t-stat
β1
t-stat
β2
t-stat
R2


Panel A: I − = I Rm,t < Rm,t
EQ
SPD EQ-RR SPD-RR OPT EQ-USD
-1.83
-2.47
0.90
1.09
3.07
-9.03
[-0.85] [-0.81] [0.39]
[0.47]
[2.89]
[-2.93]
8.36
13.23
7.98
9.91
-1.12
17.44
[2.98] [3.46]
[2.40]
[3.10]
[-0.83]
[4.24]
0.13
0.22
0.10
0.11
-0.01
0.26
[2.79] [3.01]
[2.40]
[2.44]
[-0.21]
[4.39]
-0.07
-0.09
-0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.28
[-1.27] [-1.13] [-0.23]
[0.10]
[0.73]
[-3.56]
0.03
0.05
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.05

EQ
-0.08
[-0.04]
6.57
[2.58]
0.10
[2.39]
-0.04
[-0.77]
0.03

Panel
SPD
0.40
[0.15]
10.22
[2.82]
0.17
[2.59]
-0.05
[-0.63]
0.04

B: I − = I (Rm,t < 0)
EQ-RR SPD-RR OPT EQ-USD
2.89
4.10
2.97
-5.87
[1.36]
[1.85]
[3.23]
[-2.12]
5.52
5.73
-1.20
14.79
[1.67]
[1.74]
[-0.92]
[3.57]
0.07
0.06
0.00
0.21
[1.84]
[1.44]
[-0.16]
[3.70]
0.01
0.04
0.02
-0.23
[0.15]
[0.57]
[0.61]
[-2.72]
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.04

63

B

GMM Standard Errors

Table 1 reports the first four unconditional moments of the basic carry trades as well as their
Sharpe ratios. This Appendix explains the construction of the standard errors. Let µ denote
the sample mean, σ denote the standard deviation, γ3 denote sample standardized skewness,
and γ4 denote sample standardized kurtosis. The orthogonality conditions are
E (rt ) − µ = 0

E (rt − µ)2 − σ 2 = 0


E [(rt − µ)3 ]
− γ3 = 0
σ3
E [(rt − µ)4 ]
− γ4 − 3 = 0
σ4
Let θ = (µ, σ, γ3 , γ4 )| , let gT (θ) denote the sample mean of the orthogonality conditions for
a sample of size T , and let ST denote an estimate of the variance of the sample moments. We
estimate ST using the Newey-West (1987) approach with three leads and lags. Hansen (1982)
demonstrates that choosing the parameter estimates to minimize gT (θ)| ST−1 gT (θ) produces
asymptotically unbiased estimates with asymptotic variance

1
(DT| ST−1 DT )−1
T

where DT is the

gradient of gT (θ) with respect to θ. The Sharpe ratio is defined to be SR =
variance of SR is found by the delta method:
var(SR) =

1h
T

1
σ

−µ
σ2

0 0

i

(DT| ST−1 DT )−1

64

h

1
σ

−µ
σ2

0 0

i|

µ
,
σ

and the

