NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VACCINE APPROVALS AND MANDATES UNDER UNCERTAINTY:
SOME SIMPLE ANALYTICS
Charles F. Manski
Working Paper 20432
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20432
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Vaccine Approvals and Mandates Under Uncertainty: Some Simple Analytics
Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 20432
August 2014
JEL No. H23,H51,I18
ABSTRACT
Social interactions make communicable disease a core concern of public health policy. A prevalent
problem is scarcity of empirical evidence that are informative about how interventions affect population
behavior and illness. Randomized trials, which have been important to evaluation of treatments for
non-infectious diseases, are less informative about treatment of communicable diseases because they
do not shed light on population-wide disease transmission. In particular, trials do not reveal the indirect
preventive (herd immunity) effect of vaccination on persons who are not vaccinated or who are unsuccessfully
vaccinated. This paper studies the decision problems faced by health planners who must choose whether
to approve a new vaccine or mandate an approved one, but who do not know the indirect effect of
vaccination. I study vaccine approval as a choice between a zero vaccination rate (rejection of the
new vaccine) and whatever vaccination rate the health-care system will yield if the vaccine is approved.
I study the decision to mandate an approved vaccine as a choice between vaccinating the entire population
(the mandate) and the vaccination rate that would be generated by decentralized health-care decisions.
Considering decision making with partial knowledge, I show that it may be possible to determine
optimal policies in some cases where the planner can only bound the indirect effect of vaccination.
Considering settings where optimal policy is indeterminate, I pose several criteria for decision making—
expected utility, minimax, and minimax-regret—and derive the policies they yield.
Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction

Social interactions in treatment response make communicable disease a core concern of public health
policy. Spread of infection creates a negative externality. Preventive administration of vaccines, therapeutic
administration of antimicrobial drugs, and separation of infected persons from the general population may
reduce disease transmission. In a decentralized health care system, infected and at-risk persons may not
adequately recognize the social implications of their actions. Hence, there may be a rationale for government
to seek to influence treatment of communicable disease. See, for example, Brito, Sheshinski, and Intriligator
(1991) and Althouse, Bergstrom, and Bergstrom (2010). In practice, policies range from quarantines of
infected persons to mandatory vaccination of certain sub-populations to subsidization of vaccines and drugs.
A prevalent problem in policy choice is scarcity of empirical evidence that are informative about how
alternative interventions affect population behavior and illness. Randomized clinical trials (RCTs), which
have been so important to evaluation of treatments for non-infectious diseases, are less informative about
treatment of communicable diseases. The classical argument for inference from RCTs assumes that the
outcome experienced by each person or other treatment unit may vary only with his own treatment, not with
those of other members of the population. This assumption—variously called non-interference (Cox, 1958),
the stable unit treatment value assumption (Rubin, 1978), or individualistic treatment response (Manski,
2013)—does not hold when treating communicable diseases. RCTs have limited power to identify the effects
of treatments for such diseases.
A leading case is the decision problem of a health planner who must choose a vaccination rate for
a population. Vaccination of a particular person may benefit him directly by generating an immune response
that reduces his susceptibility to the disease. It may also reduces the infectiousness of this person and
thereby inhibit transmission of the disease to others who are unvaccinated or unsuccessfully vaccinated.
Thus, vaccination may have both a direct preventive effect on the person vaccinated and an indirect
preventive effect on other persons. The indirect effect is sometimes called herd or community immunity.

2
See Fine (1993) and Fine, Eames, and Heymann (2011) for discussions of the long history and use of this
concept in epidemiology.1
An RCT that randomly vaccinates a specified fraction of the population may enable evaluation of
the direct effect of vaccination on illness, but it does not reveal the indirect effect. The trial only reveals the
illness outcomes that occur with the vaccination rate used in the trial. The outcomes that the population
would experience with other vaccination rates remain counterfactual. Yet policy choice requires comparison
of alternative vaccination rates.2
Attempting to cope with the dearth of empirical evidence, researchers have used epidemiological
models of disease transmission to forecast the outcomes that would occur with counterfactual vaccination
policies. Unfortunately, authors typically provide little information that would enable one to assess the
accuracy of their assumptions about individual behavior, social interactions, and disease transmission.
Hence, it is prudent to view their forecasts more as computational experiments predicting outcomes under
specific assumptions than as accurate predictions of policy impacts.
With this background, I have previously considered choice of a vaccination rate when a planner has
partial knowledge of the indirect effect of vaccination on illness (Manski, 2010). I posed a planning problem
whose objective is to minimize the utilitarian social cost of illness and vaccination. Vaccination is socially
costly, as is illness. Vaccination is beneficial to the extent that it prevents illness. I supposed that the planner

1

While the usual presumption is that vaccines have beneficial indirect effects, they can in principle have
negative effects. Vaccines based on attenuated live pathogens may infect persons other than the recipient.
Vaccination may also encourage selection of pathogens towards variants resistant to the vaccine. However,
these negatives forces are thought to be weak in practice. See Mishra et al. (2012).
2

Vaccine trials can reveal indirect effects in special cases where the population partitions into many
isolated groups of persons. Then the members of each group may infect one another but not the members
of other groups. In such cases, one can define treatment units to be groups rather than persons, randomly
assign varying vaccination rates to different groups, and use the trial to learn about illness outcomes under
alternative vaccination rates. Hudges and Halloran (2008) develop methodology for analysis of RCTs
performed in such settings. Loeb et al. (2010) report a trial performed on isolated Hutterite communities in
Canada. However, populations rarely partition in modern societies. RCTs have no identifying power in the
polar case of a fully connected society, where social interactions are global rather than local (Manski, 2013a).

3
observes the illness rate of a study population whose vaccination rate has been chosen previously. I assumed
that the illness rate of unvaccinated or unsuccessfully vaccinated persons weakly decreases as the vaccination
rate increases, but that the magnitude of this indirect preventive effect of vaccination is unknown. In this
setting, I first showed how the planner can eliminate dominated vaccination rates and then how he can use
various decision criteria to choose an undominated vaccination rate.
Whereas Manski (2010) studied decision making by a hypothetical powerful planner who can choose
any vaccination rate, the present paper considers two prominent instruments of actual vaccination policy,
vaccine approvals and mandates. To begin, Section 2 describes prevailing procedures for approval of new
vaccines and for mandating approved ones in the United States. Vaccine approval is a federal responsibility
performed by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA approval process aims to measure the
direct effects of vaccines by requiring performance of RCTs. It does not seek to measure indirect effects,
ignores monetary costs, and rejects use of formal decision analysis as a tool in policy making. Vaccine
mandates are primarily enacted by states. There is no uniform decision process across jurisdictions, but the
indirect effects and monetary costs of vaccination are prevalent considerations.
To provide a formal framework for evaluation of vaccine approvals and mandates, I adapt the
planning problem posed in Manski (2010). My analysis intentionally makes various simplifying assumptions
in order to make basic points transparently. Relaxing these assumptions may complicate the specifics of the
analysis but the general principles would remain intact.
Section 3 supposes that the planner has sufficient knowledge to choose an optimal policy. Among
other things, the planner knows the indirect-response function that describes how the illness rate of
unvaccinated or unsuccessfully vaccinated persons varies with the vaccination rate.3 I earlier studied the
unconstrained optimization problem where the planner can choose any vaccine rate. Here I view decisions

3

The indirect-response function was called the external-response function in Manski (2010). I revise the
word "external" to "indirect" here to make the terminology consistent with the norm in the literature on
vaccination.

4
to approve or mandate vaccines as constrained optimization problems.
Vaccine approval presents a choice between a zero vaccination rate (rejection of the new vaccine)
and whatever vaccination rate the health-care system will yield if the vaccine is approved. The decision to
mandate an approved vaccine presents a choice between vaccinating the entire population (the mandate) and
the vaccination rate that would be generated by decentralized health-care decisions. I show that a planner
can solve the constrained optimization problem posed by vaccine approval if he knows the direct effect of
vaccination on illness as well as the vaccination and illness rates that will be generated by the health-care
system if the vaccine is approved. He can solve the constrained optimization problem that arises when
contemplating a vaccine mandate if he knows the vaccination and illness rates that would be generated by
decentralized decision making as well as the illness rate that would result if the entire population were
vaccinated.
Section 4 considers decision making with partial knowledge. I discuss the knowledge that a planner
may have in practice and conclude that incomplete knowledge of the indirect effect of vaccination is likely.
I show that it may be possible to determine optimal policies in some cases where the planner can only bound
the indirect effect. In other cases the optimal policy is indeterminate. I pose several criteria for decision
making in such cases—expected utility, minimax, and minimax-regret—and derive the policies they yield.
The concluding Section 5 suggests that performance of formal decision analysis can improve
prevailing vaccine approval and mandate procedures. I question the narrow scope of the FDA approval
process, which uses a qualitative approach that ignores the monetary costs and indirect effects of vaccination.

5
2. Prevailing Vaccine Approval and Mandate Procedures

The American institutions for approving new vaccines and mandating approved ones differ in
numerous respects. Whereas the federal Food and Drug Administration performs the former function, state
public health agencies perform the latter. Whereas the FDA approval process focuses on the direct effect
of vaccination on the person vaccinated, concern with indirect effects on unvaccinated or unsuccessfully
vaccinated persons is a central rationale for state mandates. Whereas FDA approval decisions ignore the
monetary costs associated with vaccination and illness, state mandate decisions explicitly consider these
costs. I explain here.

2.1. FDA Approval

The FDA vaccine approval process is similar to the one used for drug approval. The FDA describes
it this way (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2009):
"FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) is responsible for regulating vaccines
in the United States. . . . Vaccine clinical development follows the same general pathway as for drugs
and other biologics. A sponsor who wishes to begin clinical trials with a vaccine must submit an
Investigational New Drug application (IND) to FDA. The IND describes the vaccine, its method of
manufacture, and quality control tests for release. Also included are information about the vaccine's
safety and ability to elicit a protective immune response (immunogenicity) in animal testing, as well
as the proposed clinical protocol for studies in humans. Pre-marketing (pre-licensure) vaccine
clinical trials are typically done in three phases, as is the case for any drug or biologic. Initial human
studies, referred to as Phase 1, are safety and immunogenicity studies performed in a small number
of closely monitored subjects. Phase 2 studies are dose-ranging studies and may enroll hundreds of
subjects. Finally, Phase 3 trials typically enroll thousands of individuals and provide the critical
documentation of effectiveness and important additional safety data required for licensing. . . . . If
successful, the completion of all three phases of clinical development can be followed by the

6
submission of a Biologics License Application (BLA). To be considered, the license application
must provide the multidisciplinary FDA reviewer team . . . . with the efficacy and safety information
necessary to make a risk/benefit assessment and to recommend or oppose the approval of a vaccine."
Thus, FDA approval of new vaccines rests primarily on evidence from RCTs administering the vaccine, as
does FDA approval of drugs.
As discussed in the Introduction, RCTs are generally uninformative about the indirect effect of
vaccination on illness. The FDA approval process focuses on the safety of the new vaccine and its direct
preventive effect on the person vaccinated, with scant attention to indirect effects. A search of the extensive
"Vaccines, Blood & Biologics" section of the FDA website reveals only five mentions of the term "herd
immunity" and none of the terms "indirect effect" and "community immunity." Documents associated with
FDA approval of specific vaccines contain at most brief discussions of herd immunity or related concepts.
See, for example, the summary for approval of the varicella (chickenpox) vaccine (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 1994).
The FDA description of the vaccine approval process, quoted above, refers to performance of a
"risk/benefit assessment" en route to an approval decision. The word "risk" refers to the possibility that
administration of a vaccine to a person may have deleterious side effects while "benefit" refers to the direct
preventive effect of vaccination on illness. The FDA description of its drug approval process similarly refers
to assessment of risks and benefits. The approval processes for both vaccines and drugs take no account of
the monetary costs associated with treatment and illness. This explains use of the term risk/benefit rather
than cost/benefit.
To an economist or decision analyst, the term "risk/benefit assessment" suggests quantification of
risks and benefits and weighing the two to measure the net value of approving a vaccine or drug. However,
FDA documents summarizing approval decisions do not quantify the tradeoff between risks and benefits.
Indeed, the FDA administration has explicitly rejected use of formal decision analysis in drug and vaccine
approval.

7
A 2012 amendment to the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act called on the FDA to institute a
"structured benefit-risk assessment framework," stating (U. S. Congress, 2012, Section 905):
"Section 505(d) (21 U.S.C. 355(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: 'The Secretary
shall implement a structured risk-benefit assessment framework in the new drug approval process
to facilitate the balanced consideration of benefits and risks, a consistent and systematic approach
to the discussion and regulatory decision making, and the communication of the benefits and risks
of new drugs."
In response to this Congressional mandate, the FDA subsequently released to the public a draft document
that is so revealing of current FDA thinking that I will quote from it at length (U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, 2013).
The FDA document begins this way (page 1):
"In the past, some FDA stakeholders have indicated that there is room for improvement in the clarity
and transparency of FDA’s benefit-risk assessment in human drug review. When FDA approves a
new product, the agency publishes the various relevant documents, such as discipline reviews . . .
and decision memoranda, on its website. While FDA takes great care to clearly explain the
reasoning behind a regulatory decision in these documents, the clinical analysis may not always be
readily understood by a broad audience who may wish to understand FDA’s thinking. In addition,
some have argued that drug regulatory decisions should be based on more formalized and
quantitative approaches to benefit-risk assessment, including the assignment of weights to benefit
and risk considerations. Others, however, are skeptical of fully quantitative approaches, and
consider such attempts to be a highly subjective exercise that would add little clarity to regulatory
decision making."
It goes on to side with those who are skeptical of quantitative approaches, stating (page 4):
"In the last few years, as other disciplines such as decision science and health economics have been
applied to drug regulatory decision-making, there has been much discussion among regulators,
industry, and other stakeholders regarding “qualitative” versus “quantitative” approaches to benefitrisk assessment. The term “quantitative benefit-risk assessment” can have various meanings
depending on who is asked. Some hold the view that a quantitative benefit-risk assessment
encompasses approaches that seek to quantify benefits and risks, as well as the weight that is placed
on each of the components such that the entire benefit-risk assessment is quantitative. This approach

8
is typical of quantitative decision modeling. It usually requires assigning numerical weights to
benefit and risk considerations in a process involving numerous judgments that are at best debatable
and at worst arbitrary. The subjective judgments and assumptions that would inevitably be
embodied in such quantitative decision modeling would be much less transparent, if not obscured,
to those who wish to understand a regulator’s thinking. Furthermore, application of quantitative
decision modeling seems most appropriate for decisions that are largely binary. Many benefit-risk
assessments are more nuanced and conditional based on parameters that could be used to effectively
manage a safety concern in the post-market setting. There is significant concern that reliance on a
relatively complex model would obscure rather than elucidate a regulator’s thinking.
These concerns have led FDA to the conclusion that the best presentation of benefit-risk
considerations involves focusing on the individual benefits and risks, their frequency, and weighing
them appropriately. FDA believes that this can be accomplished by a qualitative descriptive
approach for structuring the benefit-risk assessment that satisfies the principles outlined earlier in
this section, while acknowledging that quantification of certain components of the benefit-risk
assessment is an important part of the process to support decision-making. FDA considers it most
important to be clear about what was considered in the decision, to be as quantitative as possible in
characterizing that information, and to fully describe how that information was weighed in arriving
at a conclusion. Quantitative assessments certainly underpin the qualitative judgments of FDA’s
regulatory decisions, but FDA has adopted a structured qualitative approach that is designed to
support the identification and communication of the key considerations in FDA’s benefit-risk
assessment and how that information led to the regulatory decision."
Thus, the FDA has rejected performance of formal decision analysis en route to drug and vaccine approval.
Indeed, an aversion to decision analysis appears widespread in medicine. For example, a recent
report of the Institute of Medicine (2011) proposing standards for development of clinical practice guidelines
contains only a brief cautionary mention of decision analysis as a potential tool for evaluation of practice
recommendations. The report states (p. 171): "A frontier of evidence-based medicine is decision analytic
modeling in health care alternatives' assessment. . . . . Although the field is currently fraught with
controversy, the committee acknowledges it as exciting and potentially promising, however, decided the state
of the art is not ready for direct comment." See Manski (2013b) for further discussion.

9
2.2. State Mandates

In the American federal system, each state decides the circumstances in which to mandate
administration of vaccines. Specific vaccines may be mandated for children in day care, pupils in schools,
students in colleges, and residents of long-term care facilities.4 While there is no uniform decision process
across states, the indirect effect of vaccination is a prevalent consideration.
For example, the state of Washington lists this as one of nine criteria considered when contemplating
a mandate for vaccination of children and young adults (Washington State Board of Health, 2006):
"Vaccinating the infant, child, or adolescent against this disease reduces the risk of person-to-person
transmission. Having some proportion of the population vaccinated with the antigen helps to stem
person to person transmission of the disease (i.e, herd immunity). Even community members who
are not vaccinated (such as newborns and those with chronic illnesses) are offered some protection
because the disease has less opportunity to spread within the community. Vaccinating children in
school and/or child care centers can increase the percentage of children in these groups who are
immune and thus reduce the risk of outbreaks of the disease in these groups and in the community
at large."
The Washington state criteria also consider the monetary cost of vaccination and the burden that compliance
with the mandate places on the parents of children.
While documents describing the decision processes used by Washington and other states express
concern with the indirect effects and monetary costs of vaccination, they do not explain the manner in which
these considerations are measured and balanced. It is not clear whether formal decision analysis is used or
whether, like the FDA, the states use qualitative approaches.

4

The webpage www.immunize.org/laws/ describes the present mandates in each state.

10
3. Optimal Vaccination

Economists and decision analysts performing normative study of public policy have long analyzed
the decision making of a real or hypothetical planner who seeks to choose a policy that maximizes social
welfare or, equivalently, minimizes social cost. A standard exercise specifies a set of feasible policies and
supposes that the planner knows the outcome yielded by each policy. The objective of the exercise is to
determine the optimal policy.
Various instances of this exercise appear in the literature on optimal vaccination, which contains
contributions by economists, epidemiologists, and others. Studies have varied in the policy options they
consider, the welfare functions they pose, and the manner in which they model the transmission of disease.
However, they have almost universally assumed that the planner has sufficient knowledge to determine an
optimal policy. See, for example, Brito, Sheshinski, and Intriligator (1991), Becker and Starczak (1997), Ball
and Lyne (2002), Scuffham and West (2002), Hill and Longini (2003), Patel, Longini, and Halloran (2005),
Boulier, Datta, and Goldfarb (2007), and Althouse, Bergstrom, and Bergstrom (2010). To my knowledge,
the only studies that have considered choice of vaccination policy under uncertainty are Tanner, Sattenspiel,
and Ntaimo (2008) and Manski (2010).
In my earlier work and here, consideration of optimal policy is a prelude to study of vaccination
under uncertainty. Section 3.1 poses the unconstrained optimization problem that I studied earlier. Section
3.2 formalizes decisions to approve and mandate vaccines as constrained optimization problems.

3.1. Unconstrained Optimization

Consider a planner who must choose a vaccination rate for a large population of observationally
identical persons. The term "observationally identically" does not mean that persons actually are identical,

11
only that the planner cannot distinguish them. When persons are observationally identical, the planner must
choose persons to vaccinate at random. He cannot systematically vaccinate persons who are particularly
susceptible or infectious.5
Consideration of a large population simplifies analysis in important respects. The planner can ignore
finite-sample statistical variation in the outcome of random treatment assignment. The ex ante probability
that a randomly drawn person becomes ill is identical to the ex post illness rate in the population. Formally,
these statements hold if the population contain infinitely many members. Standard arguments using Laws
of Large Numbers enable their approximate application to large finite populations.
Suppose that the vaccine under consideration generates a protective immune response in a vaccinated
person with probability ë 0 (0, 1], preventing this person from becoming ill and from infecting others.
Contrariwise, the vaccine confers no immunity with probability 1 ! ë. Then ë measures the direct effect of
vaccination.6 If fraction v of the population are vaccinated, the effective vaccination rate is ëv and the
fraction 1 ! ëv of the population are susceptible to the disease.
The indirect-response function p(@): [0, 1] 6 [0, 1] gives the probability that a susceptible person
becomes ill when a specified fraction of the population are effectively vaccinated. If vaccination yields an
indirect preventive effect, then p(@) is a decreasing function. When the effective vaccination rate is ëv, the
fraction of the population who become ill is p(ëv)(1 ! ëv).

5

The assumption of observationally identical persons is maintained in some of the literature on optimal
vaccination, such as Althouse, Bergstrom, and Bergstrom (2010) and Brito, Sheshinki, and Intriligator
(1992). Findings there and in the present paper extend directly to settings where the population partitions
into multiple isolated groups, each defined by a different value of observed covariates. Analysis is more
complex when interacting persons with different observed covariates vary systematically in susceptibility
or infectiousness. Studies of such settings often consider a constrained optimization problem in which the
problem is to allocate a fixed supply of vaccine among persons with different covariates. See, for example,
Patel, Longini, and Halloran (2005) and Keeling and Shattock (2012).
6

Manski (2010) mainly assumed that ë = 1 and sketched extension of the analysis to cases with ë < 1.
Here I study from the outset the general case where the vaccine may be imperfect. Imperfect vaccination is
a substantive concern when considering whether to approve or mandate some vaccines.

12
Suppose that the planner wants to minimize a social cost function with two additive components,
the harm caused by illness and the cost of vaccination. Let a > 0 denote the mean social harm resulting from
a case of illness and let c > 0 denote the mean social cost per vaccination, measured in commensurate units.
The social cost of vaccination rate v is

(1)

S(v) = ap(ëv)(1 ! ëv) + cv.

The first term measures the social cost of illness and the second gives the social cost of vaccination. The
optimization problem is invariant to the scale of S(@). Hence, without loss of generality, I shall let a = 1 and
interpret c as the ratio of the mean social cost of vaccination to the mean social cost of illness. This done,
the planner wants to solve the problem

(2)

min

p(ëv)(1 ! ëv) + cv.

v 0 [0, 1]

This simple static optimization problem expresses the core tension of vaccination policy: a higher
vaccination rate is more effective in preventing illness but is more costly. Similar planning problems have
been posed in some past research on optimal vaccination, such as Brito, Sheshinski, and Intriligator (1991)
and Keeling and Shattock (2012). However, it has been more common to pose a susceptible-infectiousremoved (SIR) or other dynamic model of disease transmission and to assume that the social objective is to
keep the transmission rate below the threshold at which an epidemic occurs. See, for example, Ball and Lyne
(2002) and Hill and Longini (2003). The latter authors ask (p. 86): "What minimal fraction of each age group
should be vaccinated to eliminate the possibility of an influenza epidemic in the whole population?"
The objective of preventing onset of an epidemic differs from minimization of social cost. In
epidemiology, an epidemic is defined to occur when the infected fraction of the population increases with

13
time. In contrast, social cost function (1) abstracts from the dynamics of illness and considers the prevalence
of illness in the population. This perspective is reasonable when considering vaccination to reduce the
incidence of an endemic disease. It may be less appropriate when considering vaccination as a measure
intended to prevent a foreign disease from becoming established in a population.
From the perspective of dynamic models of disease transmission, p(ëv)(1 ! ëv) is the steady-state
fraction of infectious persons. Classical SIR models imply that p(@) is a decreasing function that may attain
the value zero at some effective vaccination rate less than one, say e*. Hence, the disease is eradicated if the
actual vaccination rate is greater than or equal to e*/ë, provided that e*/ë # 1. In this case, the steady-state
fraction of infectious persons is zero. Vaccination rate e*/ë is called the critical vaccination or herd immunity
threshold. See for example, Anderson and May (1991) and Fine (1993).

3.2. Approvals and Mandates as Constrained Optimization Problems

I have thus far supposed that the planner can choose any vaccination rate in the unit interval.
Decisions to approve or mandate a vaccine pose a sequence of constrained optimization problems in which
the planner must choose between two vaccination rates.
The decision to mandate an approved vaccine presents a choice between vaccinating the entire
population (the mandate) and the vaccination rate, say vd, that would be generated by decentralized decision
making in the absence of the mandate. Using social cost function (1), the optimal mandate decision is

(3) mandate if

p(ë)(1 ! ë) + c # p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd,

do not mandate if p(ë)(1 ! ë) + c $ p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd.

Vaccine approval presents a choice between a zero vaccination rate (rejection of the new vaccine)

14
and the vaccination rate that the health-care system will yield if the vaccine is approved. The latter rate is
either 1 or vd, depending on whether approval would or would not be followed by imposition of a mandate.
Let va denote the vaccination rate that would occur following approval. Again using social cost function (1),
the optimal approval decision is

(4) approve if p(ëva)(1 ! ëva) + cva # p(0),
reject if

p(ëva)(1 ! ëva) + cva $ p(0).

This formalization of the planning problem poses approval and mandate as a sequence of binary
decisions. I do so to facilitate discussion of the existing process in which FDA vaccine approval precedes
state consideration of a mandate. If the same social cost function is used in both decisions, one can
equivalently formalize the planning problem as a single decision comparing three vaccination rates: 0, vd,
and 1.
Implicit in criteria (3) and (4) is the assumption that decentralized vaccination decisions are
effectively random. Thus, vaccinated persons do not differ systematically from unvaccinated ones in their
cost of vaccination, the probability that vaccination successfully generates a protective immune response,
susceptibility to the disease, or infectiousness. I maintain this assumption, which may or may not be realistic,
because it substantially simplifies the planning problem, making knowledge of vd sufficient to determine the
welfare outcome of decentralized decision making. Without the assumption, the welfare achieved by
decentralization would depend not only on the vaccination rate but on the composition of the vaccinated subpopulation.
Having expressed vaccine approval and mandate as constrained optimization problems, it is natural
to ask why a society would limit policy making to these decisions when unconstrained choice of the
vaccination rate may yield greater social welfare. A possible answer is that having a planner choose a

15
vaccination rate other than 0 or 1 would violate a version of the ethical principle of "equal treatment of
equals." Vaccinating an interior fraction of the population is consistent with the equal-treatment principle
in the ex ante sense that all observationally identical people have the same probability of vaccination.
However, it violates equal treatment in the ex post sense that only some persons ultimately are vaccinated.
The ex post sense of equal treatment expresses a deontological consideration that is absent from social cost
function (1) and, more generally, from the consequentialist welfare functions usually assumed in economic
analysis of planning. See Manski (2009) for further discussion.

4. Approvals and Mandates with Partial Knowledge

Viewing vaccine approvals and mandates as constrained optimization problems, Section 3.2 showed
that a planner can make optimal decisions if he has sufficient knowledge of the social cost of vaccination,
the direct and indirect effects, and the vaccination rate that would result from decentralized decision making.
Criterion (3) showed that to make an optimal mandate decision, it suffices to know [c, ë, p(ë), vd, p(ëvd)].
Criterion (4) showed that to make an optimal approval decision, it suffices to know [c, ë, p(0), va, p(ëva)].
The criteria are inequalities, so it is not necessary to know the precise values of the relevant quantities. The
planner only needs to know enough to determine which inequalities hold.
Section 4.1 considers what knowledge a planner might have in practice. Sections 4.2 and 4.3 apply
basic elements of decision theory to suggest criteria for making approval and mandate decisions with partial
knowledge.

16
4.1. What Knowledge Might a Planner Have?

Performance of RCTs ordinarily is a necessary prelude to approval of a vaccine. RCTs can measure
the immune responses that a vaccine generates in vaccinated subjects, which provides evidence on the direct
effect of vaccination. RCTs can also reveal the clinical side effects and monetary costs of vaccination, two
primary determinants of social costs. Thus, planners making approval and mandate decisions typically have
substantial knowledge of the parameters ë and c.
In settings where a disease is endemic, it seems realistic to expect that a planner deciding whether
to approve a new vaccine observes p(0), the illness rate in the absence of vaccination. It also seems realistic
to expect that a planner deciding whether to mandate a previously approved vaccine observes the
decentralized vaccination rate vd and illness rate p(ëvd) that occur in the absence of the mandate. However,
the former planner cannot observe va and p(ëva); these quantities become observable only after a vaccine is
approved. The latter planner cannot observe p(ë); this becomes observable only after a mandate is enacted.
In the absence of direct observation, what knowledge might these planners realistically have of the
illness rates p(ëva) and p(ë)? A basic assumption of epidemiological analysis of infectious disease is that
raising the vaccination rate increases the indirect protective effect of vaccination. Hence, the indirectresponse function p(@) is decreasing. When combined with available empirical evidence, this monotonicity
assumption yields inequalities on p(ëva) and p(ë). A planner in the approval setting knows p(0) and hence
can deduce that 0 # p(ëva) # p(0). A planner in the mandate setting knows p(ëvd) and hence can deduce that
0 # p(ë) # p(ëvd). These inequalities apply the general idea of monotone treatment response (Manski, 1997).
Beyond the monotonicity assumption, epidemiological analysis yields no clearly credible assumption
about the shape of p(@). Alternative models of disease transmission imply different shapes for the function.
Researchers have typically chosen models to be analytically and computationally tractable, with only limited
understanding of the realism of their assumptions. Hence, a planner may not know much about the shape

17
of p(@) beyond its monotonicity. I assume no further knowledge in the analysis below.
It remains to consider what a planner making an approval decision might know about the vaccination
rate va that would occur if the vaccine is approved. Some relevant empirical evidence may be available from
observation of vaccination rates for other diseases with previously approved vaccines, but there may be no
firm basis for extrapolation from these data to new vaccines. Nevertheless, in the interest of simple analytics,
I assume below that the planner knows va.

4.2. Mandates

The mandate decision is somewhat simpler than the approval decision, so I consider mandates first.
The difficulty is incomplete knowledge of p(ë). A mandate is consequential only if decentralized decision
making would yield incomplete vaccination of the population. Hence, I assume that vd < 1.

4.2.1. Optimization with Partial Knowledge
Rewriting criterion (3), a mandate is optimal if

(3')

p(ë)(1 ! ë) # p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! c(1 ! vd)

and is sub-optimal otherwise. Observation of p(ëvd) and the assumption of monotone treatment response
imply that 0 # p(ë) # p(ëvd). This bound on p(ë) suffices to determine the optimality of a mandate if either
of two conditions hold:

(5a)

p(ëvd)(1 ! ë) # p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! c(1 ! vd) Y mandate is optimal,

(5b)

0 > p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! c(1 ! vd)

Y mandate is not optimal.

18
The inequality on the left-hand side of (5a) implies that inequality (3') holds for all feasible values of p(ë);
hence, a mandate must be optimal. The inequality on the left-hand side of (5b) implies that (3') holds for no
feasible value of p(ë); hence, a mandate cannot be optimal. If neither inequality holds, a mandate is optimal
for some feasible values of p(ë) but not for others.
Conditions (5a) and (5b) show that a planner with incomplete knowledge of the illness rate that
would occur with a mandate may nonetheless be able to determine if a mandate is optimal. One or the other
condition necessarily holds if ë = 1. In this case, p(ë)(1 ! ë) = 0 for all values of p(ë). Hence, indeterminacy
of the optimum can happen only if the vaccine has an imperfect direct effect.
To study cases with ë < 1, it is instructive to rewrite (5) in the equivalent form

(5a')

c # ëp(ëvd)

Y mandate is optimal,

(5b')

c > p(ëvd)[(1 ! ëvd)/(1 ! vd) ]

Y mandate is not optimal.

Condition (5a') considers the worst-case scenario in which increasing the vaccination rate from vd to 1 has
no indirect preventive effect. The inequality shows that, all else equal, a mandate is still optimal if the cost
c of vaccination is sufficiently small. Condition (5b') considers the best-case scenario in which increasing
the vaccination from vd to 1 has the strongest possible indirect effect. This inequality shows that, all else
equal, a mandate cannot be optimal if c is sufficiently large. The optimality of a mandate is indeterminate
if c has an intermediate value; that is, if

(6)

ëp(ëvd) < c # p(ëvd)[(1 ! ëvd)/(1 ! vd)].

To determine the optimal policy when (6) holds, the planner must know more about p(ë) than the
bound 0 # p(ë) # p(ëvd). In some cases, a planner may judge available epidemiological models of disease

19
transmission to be sufficiently credible that he thinks it reasonable to use the models to predict p(ë) and then
possibly tighten the bounds. In the best case, a planner might use a model to make a point prediction and
view the prediction as accurate. However, it typically is unrealistic to view any point prediction as accurate.
It may be more credible to use epidemiological models to tighten the bound on p(ë). One might make
predictions using multiple a priori plausible models, determine the range of findings, and use this range as
the bound on p(ë).7 This done, the analysis resulting in inequalities (5) and (6) can be repeated using the
tightened bound.

4.2.2. Decision Making When the Optimal Policy is Indeterminate
It remains to consider decision making when the optimality of a mandate is indeterminate. Decision
theory gives no consensus prescription, but it suggests various reasonable criteria.
When economists have studied planning with partial knowledge, it has been standard to assert a
subjective probability distribution over unknown decision-relevant quantities (aka states of nature) and
propose choice of an action that maximizes subjective expected utility. Researchers studying vaccination
policy have recently begun to use this criterion to cope with uncertainty. Tanner et al.(2008) exposits it
under the name stochastic programming.
In the present setting, one would minimize subjective expected cost. Let S denote the set of states
of nature, indexing feasible values of the unknown quantity p(ë). Let ð denote the subjective distribution
placed on S. For s 0 S, let ps(ë) denote the value of p(ë) in state s. Let f(@): R 6 R be a specified increasing
function expressing the risk preference of the planner. Then minimization of subjective expected cost means
replacement of optimality criterion (3) with the computable criterion

7

Studies of disease transmission sometimes report sensitivity analyses that conjecture multiple parameter
values within a specified parametric model. See, for example, Weycker et al. (2005). As far as I am aware,
epidemiological research has not sought to generate set-valued predictions conjecturing a broad set of
plausible models, as is the norm in partial identification analysis (Manski, 2007).

20
(7)

mandate if

IS f[ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c]dð # f[p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd],

do not mandate if

IS f[ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c]dð $ f[p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd].

Criterion (7) simplifies if f(@) is the identity function, in which case the planner is risk neutral. It reduces to

(8)

mandate if

[IS ps(ë)dð](1 ! ë) + c # p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd,

do not mandate if

[IS ps(ë)dð](1 ! ë) + c $ p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd.

Thus, the planner acts as if the unknown p(ë) equals its known subjective mean IS ps(ë)dð.
Use of the expected utility criterion to make policy choices with partial knowledge is reasonable
when a planner has a credible basis for asserting a subjective probability distribution on unknown quantities.
However, a subjective probability distribution is itself a form of knowledge, and a planner may not have a
credible basis for asserting one. I have previously studied various problems of this type, where a planner
faces ambiguity; Manski (2011) reviews basic ideas and gives applications. In particular, Manski (2010)
studied the unconstrained planning problem of Section 3.1 as choice of a vaccination rate under ambiguity,
focusing on the minimax and the minimax-regret criteria. These criteria are complex to evaluate when the
planner can choose any vaccination rate, but they simplify when he makes a mandate decision.
A planner who uses the minimax criterion and who assumes that p(@) is monotone acts as if he faces
the worst-case scenario in which increasing the vaccination rate from vd to 1 has no indirect preventive effect.
Thus, he acts as if p(ë) = p(ëvd). This done, he replaces optimality criterion (3) with the computable criterion

(9)

mandate if

p(ëvd)(1 ! ë) + c # p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd,

do not mandate if p(ëvd)(1 ! ë) + c $ p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd.

21
This criterion simplifies to

(9')

mandate if

c # ëp(ëvd),

do not mandate if c $ ëp(ëvd).

Thus, the minimax criterion resolves indeterminacy in favor of no mandate.
To form the minimax-regret criterion, let Sm and Sd respectively be the subsets of S in which a
mandate yields strictly lower and higher social cost than decentralized decision making. For states in Sm,
regret is zero if the planner chooses the mandate, which is optimal in these states. Regret in state s 0 Sm takes
the positive value [p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd] ! [ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c] if he choose not to mandate the vaccine.
Analogously, for states in Sd, regret is zero if the planner chooses not to mandate the vaccine and takes the
positive value [ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c] ! [p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd] if he choose to mandate it.
Maximum regret in each subset of states is

(10a) Rm / max [p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd] ! [ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c],
s 0 Sm

(10b) Rd / max [ps(ë)(1 ! ë) + c] ! [p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd].
s 0 Sd

The maximum regret of mandate and no-mandate decisions across all states are Rd and Rm respectively.
Hence, a minimax-regret decision is

(11)

mandate if

Rd # Rm,

do not mandate if Rd $ Rm.

To obtain an explicit solution, observe that the maximum in (10a) occurs in the best-case scenario

22
for vaccination, where ps(ë) = 0. The maximum in (10b) occurs in the worst-case scenario where ps(ë) =
p(ëvd). Hence,

(12a) Rm = p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! c(1 ! vd),
(12b) Rd = (1 ! vd)[c ! ëp(ëvd)].

Inserting these values into (11) yields the criterion

(13)

mandate if

2c(1 ! vd) # p(ëvd)[1 ! 2ëvd + ë],

do not mandate if

2c(1 ! vd) $ p(ëvd)[1 ! 2ëvd + ë].

Comparison of (13) with (9') shows that the minimax and minimax-regret criteria are broadly similar
but differ in their specifics. The two criteria are identical when ë = 1. In that case, both prescribe adoption
of the mandate if c # p(vd).

4.2.3. Numerical Example
Numerical examples are useful to illustrate the findings. First consider a scenario where ë = 1. The
vaccine has been approved and the planner observes that decentralized decision making yields vaccination
rate vd = 0.5 and illness rate among the unvaccinated p(vd) = 0.2. In this setting, inequality (5a') holds if the
mean cost of vaccination (relative to illness) is sufficiently small, specifically if c # 0.2. Inequality (5b')
holds if c > 0.2. Hence, the planner can conclude that a mandate is optimal if c # 0.2 and is not optimal
otherwise.
Indeterminacy of optimal policy can occur if ë < 1. Suppose that ë = 0.75, vd = 0.5 and p(ëvd) = 0.2.
Applying (5'), the planner can conclude that a mandate is optimal if c # 0.15 and not optimal if c > 0.25.

23
Optimal policy is indeterminate if 0.15 < c # 0.25.
In cases of indeterminacy, policy choice depends on the decision criterion that the planner uses. The
expected utility criterion (7) can yield either policy depending on the transformation f(@) and subjective
distribution ð. A planner using the minimax criterion (9') enacts the mandate if c # 0.15 but not if c > 0.15.
One using the minimax-regret criterion (13) enacts the mandate if c # 0.2 but not if c > 0.2.

4.3. Approvals

4.3.1. Approval Followed by a Mandate
Analysis of the decision to approve a new vaccine is straightforward if the planner knows the
vaccination rate va that would occur after approval. Suppose first approval would be followed by a mandate.
Then approval is equivalent to enacting a mandate in a setting where the observed decentralized vaccination
rate is vd = 0 and the observed decentralized illness rate is p(ëvd) = p(0). The analysis of Section 4.2 applies
directly to this case.
Application of (5) shows that the available knowledge suffices to determine the optimality of
approval if either of two conditions hold:

(14a)

p(0)(1 ! ë) # p(0) ! c Y approval is optimal,

(14b)

0 > p(0) ! c

Y approval is not optimal.

The optimality of approval is indeterminate if

(15)

ëp(0) < c # p(0).

24
Application of (9') and (13) show that the minimax and minimax-regret approval decisions are

(16) approve if
reject if

c # ëp(0),
c $ ëp(0)

and

(17)

approve if

2c # p(0)(1 + ë),

reject if

2c $ p(0)(1 + ë).

4.3.2. Approval Followed by Decentralized Vaccination
Now suppose the planner knows that approval would be followed by decentralized decision making.
Approval is not equivalent to a mandate in this case, but the reasoning underlying the analysis of Section 4.2
applies with straightforward modifications. Approval is consequential only if decentralized decision making
would yield a positive vaccination rate, so I assume that vd > 0.
Applying (4), approval is optimal if

(18)

p(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) # p(0) ! cvd

and is sub-optimal otherwise. Observation of p(0) and the monotonicity assumption imply that 0 # p(ëvd)
# p(0). This bound on p(ëvd) suffices to determine the optimality of approval if either of two conditions
hold:

(19a)

c # ëp(0)

Y approval is optimal,

25
(19b)

c > p(0)/vd Y approval is not optimal.

The optimality of approval is indeterminate if neither inequality holds; that is, if

(20) ëp(0) < c # p(0)/vd.

A planner who uses the minimax criterion to cope with indeterminacy acts as if p(ëvd) = p(0). Thus,
he replaces optimality criterion (4) with the computable criterion

(21) approve if p(0)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd # p(0),
reject if

p(0)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd $ p(0).

This simplifies to

(21') approve if c # ëp(0),
reject if

c $ ëp(0).

Thus, the minimax criterion resolves indeterminacy in favor of rejection of the vaccine.
To form the minimax-regret criterion, let Sa and Sr respectively be the subsets of S in which approval
yields strictly lower and higher social cost than rejection. For states in Sa, regret is zero if the planner
approves the vaccine, which is optimal in these states. Regret in state s 0 Sa takes the positive value p(0) !
ps(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! cvd if he rejects the vaccine. Analogously, for states in Sr, regret is zero if the planner
rejects the vaccine and takes the positive value ps(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd ! p(0) if he approves it.
Maximum regret in each subset of states is

26
(22a) Ra / max p(0) ! ps(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) ! cvd
s 0 Sa

(22b) Rr / max ps(ëvd)(1 ! ëvd) + cvd ! p(0).
s 0 Sr

The maximum regret of approval and rejection decisions across all states are Rr and Ra respectively. Hence,
a minimax-regret decision is

(23)

approve if

Rr # Ra,

reject if

Rr $ Ra.

To obtain an explicit solution, observe that the maximum in (22a) occurs in the best-case scenario
for vaccination, where ps(ëvd) = 0. The maximum in (22b) occurs in the worst-case scenario where ps(ëvd)
= p(0). Hence,

(24a) Ra = p(0) ! cvd,
(24b) Rr = cvd ! ëp(0)vd.

Inserting these values into (23) yields the criterion

(25)

approve if

2cvd # p(0)(1 + ëvd),

reject if

2cvd $ p(0)(1 + ëvd).

4.3.3. Numerical Example
A numerical example again is useful to illustrate findings. Let the direct effect of vaccination be ë

27
= 1. The planner observes that the illness rate in the absence of vaccination is p(0) = 0.25. He knows that
if the vaccine is approved, decentralized decision making will yield vaccination rate vd = 0.5. In this setting,
inequality (19a) holds if c # 0.25 and (19b) holds if c > 0.5. Hence, the planner can conclude that approval
is optimal if c # 0.25 and not optimal if c > 0.5. Optimal policy is indeterminate if 0.25 < c # 0.5.
In cases of indeterminacy, policy choice depends on the decision criterion that the planner uses. The
expected utility criterion can yield either approval or rejection of the vaccine depending on the planner's risk
preference and the subjective distribution he places on the illness rate that would occur following approval.
A planner using minimax criterion (21') approves the vaccine if c # 0.25 but not if c > 0.25. One using
minimax-regret criterion (25) approve the vaccine if c # 0.375 but not if c > 0.375.

5. FDA Approval Reconsidered

This paper has expressed vaccine approval and mandate as planning problems, has characterized
optimal decision making, and has suggested criteria for decision making when incomplete knowledge makes
optimal policy indeterminate. Various assumptions—linearity of social cost in the illness rate and the cost
of vaccination, abstraction from the dynamics of illness, uncertainty only about the indirect preventive effect
of vaccination—enabled a simple analysis. Relaxing these assumptions may complicate policy determination
but the principles would remain intact.
Perhaps the most basic virtues of formal decision analysis are that it makes explicit the
considerations that affect policymaking and makes it possible to examine how variation in these
considerations would affect decisions. I believed it well justified to suggest that performance of formal
decision analysis, whether the version developed in this paper or some variant, can improve prevailing
vaccine approval and mandate procedures. The FDA approval process particularly warrants reconsideration.

28
I observed in Section 2 that in 2012 Congress required the FDA to institute a "structured benefit-risk
assessment framework." The subsequent FDA response rejected use of formal decision analysis in favor of
what the FDA calls a "structured qualitative approach" (U. S. Food and Drug Administration, 2013). The
nature of this approach is difficult for an external observer to discern, it being carried out mainly through the
deliberations of FDA advisory panels. The FDA makes public only a "Summary of Basis for Approval"
when a new vaccine or drug is approved. This document presents some information on the safety and
efficacy of the product but it does not explain how the agency balances these considerations. The agency
does not make public even a summary of its rationale when it rejects an application for drug or vaccine
approval. Thus, the "structured qualitative approach" of the FDA is not transparent.
While much about the FDA approval process is obscure, two important features are clear. First,
agency concern with negative consequences of vaccination focuses on the health risk to the recipient and
does not extend to monetary costs or other burdens borne by society. Second, agency concern with the
benefits of vaccination focuses on the direct preventive effect on the recipient and does not extend to the
indirect preventive effects on other members of the population.
I find it difficult to rationalize why the outcomes considered by a public agency should have such
limited scope. The qualitative decision process of the FDA shields the agency from scrutiny. Analysis of
approval as a planning problem would make explicit the full social costs and benefits of vaccination.

29
References

Althouse, B., T. Bergstrom, and C. Bergstrom (2010), "A Public Choice Framework for Controlling
Transmissible and Evolving Diseases," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107, 1696-1701.
Anderson R. and R. May (1991), Infectious Diseases of Humans: Dynamics and Control, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Ball F. and O. Lyne (2002), "Optimal Vaccination Policies for Stochastic Epidemics among a Population of
Households," Mathematical Biosciences, 177&178, 333–354.
Becker, N. and D. Starczak (1997), "Optimal Vaccination Strategies for a Community of Households,"
Mathematical Biosciences, 139, 117-132.
Boulier, B. T. Datta, and R. Goldfarb (2007), "Vaccination Externalities," The B.E. Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy 7, issue 1, article 23. http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/vol7/iss1/art23.
Brito, D., E. Sheshinski, and M. Intriligator (1991), "Externalities and Compulsory Vaccinations," Journal
of Public Economics, 45, 69-90.
Cox, D. (1958), Planning of Experiments, New York: Wiley.
Fine, P. (1993), "Herd Immunity: History, Theory, Practice," Epidemiological Reviews, 15, 265-302.
Fine, P, K. Eames, and D. Heymann (2011), "'Herd Immunity': A Rough Guide," Clinical Infectious
Diseases, 52, 911–916.
Hill, A. and I. Longini (2003), The Critical Vaccination Fraction for Heterogeneous Epidemic Models,"
Mathematical Biosciences, 181, 85–106.
Hudgens, M. and E. Halloran (2008), "Toward Causal Inference with Interference," Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 103, 832-842.
Institute of Medicine, (2011), Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust, Committee on Standards for
Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, Board on Health Care Services; editors, R. Graham
et al. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Keeling, M. and A. Shattock (2012), "Optimal but Unequitable Prophylactic Distribution of Vaccine,"
Epidemics, 4, 75-85.
Loeb, M., M. Russell, L. Moss, K. Fonseca, J. Fox, D. Earn, F. Aoki, G. Horsman, P. Van Caeseele, K.
Chokani, M. Vooght, L. Babiuk, R. Webby, and S. Walter (2010), "Effect of Influenza Vaccination of
Children on Infection Rates in Hutterite Communities: A Randomized Trial," Journal of the American
Medical Association, 303, 943-950.
Manski, C. (1997), "Monotone Treatment Response," Econometrica, 65, 1311-1334.

30
Manski, C. (2007), Identification for Prediction and Decision, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Manski, C. (2009), "Diversified Treatment under Ambiguity," International Economic Review, 50, 10131041.
Manski, C. (2010), "Vaccination with Partial Knowledge of External Effectiveness," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107, 3953-3960.
Manski, C. (2011), "Choosing Treatment Policies under Ambiguity," Annual Review of Economics, 3, 25-49.
Manski, C. (2013a), "Identification of Treatment Response with Social Interactions," The Econometrics
Journal, 16, S1-S23.
Manski, C. (2013b), "Diagnostic Testing and Treatment under Ambiguity: Using Decision Analysis to Inform
Clinical Practice," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110, 2064-2069.
Mishra, R., E. Oviedo-Orta, P. Prachi, R. Rappuoli and F. Bagnoli (2012), "Vaccines and Antibiotic
Resistance," Current Opinion in Microbiology, 15, 596-602.
Patel, R., I. Longini, and E. Halloran (2005), "Finding Optimal Vaccination Strategies for Pandemic
Influenza Using Genetic Algorithms," Journal of Theoretical Biology, 234, 201-212.
Rubin, D. (1978), "Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization," Annals of Statistics,
6, 34-58.
Scuffham, P. and P. West (2002), "Economic Evaluation of Strategies for the Control and Management of
Influenza in Europe," Vaccine, 20, 2562–2578.
Tanner, M., L. Sattenspiel, and L. Ntaimo (2008), "Finding Optimal Vaccination Strategies under Parameter
Uncertainty Using Stochastic Programming," Mathematical Biosciences, 215, 144-151.
U. S. Congress (2012), "Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act," Public Law 112–144,
112th Congress, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U. S. Food and Drug Administration (1994), "Summary for Basis of Approval Reference Number: 93-0395
Merck and Co. Varicella Virus Vaccine Live VARIVAX,"
www.fda.gov/downloads/biologicsbloodvaccines/vaccines/approvedproducts/ucm142826.pdf, accessed
August 3, 2014.
U. S. Food and Drug Administration (2009), "Vaccine Product Approval Process,"
www.fda.gov/biologicsbloodvaccines/developmentapprovalprocess/biologicslicenseapplicationsblaproce
ss/ucm133096.htm, accessed August 3, 2014.
U. S. Food and Drug Administration (2013), Structured Approach to Benefit-Risk Assessment in Drug
Regulatory Decision-Making, Draft PDUFA V Implementation Plan,
patientnetwork.fda.gov/sites/default/files/fda_benefit-risk_draft_plan_final_for_posting.pdf, accessed August
3, 2014.

31
Washington State Board of Health (2006), Immunization Advisory Committee: Criteria for Reviewing
Antigens for Potential Inclusion in Wac 246-100-166,
sboh.wa.gov/Portals/7/Doc/immunizations/FinalRecs_2006-06-14.pdf, accessed August 4, 2014.
Weycker, D., J. Edelsberg, E. Halloran, I. Longini, A. Nizam, A. Ciuryla, and G. Oster (2005), "Populationwide Benefits of Routine Vaccination of Children Against Influenza," Vaccine, 23, 1284-1293.

