NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFICIENCY OF REAL-WORLD BARGAINING:
EVIDENCE FROM WHOLESALE USED-AUTO AUCTIONS
Bradley Larsen
Working Paper 20431
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20431

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014, Revised September 2019

I thank Panle Jia Barwick, Glenn Ellison, and Stephen Ryan for invaluable help and advice. I
would also like to thank Isaiah Andrews, Gabe Carroll, Mingli Chen, Victor Chernozhukov,
Denis Chetverikov, Dominic Coey, Joachim Freyberger, Ken Hendricks, Kyoo-il Kim, Steven
Lang, Ariel Pakes, Christopher Palmer, Parag Pathak, Brennan Platt, Zhaonan Qu, Dan Quint,
Mark Satterthwaite, Paulo Somaini, Alan Sorensen, Evan Storms, Jean Tirole, Juuso Toikka, and
Anthony Zhang for helpful suggestions. This paper also benefited from conversations with many
other faculty and students at various institutions. I thank several anonymous auction houses and
their employees for providing data and institutional details. I acknowledge support from the
National Science Foundation under grants GRFP-0645960 and SES-1530632. Earlier versions of
this paper were circulated under the title, "The Efficiency of Dynamic, Post-Auction Bargaining:
Evidence from Wholesale Used-Auto Auctions." The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2014 by Bradley Larsen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Efficiency of Real-World Bargaining: Evidence from Wholesale Used-Auto Auctions
Bradley Larsen
NBER Working Paper No. 20431
August 2014, Revised September 2019
JEL No. C57,C78,D44,D47,D82,L1
ABSTRACT
This study empirically quantifies the efficiency of a real-world bargaining game with two-sided
incomplete information. Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987) derived the
theoretical ex-ante efficient frontier for bilateral trade under two-sided uncertainty and
demonstrated that it falls short of ex-post efficiency, but little is known about how well
bargaining performs in practice. Using about 265,000 sequences of a game of alternating-offer
bargaining following an ascending auction in the wholesale used-car industry, this study
estimates (or bounds) distributions of buyer and seller valuations and evaluates where realized
bargaining outcomes lie relative to efficient outcomes. Results demonstrate that the ex-ante and
ex-post efficient outcomes are close to one another, but that the real bargaining falls short of both,
suggesting that the bargaining is indeed inefficient but that this inefficiency is not solely due to
the information constraints highlighted in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983). Quantitatively,
findings indicate that 17–24% of negotiating pairs fail to trade even though gains from trade
exist, leading an efficiency loss of 12–23% of the available gains from trade.

Bradley Larsen
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
bjlarsen@stanford.edu

Whether haggling in an open-street market, deciding upon prices between an upstream supplier
and downstream producer, or negotiating a corporate takeover deal, bargaining between a buyer and
seller is one of the oldest and most common ways of transacting. When both parties have incomplete
information, it is known that equilibrium outcomes are difficult to characterize.1 Myerson and
Satterthwaite (1983) demonstrated that ex-post efficiency—trading whenever the buyer values the
good more than the seller—is not possible in bargaining with two-sided incomplete information.
Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987) derived the theoretical ex-ante efficient
frontier, but, as Williams emphasized, “little is known about whether or not these limits can be
achieved with ‘realistic’ bargaining procedures.”2 This paper is the first attempt to bring data
to this question. I develop a framework to estimate distributions of private valuations of both
buyers and sellers who participate in bargaining following wholesale used-auto auctions. I then
map these primitives into results from the theoretical mechanism design literature to compare
real-world outcomes to efficient outcomes.
The question of whether real-world bargaining is efficient is one that cannot be addressed
in a standard non-strategic framework (e.g. some form of Nash bargaining) or even a strategic
alternating-offer game (e.g. Rubinstein 1982). These frameworks entail complete information and
thus presume knowledge a priori that bargaining is perfectly efficient: in such a world, bargaining is
never even attempted unless agreement is the efficient outcome. Treating bargaining as efficient, if it
is in fact not, can result in incorrect market design recommendations or misleading calculations for
welfare or pricing, or an incorrect understanding of bargaining power. The data and methodology
I use in this paper allow me to study whether or not bargaining is actually efficient, rather than
assuming it to be so.
Moreover, this question is indeed an empirical question—one that theory alone cannot address.
Theoretical work by Chatterjee and Samuelson (1983), Satterthwaite and Williams (1989), Ausubel
and Deneckere (1993), and Ausubel, Cramton, and Deneckere (2002) demonstrated that certain
knife-edge or limiting cases of bargaining games may reach the theoretical ex-ante efficient frontier,
but the limits of practical bargaining are unknown. Also, while the large theoretical literature on
incomplete-information strategic bargaining has yielded valuable insights, it has done so primarily
through a focus on special cases (see Appendix Table A1 for a summary of this literature). The
1
Fudenberg and Tirole (1991) stated, “The theory of bargaining under incomplete information is currently more
a series of examples than a coherent set of results. This is unfortunate because bargaining derives much of its
interest from incomplete information.” Fudenberg, Levine, and Tirole (1985) similarly commented “We fear that
in this case [of two-sided incomplete information], few generalizations will be possible, and that even for convenient
specifications of the functional form of the distribution of valuations, the problem of characterizing the equilibria
will be quite difficult.” Very little work—theoretical or empirical—on bargaining with two-sided uncertainty and
continuous valuations has been published before or after this time.
2
In the language of Holmström and Myerson (1983), the term ex-ante refers to before the players learn their
values and before the outcome of the bargaining is realized, and the term ex-post refers to after the valuations and
bargaining outcomes are realized. As explained below, the ex-ante efficient frontier describes the limits on possible
combinations of buyer and seller surplus that can be achieved under any bilateral bargaining mechanism in the
presence of incomplete information.

1

general case, with alternating offers, two-sided incomplete information, and continuous valuations
has received little attention because it involves complex signaling and updating by both parties. It
is known to have multiple equilibria, some of which are very inefficient, but no canonical model or
equilibrium characterization exists for the general setting examined in this paper.
To overcome these challenges, I take advantage of a unique, new dataset and novel empirical
approach. The data consists of several hundred thousand sequences of bargaining offers between
buyers and sellers at wholesale used-car auctions. It is the first bargaining dataset of this volume
and detail to be analyzed in the literature, containing not only final negotiated prices on consummated deals, as most empirical bargaining datasets likely would, but also all of the back-and-forth
bargaining offers between negotiating parties, and even all cases where bargaining failed to yield
an agreement. The data also contains detailed information on cars and characteristics of the sale.
The empirical setting, described in Section 2, is a large market of business-to-business transactions where new- and used-car dealers buy vehicles from other dealers as well as from rental
companies and banks. This industry represents the backbone of the supply side of the US used-car
market, with 15 million cars annually passing through its lanes, totaling $80 billion in sales. For
each car, the auction house runs a secret-reserve-price ascending auction, followed by bargaining if
the auction price falls short of the secret reserve price (which occurs more than two-thirds of the
time). It is in this bargaining stage of the game that trade can fail, and thus understanding the
efficiency of the bargaining is key to understanding the efficiency of the overall market. Industry
wide, about 40% of sales attempts result in no trade. Why do these trades fail? These could be
cases where the seller values the good more than the buyer, and hence no trade should occur even
in a fully efficient world; these could be cases where gains from trade do exist, but trade fails due
to the information constraints highlighted by Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983); or these may be
cases where trade fails because of the particular bargaining protocol employed or the particular
equilibrium played. These questions are the focus of this paper.
The bargaining I study takes place after an auction.3 This is not an unfortunate characteristic of the data, but rather a useful feature in studying what might otherwise be an intractable
problem. Indeed, it is quite difficult to make any progress studying incomplete-information bargaining empirically without some kind of special lever. Specifically, given that no canonical model
or even characterization of equilibria exists for such games, theory provides no obvious mapping
from observables to primitives. In my setting, however, the distribution of buyer valuations can
be estimated using the auction data, and bounds on the distribution of seller valuations can be
obtained using sellers’ responses to the first bargaining offer (the auction price). Each of these
3

Many other settings similarly constitute an auction followed by bargaining, where one party collects initial bids
from a number of different bidders in an auction-like stage and then selects a single bidder with whom to negotiate
a final deal. Examples include business-to-business settings (e.g. procuring subcontractors), government settings
(e.g. procuring services or selling government property), or private settings (e.g. selling a home). See examples in
Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong (1997), Wang (2000), Huh and Park (2010), and An and Tang (2018).

2

steps imposes only minimal assumptions on the structure of the bargaining game.
I lay out a model in Section 3 and demonstrate several theoretical properties that aid in estimating model primitives. I show that the precise effect of the auction on the bilateral bargaining
game is twofold: first, the auction leads to a truncation of the lower bound of the support of types
who bargain. Thus, the game I study is analogous to a setting of bargaining alone where the lower
bound of the support of the types in the bargaining game differs across realizations of the game
in a tractable manner determined by the realization of the auction price, and the results herein
average over these realizations. Second, the auction price is the first offer in the bargaining game
and provides a lower bound on achievable prices in the bargaining game, similar to how a list price
would provide an upper bound in many other real-world bargaining games, such as haggling over
a car at a retail outlet. I also demonstrate in the model that game-level heterogeneity affects the
game’s outcomes in a tractable manner.
My approach to bounding the distribution of seller valuations is similar in spirit to Haile and
Tamer (2003), using inequalities implied by very basic assumptions about players’ rationality to
learn about model primitives without imposing a complete model of the game or solving for an
equilibrium. The bargaining setting is more complicated than the auction setting in Haile and
Tamer (2003), however, in that it is not necessarily the case that an upper and lower bound on
the valuation is observed for each individual observation in the data; instead, I obtain conditional
probability statements that bound the whole distribution of valuations. This methodology is new
to the empirical bargaining literature, and can be applied in alternating-offer bargaining settings,
regardless of whether the bargaining follows an auction, when the econometrician observes the first
offer and the response to that offer.
In order to compute expected gains from trade to measure efficiency in the real-world mechanism, it is necessary to know not only the distributions of valuations but also which player types
trade and which do not. This is an equilibrium object and, as highlighted above, existing theory provides no guidance on identifying the equilibrium of games involving two-sided incompleteinformation bargaining. I demonstrate, however, that even without solving explicitly for equilibrium
strategies the direct-revelation mechanism corresponding to the equilibrium of the real-world game
is identified in the data. This argument relies on the Revelation Principle, which has been exploited
widely in the theoretical mechanism design literature. Applying this concept to my empirical setting allows me to avoid solving for or characterizing the actual equilibrium of the game and instead
work with the direct mechanism corresponding to this game as implied by the data.
Section 4 describes each step of my estimation approach, which exploits the model’s properties.
After controlling for observable heterogeneity, I use a likelihood approach to deconvolve unobserved
game-level heterogeneity and estimate buyer valuations using an order statistic inversion. I then
estimate bounds on seller valuations, exploiting revealed preferences inequalities. I estimate the
mapping between auction prices and the lower bounds of the support of buyer and seller types in
3

the bargaining game as well as the mapping corresponding to the direct revelation mechanism of
the game. These mappings and the seller valuation bounds can each be estimated using flexible
spline approximations within a constrained least squares framework.
After estimating these structural objects, I describe in Section 5 how I compute welfare under
counterfactual efficient bargaining mechanisms. These counterfactual mechanisms are related to
results derived in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987), but are more complex
to compute than the mechanisms they study because the distributions I estimate do not satisfy the
regularity assumptions exploited by Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987) (defined
below in Section 5) to simplify their analysis. I must therefore impose incentive compatibility
numerically. Also, having only bounds on seller valuations, and not point estimates, I must perform
a large numerical search to find bounds on efficiency measures. I ease this computational burden by
deriving useful monotonicity properties that allow me to obtain bounds for some welfare measures
directly using bounds on the distribution of seller valuations.
In Section 6 I then compare outcomes under efficient bargaining to those under the real bargaining to measure the relative efficiency. The first type of efficiency loss I measure is the loss
due solely to incomplete information. Ideally, a buyer and seller should trade whenever the buyer
values the good more than the seller (ex-post efficient trade). However, the celebrated Myerson
and Satterthwaite (1983) Theorem demonstrated that, when the supports of buyer and seller types
overlap, there does not exist any incentive-compatible, individually rational bargaining mechanism
that is ex-post efficient and that also satisfies an ex-ante balanced budget. Williams (1987) then
derived the entire ex-ante efficient frontier for any range of relative weights placed on the buyer’s
and seller’s expected gains from trade. This frontier describes the limits on buyer and seller surplus
that can be achieved by any incentive-compatible, individually rational, budget-balancing mechanism. I highlight several mechanisms along the ex-ante efficient frontier: the mechanism that places
equal welfare weight on the buyer and seller surplus, which I refer to as the second-best mechanism;
the mechanism placing all welfare weight on the seller’s surplus (the seller-optimal mechanism);
and the mechanism placing all welfare weight on the buyer’s surplus (the buyer-optimal mechanism). The gap between the ex-ante and ex-post efficient frontiers represents an efficiency loss due
to the presence of incomplete information. Using the estimated distributions, I find that incomplete information per se need not be a huge problem in this market: the second-best mechanism
achieves about the same range of expected surplus as the infeasible ex-post efficient mechanism.
The efficiency loss due solely to incomplete information is about $9–59 for cars sold by dealers and
$9–77 for cars sold by fleet or lease institutions. The second-best mechanism falls short of ex-post

efficiency in terms of the probability of trade by 3 to 16 percentage points, but these trades that
the second-best mechanism fails to capture appear to be low-surplus trades.
The second type of efficiency loss I measure compares the real-world bargaining to the ex-ante
efficient frontier. The real bargaining may fall short of this frontier for several reasons. First,
4

it is well known that, unlike the mechanisms discussed in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and
Williams (1987), real-world bargaining with two-sided uncertainty has no clear equilibrium predictions due to signaling by both parties, and many qualitatively different equilibria exist (see
Ausubel and Deneckere 1993). The equilibrium play observed in the data may correspond to a
particularly inefficient equilibrium. Second, it may the case that the alternating-offer protocol used
in this market is inefficient regardless of the equilibrium played; it may indeed be the case that
a more efficient, practical protocol exists. Third, it may be that the real bargaining falls short
of the theoretically efficient benchmark because that benchmark fails to satisfy other constraints
that real-world bargaining satisfies, such as having rules that are simple for players to understand
or being implementable without requiring the strong assumption that players and the market designer all have common knowledge of players’ valuation distributions and beliefs (an assumption of
traditional mechanism design critiqued in the influential Wilson doctrine, Wilson 1986). Because I
place very little structure on the bargaining game, my analysis allows for any of these three cases
to occur. Any of these cases can lead to a gap between the real outcome and that of an ex-ante
efficient mechanism.
My findings indicate that the real bargaining falls short of the second-best by $377–1,123 for
cars sold by dealers and by $223–834 for cars sold by large fleet or lease institutions. The losses of
the real-world mechanism compared to the ex-post efficient frontier are similar in magnitude. These
losses represent 17–23% of the ex-post gains from trade for cars sold by dealers and 12–20% for
cars sold by large institutions. In terms of the probability of trade, the real-world bargaining falls
short of the ex-post efficient outcome by 0.172–0.225 for cars sold by dealers and by 0.199–0.235
for cars sold by fleet and lease sellers. This implies that about 17–24% of negotiations constitute
cases where the buyer indeed values the good more than the seller and yet the negotiation fails.
Given that the overall rate of trade failure in the bargaining stage is about 35% in each sample,
this suggests that over half of failed trades are cases where gains from trade exist but the parties
do not trade, and the remainder of failed trades are cases where no gains from trade exist. The key
takeaway of my analysis is that the real-world bargaining in this market is indeed inefficient and
that this inefficiency is not solely due to the information constraints highlighted in Myerson and
Satterthwaite (1983).

1

Related Literature

To my knowledge, this paper is the first to bring data to the bargaining efficiency framework of Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983). Unlike the vast structural auction literature—where researchers
identify primitives to study various counterfactuals by modeling the game as one of incomplete
information and strategic behavior—structural studies analyzing bargaining through a strategic,

5

incomplete-information lens are rare.4 Several exceptions that estimate models of one-sided incomplete information include Sieg (2000) and Silveira (2017), who focused on take-it-or-leave-it
bargaining in trial settings, and Ambrus, Chaney, and Salitsky (2018), who studied pirate ransom
negotiations and modeled bargaining following the theoretical work of Fudenberg, Levine, and Tirole (1985). Structural empirical work that highlights a role for two-sided uncertainty in bargaining
(i.e. where both parties have private information) includes Genesove (1991), who discussed briefly
the bargaining that takes place at wholesale auto auctions. Lacking detailed data on bargaining,
he tested several parametric specifications for buyer and seller distributions and found that these
assumptions performed poorly in explaining when bargaining occurred or when it was successful.
Li and Liu (2015) studied identification of valuations in a static, two-sided incomplete-information
bargaining game (a k double auction).
Another strand of the literature offers reduced-form analysis of implications of incomplete information bargaining. These studies include Merlo and Ortalo-Magne (2004), studying home sales in
the U.K.; Scott Morton, Silva-Risso, and Zettelmeyer (2011), studying survey data from retail car
buyers; Bagwell, Staiger, and Yurukoglu (2017), studying international trade negotiations; Backus,
Blake, Larsen, and Tadelis (2018), studying alternating-offer bargaining data in an online marketplace; and Grennan and Swanson (2019), studying information disclosure in hospital-supplier
bargaining.5 The data I analyze is new to the literature, and is particularly novel in the opportunity
it presents for analyzing bargaining in detail, as it contains hundreds of thousands of observations
and rich information about the characteristics of the goods sold and the actions players take during
each observation of the game.
The only previous structural analysis of actual back-and-forth offers is Keniston (2011), but
the setting, methodology, and focus of the two papers are quite distinct. Keniston (2011) collected
several thousand observations of back-and-forth bargaining offers between riders and autorickshaw
drivers in India, whereas my setting studies professionals engaging in business-to-business negotiations. The model of Keniston (2011) allowed for two-sided incomplete information, like mine,
but the author embedded this model in a search-and-matching framework to model agents’ outside
options, whereas my paper does not explicitly model players’ continuation payoffs when bargaining
fails. The method of Keniston (2011) requires estimating beliefs in the bargaining subgame, relying
on the assumption of a stationary equilibrium, whereas my approach does not require stationarity
4

In a separate strand of the structural bargaining literature, a number of papers have made valuable contributions
by abstracting away from incomplete information and modeling negotiated prices as arising from a Nash-bargaining
surplus-splitting rule, such as Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) and other subsequent studies of bargaining settings
with externalities, and other work studying post-auction bargaining settings (Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong
1997; An and Tang 2018). Merlo and Tang (2012) provided identification arguments for stochastic bargaining games
of complete information, and Merlo and Tang (2018) and Watanabe (2009) studied complete-information games with
asymmetric priors.
5
Merlo, Ortalo-Magné, and Rust (2015) provided a structural model of the home-sales data from Merlo and
Ortalo-Magne (2004) but abstracted away from bargaining actions in order to focus on the seller’s dynamic choice of
list price.

6

assumptions or belief estimation. Keniston (2011) does not focus on the efficiency of bargaining
or the Myerson-Satterthwaite Theorem, but instead compares welfare under bargaining to welfare
under a fixed-price mechanism.
The approach developed in my paper can be applied to other settings with alternating-offer
data to identify and estimate bounds on the distribution of valuations for the player who responds
to the first offer. Larsen and Zhang (2018) presented an approach that can be used to instead
obtain the distribution of valuations in bargaining games for the player who makes (rather than
responds to) the first offer. Larsen and Zhang (2018) applied their approach to a subset of the data
used in this paper to analyze the full auction-plus-bargaining mechanism rather than the bilateral
bargaining studied in this paper, finding similar qualitative results regarding mechanism efficiency.

2

The Wholesale Used-Car Industry and the Data

The wholesale used-auto auction industry provides liquidity to the supply side of the US used-car
market. Each year approximately 40 million used cars are sold in the United States, 15 million
of which pass through a wholesale auction house. Industry wide, about 60% of these cars sell,
with an average price between $8,000 and $9,000, totaling to over $80 billion in revenue (NAAA
2009). The industry consists of approximately 320 auction houses scattered across the country.
Throughout the industry, the majority of auction house revenue comes from fees paid by the buyer
and seller when trade occurs. Buyers attending wholesale auto auctions are used-car dealers. Sellers
may be car dealers (whom I will refer to as “dealers”) selling off extra inventory, or they may be
large institutions, such as banks, manufacturers, or rental companies (whom I will refer to as
“fleet/lease”) selling repossessed, off-lease, lease-buy-back, or old fleet vehicles.
Sellers bring their cars to the auction house, usually several days before the sale, and establish
a secret reserve price. In the days preceding the sale, potential buyers may view car details and
pictures online, including a condition report for cars sold by fleet/lease sellers, or may visit the
auction house to inspect and test drive cars (although very few visit prior to the day of sale). The
auction sale takes place in a large, warehouse-like room with 8–16 lanes running through it. In
each lane there is a separate auctioneer, and lanes run simultaneously. A car is driven to the front
of the lane and the auctioneer calls out bids, raising the price until only one bidder remains.
If the auction price exceeds the secret reserve price, the car is awarded to the high bidder. If
the auction price is below the secret reserve price, the high bidder is given the option to enter into
bargaining with the seller. If the high bidder opts to bargain, the auction house will contact the
seller by phone (or in person, if the seller is present at the sale), at which point the seller can accept
the auction price, end the negotiations, or propose some counteroffer higher than the auction price.6
6

If the seller is not present and the auctioneer observes that the auction price and the reserve price are far enough
apart that phone bargaining is very unlikely to succeed, the auctioneer may choose to reject the auction price on

7

If the seller counters, the auction house calls the buyer. Bargaining continues in this fashion until
one party accepts or terminates negotiations (with the typical time between calls being 2-3 hours).
It is this bilateral bargaining that is the focus on this paper.
The dataset used in this paper is new to the literature. The data come from six auction houses
owned by one company, each maintaining a large market share in the region in which it operates.
The sample period is from January 2007 to March 2010. An observation in the dataset represents
a run of the vehicle, that is, a distinct attempt to sell the vehicle through the mechanism. For
a given run, the data records the date, time, auction house location, and auction lane, as well as
the seller’s secret reserve price, the auction price, and, when bargaining occurs over the phone,
the full sequence of buyer and seller actions (accept, quit, or counter), and the amounts of any
offers/counteroffers. The data also records detailed characteristics of each car and sale. I drop a
number of observations, such as those with missing variables or extreme price realizations (lying
outside the lowest or highest 0.01 percentiles). I also drop car types (make-model-year-trim-age
combinations) that are not offered for sale at least ten times in my sample. Appendix C.1 contains
a list of all of my sample restrictions and a list of car observable characteristics that I use in
estimation. In the end, I am left with 133,523 runs of cars offered for sale by used-car dealers
(which I will refer to as the dealers sample), and 131,443 offered for sale by fleet/lease sellers
(which I will refer to as the fleet/lease sample).
Descriptive statistics for these samples are displayed in Table 1 (with additional descriptive
statistics shown in Appendix Table A3). The probability of trade is 0.705 in the dealers sample
and 0.768 in the fleet/lease sample; in both of these subsamples, this trade probability is higher
than the industry-wide average highlighted above (due primarily to my sample restrictions, such
as focusing on certain make-model-year-trim-age combinations). In the dealers sample, the average
auction price is over $1,000 below the average reserve price and about $600 below the average
blue book price. Dealer cars are on average seven years old and have nearly 100,000 miles on the
odometer. Fleet/lease cars tend to be newer (three years old and 57,000 miles), higher priced, and
have a smaller gap between the reserve and auction prices. Also, unlike dealer cars, for fleet/lease
cars the reserve price does not exceed the blue book price on average. All of these descriptive
statistics are consistent with conversations with industry participants: dealer cars tend to be older
cars with more aggressive reserve prices and tend to be less likely to sell.
Table 1 also shows information on the number of bidders participating in the auction. A precise
measure of the number of bidders is difficult to obtain at these auctions, as many sales take place
behalf of the seller. If both the buyer and seller are present at the auction sale, a quick round of bargaining may
sometimes take place in person immediately following the auction, but such behavior is discouraged as it delays
the next sale; each auction typically takes 30–90 seconds, and inserting in-person negotiations into that procedure
could drastically increase that time. Furthermore, the auction house discourages in-person interactions less they lead
parties to transact off site in attempts to avoid auction house fees. Such off-site transacting is generally prevented by
social norms, but in extreme cases violators could be punished through the auction house revoking access to future
sales.

8

simultaneously in different auction lanes and bidders are not required to register for the sale of
a specific car. However, for some auction sales, the company offers live video streaming and a
web-based portal for remote bidding, and for these sales I can obtain a lower bound on the number
of bidders from bid logs. These bid logs record each bid and the identity of the bidder if the bidder
participated online. If the bidder was instead physically present on the auction house floor, the bid
log only records the amount of the bid and an indicator, “floor”, rather than an identity. A lower
bound on the number of distinct bidders is given by the number of distinct online identities who
placed bids plus 1 if the log records any floor bids or plus 2 if the log records two consecutive floor
bids (assuming no bidder bids against himself). This lower bound rarely falls below 2 (this occurs
in 0.37% of observations in the dealers sample and 1.76% of observations in the fleet/lease sample).
The mean of this lower bound conditional on it being at least 2 is 2.924 in the dealers sample and
2.973 in the fleet/lease sample. The distribution of this lower bound will be used in estimation in
Section 4.
As data on actual back-and-forth offers is rare in the literature, I provide a period-by-period
summary of this data in Table 2 (for the dealers sample). Outcomes in this table are separated by
the period of the game in which the observed sequence ends. Period 1 is the auction. Observations
ending in period 1 represent cases that ended with auction price exceeding the reserve price or with
the auction price falling short of the reserve price and the buyer opting out of bargaining. The
remaining periods are labeled with even numbers for seller turns and odd numbers for buyer turns.
Table 2 demonstrates that in 10.66% of the dealers sample the game ends at the auction, and in
these cases the final price when trade happens (which occurs 88.58% of the time) is naturally the
auction price. The remainder of the time, the buyer opts out of bargaining. Observations ending in
trade in the second period also have the final price equal to the auction price (as the auction price
is the first bargaining offer). Consider now the fifth period of the game. Only 1.25% of the full
sample reaches this period, but this still consists of nearly 1,700 observations. In the fifth period,
when trade does occur, it occurs at an average final price of $7,792, which is over $600 above the
average auction price ($7,174), but still does not reach as high as the average reserve price ($8,640).
Overall, Table 2 suggests that observations ending in later periods had somewhat higher reserve
prices than those ending in earlier periods. Only one buyer-seller pair in the data endured ten
periods of the game, coming to agreement in the end, at a price $2,600 above the auction price.
Appendix Table A4 displays similar patterns for the fleet/lease sample. In the fleet/lease sample,
the game ends at the auction 34.39% of the time. Thus, in both the dealers and fleet/lease samples,
what happens after the auction plays a major role in the market.

9

3

Model

This section presents a model of the game played in wholesale used-car markets. Prior to stating
the assumptions of the model, I first restate the timing of the game, which is as follows:
1. Seller sets a secret reserve price, R.
2. N bidders bid in an ascending auction.
3. If the auction price, P A , exceeds the secret reserve price, the high bidder wins the item.
4. If the auction price does not exceed the secret reserve price, the high bidder is given the
opportunity to walk away, or to enter into bargaining with the seller.
5. If the high bidder chooses to enter bargaining, the auction price becomes the first bargaining
offer, and the high bidder and seller enter an alternating-offer bargaining game, mediated by
the auction house.
Throughout I maintain the following assumptions:
Assumptions.
(A1) N ≥ 2 risk-neutral bidders participate in an ascending button auction with zero participation
costs. For i = 1, ..., N , each buyer i has a private valuation B̃i = W + Bi , with Bi ∼ FB and
W ∼ FW , and with (W ,N ,{Bi }N
i=1 ) mutually independent..
(A2) A risk-neutral seller has a private valuation S̃ = W + S, with S ∼ FS and with S independent
of (W ,N ,{Bi }N
i=1 ).
(A3) The bargaining lasts for up to T < ∞ periods; buyers incur a common bargaining cost, cB > 0,
for each offer made; and sellers incur a common bargaining cost, cS > 0, for each offer made.
(A4) Strategies of the bargaining subgame are continuous in the auction price.
(A5) S has density fS and Bi has density fB , where fB is positive on [b, b].
The motivation for the independent private values framework is that, according to market
participants, buyers—as well as dealer-type sellers—have valuations arising primarily from their
local demand and inventory needs.7 Also, seller valuations can depend on the value at which
7

These buyers come from a wide geographic area, with some participants driving long distances or even flying to
attend the auction sale, and thus strong correlations between local demands and inventory needs among these buyers
are not likely a major concern. While there is likely some common values component to wholesale auto auctions,
accounting for this in estimation would be beyond the state of the methodological literature (positive identification
results do not exist for valuations at common values ascending auctions; see Athey and Haile 2007). In conversations
with market participants, buyers often claim to decide upon their willingness to pay before bidding begins, sometimes
having a specific retail customer lined up for a particular car, also suggesting a strong private component to valuations
(see also discussions on the popular industry blog, thetruthaboutcars.com, Lang 2011). Studying similar auto auctions
in Korea, Roberts (2013) and Kim and Lee (2014) provided evidence that private values models fit bidder behavior
well in these settings.

10

the car was assessed as a trade-in; for a bank or leasing company, valuations can arise from the
size of the defaulted loan.8 The button auction assumption simplifies the analysis of the auction,
but is also not an unreasonable approximation, as it is the auctioneer in this market who raises
the price and not the bidders (unlike in oral English auction) and bid increments are small. The
assumption of symmetric buyers is not restrictive in this setting given that the high bidder’s identity
is generally not known to the seller during bargaining and given that, in a private values ascending
auction, bidders’ auction strategies will not depend on the identities of other participants. The
assumption that N is independent of buyer valuations rules out endogenous entry. In Appendix
C.3.2, I document some evidence supporting this assumption, following the intuition derived in
Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2016).
The form of bargaining costs in Assumption A3 is found elsewhere in the theoretical bargaining
literature (e.g. Perry 1986 and Cramton 1991), and prevents players from continuing to bargain
even when no surplus is to be had. The cap on the number of periods T simplifies the proofs of
many of the model properties. T is assumed to be known to the players but not necessarily to
the econometrician (and similarly for cB and cS ). Assumption A4 is a technical condition required
for the differentiability of the seller’s payoff, exploited in the proof of Proposition 3 to prove strict
monotonicity of the seller’s secret reserve price strategy.
The assumption of positive density for Bi in Assumption A5 only plays a role in preventing
division by zero when I prove strict monotonicity of the seller’s secret reserve price (Proposition
3) and when I prove identification arguments in Appendix C.4–C.6. For the support of the seller
density, fS , I will use the notation [s, s]. My results do not rely on specifying whether the supports
of Bi and S are finite or infinite. In estimation and in computing welfare measures, I choose large,
finite values for the support bounds of B and S. In pinning down one tail condition empirically
(discussed in estimation step 4 in Section 4), I will also assume that s ≥ b, given that the seller will
be guaranteed a price of at least b from the auction.
The random variable W in Assumptions A1 and A2 is observed by all buyers and the seller and
represents game-level heterogeneity. Conditional on W , buyers and sellers have independent private
values, but unconditional on W valuations are correlated. In estimation, in Section 4, I consider
W to be unobserved to the econometrician, and I incorporate an additional, additively separable
game-level heterogeneity term X 0 γ that is observable to both the econometrician and to the players.
Incorporating this latter term, the seller’s value is S + W + X 0 γ and buyer i’s value is Bi + W + X 0 γ.
I do not assume that Bi and S take on only positive values; this is because these random variables
represent how the players value the car relative to the game-level heterogeneity component they all
observe (so a negative Bi or S means that a buyer or seller values the car less than the observable
8
These explanations for seller values are due to conversations with industry professionals. Note also that adverse
selection from the seller possessing more knowledge about car quality than the buyer is likely small because of auction
house information-revelation requirements and because sellers are not previous owners/drivers of the vehicles.

11

value of the car). Because these objects can be negative, I assume nothing that prevents the model
from suggesting that players’ overall valuations may be negative. However, in practice, when I
estimate the pieces of my model, I find that the majority of the variation in these valuations arises
from the observable heterogeneity term X 0 γ, and that this term has most of its mass above zero,
and thus the additively separable model does not appear to be a bad approximation. I discuss this
in Appendix C.2.2.
For the next several subsections, I will discuss properties of the game conditional on a realization
of W , and thus I will omit W for notational simplicity and return to it when I incorporate gamelevel heterogeneity in Proposition 5. I ignore auction house fees in this analysis but discuss them
in detail in Appendix D.

3.1

Payoffs

I model the game as follows. In period t = 0, the seller chooses her secret reserve price, R = ρ(S),
knowing only her type S. This choice of reserve price is not revealed to buyers, before or after
the auction. In period t = 1, the ascending auction takes place. Let βi denote bidder i’s auction
strategy (a price at which bidder i drops out of the auction), and let the final auction price be
denoted P A . If P A ≥ R, the high bidder wins the car and the game ends. If P A < R, the high
bidder is given the opportunity to walk away (denoted D1B = 1), which ends the game, or now walk
away (D1B = 0), entering into bargaining with the seller .
When the auction price is P A , a high bidder of type B chooses to enter into bargaining rather
than walk away whenever the payoff from entering into bargaining is non-negative. If the buyer
chooses not to walk away, the buyer enters an alternating-offer bargaining game with the seller. In
doing so the buyer immediately incurs a bargaining cost, cB > 0, and this cB will be incurred by
the buyer at every offer he makes. The seller will incur a bargaining cost, cS > 0, at each offer she
makes. The first offer of the bargaining game is P A . The game moves to period 2 of the game, in
which the seller chooses D2S ∈ {A, Q, C}—a choice to accept (A), quit (Q), or counter (C). If the
seller chooses Q or A the game ends. If the seller chooses C, the seller specifies a counteroffer P2S ,
and play continues to period 3, with the buyer choosing D3B ∈ {A, Q, C}, and so on up to period
T . If period T is reached, the player whose turn it is can only choose to accept or quit.
Throughout the game, bargaining offers must be weakly greater than the auction price. In
practice, this is an understood norm at the auction house, and it is supported in the data (bargaining
prices lie above the auction price nearly 100% of the time). This feature means that the auction
price plays a similar role for the seller that a list price would play for a buyer in many other realworld haggling scenarios.9 In the auto auction setting, this ability of the seller to accept the auction
9

In haggling in the presence of posted list price, a seller and buyer may negotiate over prices in a range below the
list price but the buyer may at any point choose to end the game by returning to the list price and accepting it. In
such a haggling setting, the list price can be thought of the first bargaining offer, just as the auction price is here.

12

price can either be modeled as an additional action available to the seller at any of her turns, or
can be modeled as a rule enforced by the auction house that all bargaining offers must lie weakly
above the auction price. I follow the latter approach.
The payoffs in the game are as follows. If a buyer of type B and a seller of type S agree to
trade at a price P , the buyer’s payoff is B − P less the per-offer bargaining costs the buyer has
incurred up to that point. If trade occurs in round 1 of the game (i.e. at the auction), the buyer’s
payoff will be B − P , with P = P A , the auction price. Similarly, if the buyer and seller agree to
trade at a price of P , the seller’s payoff is P , less any bargaining costs incurred by the seller up to
that point.
When disagreement occurs, the buyer receives a payoff of zero and the seller a payoff of S
(less any incurred costs). This modeling choice is one of the abstractions (and limitations) of the
model. In practice, a buyer who fails to acquire a car may choose to later re-enter the market to
bid on a similar car. The approach I adopt—treating buyers’ outside option as a 0 payoff—means
that the object I model as the buyer’s valuation is actually the buyer’s full willingness to pay
minus a discounted continuation value of re-entering the market. Similarly, what I model as the
seller’s value S is in practice the seller’s discounted continuation value of re-entering the market to
attempt to sell the car again at the auction house, at a competing wholesale outlet, or at her own
lot. These abstractions are appropriate under the following interpretation of my counterfactual
exercises: For a given buyer and seller pair who meet in bargaining today, holding fixed their
continuation values of re-entering the market, how would their expected gains from trade improve
if today’s bargaining game were efficient? Where these abstractions become a limitation is that
they do not allow me to model how players’ continuation values might change if the bargaining
mechanism were to change permanently. In Appendix B.4, I demonstrate that my qualitative and
quantitative findings are similar in several analyses that cut the data based on variables related to
players’ continuation values. These analyses do not alleviate all concerns associated with ignoring
these continuation-game dynamics. I ignore these dynamics across games in order to focus on
dynamics within the game; studying instead the dynamics across games would be an interesting
avenue for future research.10

3.2

Equilibrium Concept

In what follows, I will focus on pure strategy Bayesian Nash equilibria (BNE). A BNE of the
game is as follows. Let Ht represent the history of offers, including the auction price, up through
period t − 1 of the bargaining game. The strategy of a buyer of type bi is a history-contingent set
of actions σ B (bi ) = {βi , {DtB |Ht }, {PtB |Ht }}, where the decisions DtB and offers PtB included are
10

Note that players’ continuation values within a given game are addressed in the model; see Appendix A; it is
only players’ continuation values across instances of the game that I abstract away from.

13

those for periods in which it is the buyer’s turn.11 The strategy of a seller of type s is a historycontingent set of actions σ S (s) = {ρ, {DtS |Ht }, {PtS |Ht }}, where the decisions and offers are those
for periods in which it is the seller’s turn. A set of strategies σ B∗ (bi ) for all buyers and σ S∗ (s) for
the seller constitutes a BNE of this game if, for each player, his or her strategy is a best response to
opponents’ strategies and players update their beliefs about opponent valuations using Bayes rule
at each history of the game that is reached with positive probability.12
It is simple to derive a multiplicity of equilibria of the game, such as the following three examples
(none of which need violate Assumption A4):
Three Examples of Equilibria of the Bargaining Subgame:
1. Sellers only accept or quit at t = 2, and buyers reject all (off-equilibrium) offers at t = 3.
2. Sellers make uninformative offers (equal to s, say) at t = 2, buyers counter at t = 3, and
sellers only accept or quit at t = 4. Buyers reject all off-equilibrium offers at t = 3 or t = 5.
3. All offers and counteroffers must lie within a particular set of possible values, and in the
(off-equilibrium) case in which any player deviates from these offers, the opponent responds
by quitting.
Ausubel and Deneckere (1993) provided a discussion of other partial-pooling equilibria for a
similar bargaining game but with one-sided offers, and Ausubel, Cramton, and Deneckere (2002)
suggested that such arguments can be extended to two-sided offer games as well.

3.3

Mechanism Design Framework for Evaluating Bargaining Efficiency

Prior to deriving the properties of BNE of this game, I describe the mechanism design framework I
use to assess efficiency of bargaining, as it is the motivation for deriving some of the game’s properties. By the Revelation Principle (Myerson 1979), any BNE of an incomplete-information trading
game has a corresponding, payoff-equivalent, direct-revelation mechanism. In a direct mechanism,
a buyer of type b and seller of type s report their true types to the mechanism designer and then
trade occurs with probability x(s, b) (the allocation function), where this allocation function is
determined so that players receive the same expected outcomes as in the original game.
11
This discussion ignores the possibility of buyers conditioning their auction strategies on information observed
during the auction (such as the points at which opponents drop out); as shown in Proposition 1 below and discussed
in Appendix B.2, bidders would not gain from conditioning on such information.
12
Note that Perfect Bayes Equilibrium (PBE) is a refinement of BNE (and thus, every PBE is also a BNE) requiring
that the researcher also specify how beliefs are updated at histories of the game that are never reached in equilibrium.
I focus on the broader equilibrium concept, BNE, because the PBE concept does not meaningfully narrow down the
set of equilibria in sequential bargaining games of incomplete information (see discussion in Gul and Sonnenschein
1988) and because none of my identification or estimation arguments rely on specifying how beliefs are updated after
zero-probability events. See Appendix B.1 for more discussion of the equilibrium concept.

14

The allocation function corresponding to ex-post efficient trade is simply x∗ (s, b) ≡ 1{s ≤ b}.
The allocation function corresponding to a given point along the ex-ante efficient frontier, on the
other hand, will maximize a convex combination of the buyer’s and seller’s ex-ante expected gains
from trade, with weight η given to the seller’s gains and weight 1 − η given to the buyer’s. I will
use the notation xη (·), for a given η ∈ [0, 1], to denote the allocation function corresponding to a
point on the ex-ante efficient frontier. Computing xη (·) boils down to solving a linear programming
problem, described in Section 5 and Appendix C.7. The direct mechanism corresponding to the
real-world bargaining, which I denote xRW (·), can be estimated directly from the data, as described
in Section 4. Computing each of these allocation functions requires estimates of FB and FS , the
distributions of buyer and seller valuations. Thus, a key focus of this paper is the estimation of these
distributions without imposing a priori any restrictions on how efficient the real-world bargaining
is relative to these counterfactual benchmarks.

3.4

Model Properties

I now describe a number of properties of this game that will hold in any equilibrium.13 These properties will then be exploited in Section 4 to estimate the distributions of buyer and seller valuations,
the support of types who enter the bargaining game, and the allocation function corresponding to
the real-world mechanism.
Bidding Behavior. The first property concerns a bidder’s auction strategy, which is a price at
which he will stop bidding:
Proposition 1. If Assumption A1 holds then truthtelling is a weakly dominant action in the
auction regardless of other players’ strategies in the auction or players’ strategies in the BNE of
the continuation game.
Proposition 1 states that bidders receive no positive benefit from deviating from a strategy involving dropping out of the bidding when, and only when, the auction price reaches their valuations
(i.e. truthtelling). The intuition behind the proposition is that, as in a standard ascending button
auction, a bidder will not find it optimal to drop out before the current price reaches his value
because doing so would make the bidder miss out on a chance to win the auction. A bidder will
also not find it optimal to remain in the auction once the current price passes his value because
doing so will yield a negative payoff if the bidder does end up winning. One implication of the
proposition is that a bidder will not gain from conditioning his auction strategy on any information
revealed during the auction, such as other bidders’ drop-out points. Appendix B.2 expounds on
this result and proves that bidders bidding above their valuations and then attempting to bargain
13

Appendix B.5 discusses an extension of this model in which sellers have some uncertainty about the distribution
of buyer valuations when choosing the reserve price, which addresses explicitly why sellers may accept offers below
their secret reserve price. Appendix B.5 also provides several other explanations of this phenomenon.

15

to a lower final price later could not occur in equilibrium even if bargained prices below the auction
price were allowed by the auction house.
There can exist BNE of this game in which bidders are indifferent between bidding truthfully
and not. For example, one such BNE would consist of the seller setting a very high reserve price,
all bidders dropping out at zero, and, in bargaining, the seller immediately rejecting any (offequilibrium) positive auction price; in this equilibrium, bidders would receive a payoff of zero, but
would receive no less by bidding truthfully. To rule out such cases, and motivated by Proposition
1, I make the following assumption:
Assumption. (A6) All bidders follow the weakly dominant strategy of bidding truthfully.
In practice, for identification and estimation, it is only the highest bid that plays any role.
Seller’s Choice to Accept the Auction Price or Quit. I now demonstrate that bounds
on the distribution of seller valuations can be achieved by an argument similar to the Haile and
Tamer (2003) bounds in English auction settings. The argument differs from Haile and Tamer
(2003), however, in that it is not possible here to construct both an upper and lower bound on the
seller’s value for each individual realization of the game. This is because, as shown below, a lower
bound on a seller’s valuation is only observed when the seller chooses to quit. Therefore, rather
than observation-level bounds, I will obtain bounds on the distribution of seller values relying on
probability statements formed from observations of many sellers’ decisions to accept or walk away
from an offer on the table.
Let DS = A, without a t subscript (to distinguish this from the period-specific action described
in Section 3.1), represent the event in which the seller takes an action in period 1 or 2 that results
in the game ending in agreement at the auction price. This event occurs either when 1) the auction
price exceeds the reserve price or 2) the auction price fails to meet the reserve price, the high bidder
does not opt out of bargaining, and the seller accepts the auction price on her first bargaining turn.
Similarly, let DS = Q represent the event in which the seller takes an action in period 2 that results
in the game ending in disagreement at the auction price. This event happens when the auction price
fails to meet the reserve price, the high bidder does not opt out of bargaining, and the seller quits
on her first bargaining turn rather than accepting the auction price or making a counteroffer.14
I exploit the following assumption:
Assumption. (A7) The seller never (i) accepts an auction price below her value or (ii) walks
away from (quits at) an auction price above her value.
The conditions in Assumption A7 will be satisfied in any BNE of the game.15 These conditions
imply that, if the realized auction price is pA and the seller accepts, it must be the case that the
14

Note that the events DS = A and DS = Q as defined above are observable to the econometrician for every
instance of the game recorded in the data, not just those in which bargaining occurs.
15
To see this, suppose to the contrary that a seller’s strategy involves accepting an auction price pA < s. A

16

seller values the good less than pA . Similarly, if the seller quits when the auction price is pA , it
must be the case that the seller values keeping the car herself more than pA . These conditions
imply bounds on distribution of S:
Pr(DS = A|P A = pA ) ≤ Pr(S ≤ pA ) = FS (pA )
Pr(DS = Q|P A = pA ) ≤ Pr(S ≥ pA ) = 1 − FS (pA ) ⇒ Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = pA ) ≥ FS (pA )
I state these bounds as the following proposition, where F represents the space of all possible CDFs
(i.e. right-continuous, weakly increasing functions approaching 0 to the left and 1 to the right):
Proposition 2. Under Assumptions A2 and A7, for any v ∈ [s, s], any CDF of seller valuations
FS ∈ F must satisfy FS (v) ∈ [Pr(DS = A|P A = v), Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = v)].
I now highlight several interesting features of these bounds. First, the bounds do not cross,
because DS = A ⇒ DS 6= Q, and therefore Pr(DS = A|P A = v) ≤ Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = v).
A monotonized version of these bounds may cross, however, and such a crossing would indicate
a violation of Assumption A7; see discussion in Appendix B.3. Second, these bounds rely only
on Assumption A2 (that is, that buyer and seller valuations are independent) and the conditions
in Assumption A7. Under these assumptions alone, the bounds are sharp. However, under the
additional assumptions imposed elsewhere in the paper (namely, that actions correspond to some
BNE), the bounds are not necessarily sharp, but are conservative. Appendix B.3 discusses sharpness
formally.
Third, the width of these bounds will be determined by the frequency with which (i) the seller
chooses to make a counteroffer in response to the first offer or (ii) the buyer opts out of bargaining.
Specifically, the bounds can be re-written
Pr(DS = A|P A = pA ) ≤ FS (pA ) ≤ Pr(DS = A|P A = pA ) + Pr(DS 6= A ∩ DS 6= Q|P A = pA )
{z
}
|
Prob. seller counters or buyer opts out

The object Pr(DS 6= A ∩ DS 6= Q|P A = pA ) is the probability that either the seller makes a
counteroffer in response to the first offer or the buyer opts out of bargaining. If, at a given P A = pA ,
the buyer doesn’t opt out and the seller only accepts or quits (doesn’t counter), this probability
will be zero, and the bounds will collapse to a point equal to the probability of acceptance at that
pA , Pr(DS = A|P A = pA ).
These bounds can be applied to other alternating-offer bargaining settings, independent of
profitable deviation from this strategy would be to quit instead, as this would yield a payoff of s. Now suppose a
seller’s strategy involves quitting when facing an auction price pA > s. A profitable deviation from this strategy
would be to accept instead, as this would yield a payoff of pA . Thus, any BNE cannot involve violations of A7. Note
that bargaining costs from Assumption A3 do not play a role in these bounds as those costs are only incurred by a
player when making an offer, not when accepting or quitting.

17

whether the bargaining follows an auction. In such cases, the decisions DS = A or DS = Q would
represent the first action taken by the player in the bargaining game who responds to the first offer.
The Lower Support of Buyer and Seller Types Who Bargain. One advantage of studying
bargaining following an ascending auction is that the auction outcome affects the bargaining game
in a tractable manner, allowing me to isolate the bargaining game from the auction. Let π B (pA , b)
represent the buyer’s expected payoff from entering into bargaining conditional on his value b and
the realization of the auction price. Let χ(b) be defined by π B (χ(b), b) = 0. The high bidder will
end up in bargaining when P A < R and when π B (P A , b) ≥ 0. The object χ−1 (pA ) then represents
the buyer type that would be indifferent between bargaining and not bargaining when the realized
auction price is pA . As above, ρ(·) is the seller’s secret reserve price strategy; that is, R = ρ(S).
Proposition 3. If Assumptions A1–A6 hold, then in any BNE satisfying Assumption A4, conditional on an auction price P A = pA and conditional on bargaining occurring, the support of
seller types in the bargaining game is [s(pA ), s] and the support of buyer types is [b(pA ), b], where
s(·) ≡ ρ−1 (·) and b(·) ≡ χ−1 (·). Moreover, ρ(·) and χ(·) are strictly increasing, with ρ(s) ≥ s and
χ−1 (pA ) > pA .
The intuition behind this result is as follows. When the auction price is pA and bargaining
occurs, it will be common knowledge among the two bargaining parties that the seller’s type s
satisfies ρ(s) ≥ pA (i.e. the reserve price is above the auction price), implying s ∈ [ρ−1 (pA ), s].
Similarly, bargaining occurring means the buyer did not opt out, so χ(b) ≥ pA , implying b ∈
[χ−1 (pA ), b]. Thus, the game I study is analogous to a setting of bargaining alone where the lower
bound of the support of the types in the bargaining game differs across realizations of the game
as determined by the realization of the auction price, and when I present welfare results later they
will average over these realizations. The clean relationship between the auction and the bargaining
game obtained in Propositions 1 and 3 would not exist if the pre-bargaining stage were a first-price
auction rather than an ascending auction; the first-price auction would affect the bargaining (and
vice versa) in an intractable manner.16
The proof of Proposition 3 also addresses the seller’s choice of reserve price, demonstrating
that ρ(·) is strictly monotone using a monotone comparative statics result from Edlin and Shannon
(1998), a special case of Topkis’s Theorem. Assumption A4, continuity of the equilibrium of the
bargaining subgame in the auction price, is required to prove differentiability of the seller’s payoff
in order to apply the Edlin and Shannon (1998) result.
Proposition 3 implies that, given an auction price pA , the distributions of buyer and seller types
in bargaining are given by

FB (b)
1−FB (χ−1 (pA ))

and

FS (s)
,
1−FS (ρ−1 (pA ))

16

respectively. These distributions corre-

Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong (1997) discussed this issue and adopted a model in which a first-price auction
takes place under incomplete information and post-auction bargaining takes place under complete information (Nash
bargaining).

18

spond precisely to on-equilibrium-path Bayes updating of the buyer’s and seller’s beliefs about their
opponents’ type given the actions occurring prior to the bargaining, as highlighted in Section 3.2.
Also, the seller’s beliefs in the bargaining game do not condition on N , the number of bidders. This
is due to a convenient property of the symmetric independent private values button auction: the
distribution of the maximum order statistic (here, the valuation of the buyer entering bargaining)
conditional on a lower order statistic (here, the auction price), does not depend on N , a result first
shown in Song (2004) and extended to the unobserved heterogeneity case in Freyberger and Larsen
(2017). Thus, the number of bidders does not enter into the seller’s beliefs about the density of
buyer valuations she faces in bargaining once she knows the realization of P A .
The Real-World Mechanism. The allocation function corresponding to the real-world mechanism, xRW , satisfies the following property:
Proposition 4. Under Assumptions A1–A6, in any BNE satisfying Assumption A4, the allocation
function xRW can be written as


xRW (r, b; pA ) ≡ 1 b ≥ g r, pA

(1)

where g(r, pA ) is an unknown function that is weakly increasing in r.
Proposition 4 demonstrates that xRW depends on a cutoff function defining the boundary
between those types who trade and those who do not. Ausubel and Deneckere (1993) referred to
this property as the “Northwestern Criterion” as it implies that trade occurs if and only if players’
types lie northwest of a boundary defined by g. The proof of Proposition 4 relies directly on an
argument presented in Storms (2015), and also exploits the strict monotonicity of ρ(·) proved in
Proposition 3, which makes it possible to model the allocation conditional on a realization of the
reserve price, R = r, rather than conditional on the seller’s type. This is particularly useful in
that it allows me to evaluate the allocation function for the real-world bargaining without knowing
where the true distribution of seller valuations lies within the bounds from Proposition 2.
Game-level Heterogeneity. The above results are derived conditional on a given realization
of game-level heterogeneity. I now consider the additively separable structure of buyer and seller
valuations in the common component W .
Proposition 5. Suppose, when W = 0, the equilibrium is such that the reserve price is r; the
auction price is pA ; the lowest buyer type who would choose to bargain is χ−1 (pA ); and, for each
period t at which the game arrives, the offer is given by Pt = pt and the decision to accept, quit, or
counter is given by Dt = dt . Then, under Assumptions A1–A6, when W = w, the equilibrium will
be such that the reserve price is r̃ = r + w; the auction price is p̃A = pA + w; the lowest buyer type

19

who would choose to bargain is χ−1 (p̃A − w) + w; the period t decision is dt ; and, for any period t
offer that is accepted with positive probability, the period t offer is pt + w.
Proposition 5 is similar to results used elsewhere in the empirical auctions literature (Haile,
Hong, and Shum 2003; Asker 2010) but is a generalization specific to this setting. It implies
that continuous actions of the game (reserve prices, auction prices, and bargaining offers) will
be additively separable in W ; choice probabilities for discrete actions (accepting, declining, or
countering in response to an offer) will be unaffected by the value of W . An immediate implication
of Proposition 5 is that the allocation function is invariant to game-level heterogeneity; that is,
xRW (r + w, b + w; pA + w) = xRW (r, b; pA ).

4

Estimating Valuations and the Bargaining Mechanism

In this section, I exploit the model properties derived above in order to estimate the distribution
of buyer and seller valuations and the bargaining mechanism. Identification and estimation require
the following additional assumptions on the data. Below, let FR , FP A , and FW represent the
cumulative distribution functions of R, P A , and W .
Assumptions.
(A8) FR , FP A , and FW have densities fR , fP A , and fW satisfying the following: (i) the characteristic functions of fR and fW have only isolated real zeros; (ii) the real zeros of the characteristic
function of fP A and its derivative are disjoint; and (iii) E[W]=0.
(A9) The supports of S and B satisfy s ≥ b.
(A10) Observations of random variables (S,Bi ,W ,N ) across instances of the game are identically
and independently distributed.
(A11) All observations in the data are generated by the same equilibrium.
Assumption A8 lists the sufficient conditions from Evdokimov and White (2012) for proving
identification of fR , fP A , and fW .17 I use Assumption A9 in pinning down the left tail of the upper
bound on the seller valuation CDF. Motivation for this assumption (s ≥ b) is that any seller is
guaranteed a price of at least b from participating.
Assumption A10 is common in the empirical games literature, and it abstracts away from
dynamics across instances of the game.18 Assumption A11 is not required for steps 1–4 below
17

Evdokimov and White (2012) demonstrated that these are weaker conditions than those used previously in the
empirical auctions literature in settings relying on convolution arguments (Li and Vuong 1998; Krasnokutskaya 2011).
The assumption that E[W ] = 0 is a location normalization, and this normalization could alternatively be placed on
R or P A without loss of generality.
18
Appendix C.1 and Section B.4 discuss some simple ways in which I do analyze inter-game dynamics.

20

but is required for steps 5–6. For example, even if different equilibria of the bargaining subgame
are played in different observations of the data, the distribution of buyer valuations can still be
estimated (step 3) using the distribution of auction prices, as described below. Similarly, the
revealed preference arguments used to bound the distribution of seller valuations (step 4) will still
hold even if A11 fails. Steps 5–6, however, require inverting policy functions that will depend
on the equilibrium of the game. Fortunately, none of the steps below, including 5–6, require fully
specifying or solving for the equilibrium. Like Assumption A10, Assumption A11 is also common in
the structural literature. The typical approach in the literature to handling cases where particular
subsamples of the data are believed to have been generated by different equilibria is to estimate
the model separately in these subsamples. In line with this, throughout the estimation, I treat
the dealers and fleet/lease samples separately because, according to conversations with industry
professionals, this is likely the most important division of the data in which behavior may differ
(although, as highlighted in Section 6, I find very similar results between the two samples). I
perform additional subsample analyses in Appendix B.4 and C.1.3.
I now provide an overview of each estimation step. I do not describe all of the technical details
for each step here, but include them in Appendix C. Appendix C also contains nonparametric
identification arguments, arguments for consistency of the estimates, and evidence of goodness of
fit for each estimation step.
Step 1) Accounting for Observed Heterogeneity Empirically. To account for game-level
characteristics that are observed to the econometrician as well as the players, I apply Proposition
5. Let Rraw and P A,raw be random variables representing the reserve price and auction price in
the raw data, prior to any adjustments for heterogeneity. As above, let W be a random variable
representing unobserved game-level heterogeneity. Let X be a random variable representing gamelevel heterogeneity that is instead observed (by the econometrician as well as the players), with X
independent of W , S, B, N . Let realizations of Rraw , P A,raw , X, and W for game j be denoted
by lower case letters with subscript j.
I specify the total game-level heterogeneity (observed plus unobserved) for observation j to be
x0j γ

+ wj , where γ is a vector of parameters to be estimated. Proposition 5 implies that auction

prices and reserve prices can be “homogenized” (Haile, Hong, and Shum 2003) by estimating the
following joint regression of reserve prices and auction prices on observables:
"

rjraw
pA,h
j

#

"
=

x0j γ
x0j γ

#

"
+

r̃j
p̃A
j

#
,

A
where r̃j = rj + wj , p̃A
j = pj + wj . In the vector xj I include a rich vector of controls, including

flexible mileage terms, dummies for each make-model-year-trim-age combination, and a number of
other factors described in detail in Appendix C.1. An estimate of r̃j is then given by subtracting x0j γ̂
21

from rjraw , and similarly for p̃A
j . Variation in these two quantities is then attributed to unobserved
game-level heterogeneity and to players’ private valuations, as detailed below.
Step 2) Accounting for Unobserved Heterogeneity Empirically. To account for heterogeneity W in the game that is observed by the players but not by the econometrician, I apply a
result due to Kotlarski (1967), which implies that observations of R̃ = R + W and P̃ A = P A + W
(which are additively separable in W by Proposition 5) are sufficient to recover the densities fW , fR ,
and fP A . This result has been applied elsewhere in first-price auction work (e.g. Li, Perrigne, and
Vuong 2000; Krasnokutskaya 2011); my application of this deconvolution argument using instead
an ascending auction bid and a reserve price to identify unobserved heterogeneity parallels Decarolis (2018) and Freyberger and Larsen (2017). I estimate these densities using a flexible maximum
likelihood approach, where the likelihood of the joint density of (R̃, P̃ A ) is given by
L(fP A , fR , fW ) =

Y Z

fP A (p̃A
j


− w)fR (r̃j − w)fW (w)dw

(2)

j

I approximate each of the densities fP A , fR , and fW as Hermite polynomials, as suggested by
Gallant and Nychka (1987) (I use fifth-order polynomials). This also yields estimates of the CDFs
FW , FR , and FP A . Appendix C.2 describes technical details and nonparametric identification.
Step 3) Estimating the Distribution of Buyer Valuations. I recover the distribution of
buyer valuations, FB , from the distribution of auction prices, FP A , which, by Proposition 1, will
coincide with the distribution of the second order statistic of buyer valuations. The relationship of
FP A and Pr(N = n) (the distribution of the number of bidders) to FB is as follows:
FP A (v) =

X



Pr(N = n) nFB (v)n−1 − (n − 1)FB (v)n

(3)

n

The right-hand side of (3) is strictly monotonic in FB (·), and thus FB is nonparametrically identified
by Pr(N = n) and FP A (see, for example, Athey and Haile 2007). I estimate the object FB by
c
solving (3) numerically on a grid of values for v, pluggin in an estimate of Pr(N
= n) and the
maximum likelihood estimate F̂P A (v) from (2).
c
To estimate Pr(N
= n), I use the subsample of the data for which bid logs are available, in which
I observe a lower bound on N that varies from auction to auction (see discussion in Section 2). I
c
set Pr(N
= n) equal to the empirical frequency with which this lower bound equals n. This treats
the distribution of the lower bound as though it is the true distribution of the number of bidders. I
gathered some additional independent data supporting this choice by physically attending over 200
auction sales and recording the number of bidders (see Appendix C.3.1). It turns out, however, that
the choice of Pr(N = n) is, perhaps surprisingly, not critical to the welfare estimates of this paper.
Specifically, the choice of Pr(N = n) affects the estimate of the full underlying buyer distribution,
22

FB , but has a negligible effect on the transformation of FB used in evaluating welfare, which is the
distribution of the high bidder’s value conditional on the auction price integrated against the auction
price density (i.e. the maximum order statistic distribution). In Appendix C.3.1, I demonstrate
numerically that this latter object is not sensitive to the choice of Pr(N = n). I also provide a
new mathematical result, stated as Proposition 10, proving that, for a class of possible choices of
Pr(N = n) (Poisson distributions with mean λ), conditional on F̂P A , the inferred maximum order
statistic distribution has a derivative that is identically zero with respect to the choice of λ.19
Step 4) Estimating Bounds on the Distribution of Seller Valuations. Proposition 2
demonstrates that, absent unobserved game-level heterogeneity, the objects Pr(DS = A|P A = v)
and Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = v) will provide bounds on FS (v). The same revealed preference arguments
used to derive that result—Assumption A7—extend to the case of unobserved heterogeneity, providing bounds on the distribution of S̃ ≡ S + W conditional on P̃ A ≡ P A + W . Here I also
incorporate the bound provided by secret reserve prices themselves: R ≥ S ⇒ FS (v) ≥ FR (v).
R
S (v,w)
dw, where MS (v, w) ≡ fP A (v −
To describe these bounds, let q(v; FS ) = FS (v − w) R M
M (v,z)dz
S

w)fW (w) is the joint density P A and W . Bounds on FS , which I denote [FSL (v), FSU (v)], are given
by the solution to the following minimization problem:
2

(

L

min

(FSL ,FSU )∈Φ

Pr(DS = A|P̃ A = v) − q v; FS

2)


U

+ Pr(DS 6= Q|P̃ A = v) − q v; FS

(4)

where | · |2 represents the L2 -norm, and the set Φ is the set of feasible pairs of CDFs that can be

bounds on FS ; that is, Φ = FSL ∈ F, FSU ∈ F : FSU (v) ≥ FSL (v) ≥ FR (v) ∀ v ∈ [s, s] , where F is
the set of possible CDFs, as defined in Section 3.4. Appendix C.4 demonstrates that these bounds
are nonparametrically identified.
The objects FSL and FSU , as well as the functions χ−1 and g in steps 5 and 6 below, can be
estimated using a minimum-distance, constrained least squares procedure. I will describe this
approach in slightly more detail in this step and be more brief in my description in steps 5 and 6.
Additional technical details for each of these steps are found in Appendices C.4–C.6. To estimate
the functions FSL and FSU , I first parameterize each as a very flexible piecewise linear spline; I denote
S
these approximations FSL (·, θS,L ) and FSU (·, θS,U ). Denote the fixed vector of spline knots {vkS }K
k=1 .

I choose KS = 200; as discussed in Appendix C.4, the estimates are not sensitive to this choice. I
estimate the parameter vectors θS,L and θS,U using the following objective function:

min

θS,L ,θS,U

KS
X

(

c S = A|P̃ A = v S )
Pr(D
k

Z

M̂S (vkS , z)dz



Z
−

FS (vkS

− w; θ

S,L

cS (v S , w)dw
)M
k

2

k=1

19

This result is new to the literature and sheds some light on why many estimated welfare results from orderc
statistic-inversion estimates can be insensitive to the choice of Pr(N
= n) used in the inversion, as I find to be the
case in this study.

23



S

c
+ Pr(D
6= Q|P̃

A

=

vkS )

Z

M̂S (vkS , z)dz



Z
−

FS (vkS

− w; θ

S,U

cS (v S , w)dw
)M
k

2 )
(5)

This approach searches for the lowest and highest possible values of FS that can rationalize the
observed behavior in the data described by the conditional probabilities Pr(DS = A|P̃ A = v) and
Pr(DS 6= Q|P̃ A = v). I impose several constraints on the minimum distance problem in (5): (i)
FSL lies graphically above FR and graphically below FSU ; (ii) FSL and FSU lie in [0, 1]; (iii) FSL and
FSU are weakly increasing; and (iv) FSL (v) and FSU (v) are equal to 0 for any v < v1S and equal to
S . These last three constraints ensure that F L and F U will correspond to proper
1 for any v > vK
S
S
S

distribution functions. The only constraint of (iv) that binds in practice is that of the left tail of
FSU . My assumption essentially bounds that left tail below by b, as stated in Assumption A9. This
is discussed in more detail in Appendix C.4.
Computing (5) requires first-step estimates of several other objects, including F̂R , fˆP A , and fˆW ,
which come from the maximum likelihood procedure in (2). The procedure also requires the objects
c S = A|P̃ A = p̃A ), and Pr(D
c S 6= Q|P̃ A = p̃A ), which I estimate using local linear regressions.
Pr(D
Step 5) Estimating the Lower Support of Bargaining Types. By Proposition 3, both
b(·) ≡ χ−1 (·) and s(·) ≡ ρ−1 (·) are increasing functions, and correspond to the lower support of
buyer and seller types who enter the bargaining game. For any function FS (·) lying in the estimated
bounds [F̂SL (·), F̂US (·)], the function ρ(s) can be constructed as ρ(s) = FR−1 (FS (s)), with FR replaced
with the estimated F̂R from (2). Similarly, ρ−1 (r) can be constructed as ρ−1 (r) = FS−1 (FR (r)).
To describe the identification and estimation of χ−1 (·), let D1B = 0 represent the buyer’s decision
to not walk away (and let D1B = 1 represent walking away) when informed that the high bid does
not meet the reserve price, which occurs with the following conditional probability:
Pr(D1B

= 0|P̃

A

A

= p̃ , P̃

A

Z
< R̃) =

1 − FB (χ−1 (p̃A − w))
1 − FB (p̃A − w)


R

Mχ (p̃A , w)
Mχ (p̃A , z)dz


dw

(6)

where Mχ (p̃A , w) ≡ fP A (p̃A − w)(1 − FR (p̃A − w))fW (w) is the likelihood of the event (P A = p̃A −
w, P̃ A < R̃, W = w). Appendix C.5 demonstrates that χ−1 (·) is nonparametrically identified. For
estimation, I approximate hχ (·) ≡ 1 − FB (χ−1 (·)) as a flexible piecewise linear spline parameterized
by θχ . Like the bounds on seller valuations, these parameters can be estimated using constrained
least squares. I do so by evaluating the left-hand side and right-hand side of (6) on a fixed grid of
points for the auction price p̃A and search for the value of the parameter vector θχ that minimizes
the distance between the left- and right-hand sides. This procedure requires estimates of densities
and CDFs from above, as well an estimate of the conditional probability of not walking away,
Pr(D1B = 0|P̃ A = p̃A , P̃ A < R̃) which I estimate using a local linear regression. Technical details
are found in Appendix C.5.

24

Step 6) Estimating the Direct Mechanism Corresponding to Real-World Bargaining.
Proposition 4 demonstrates that the allocation function corresponding to the real-world mechanism


can be written as xRW (r, b; pA ) ≡ 1 b ≥ g r, pA for some unknown function g(·). The empirical
object that can be used to identify this function g(·) is the probability of trade conditional on a
realization of R̃ and P̃ A . Let A ∈ {0, 1} be a random variable indicating whether or not trade
occurs in a given instance of the game. The conditional probability of trade is given by
Pr(A = 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃

A

Z
= p̃A ) =



1 − FB g(r̃ − w, p̃A − w)
Mg (r̃, p̃A , w)
R
dw
1 − FB (p̃A − w)
Mg (r̃, p̃A , z)dz

(7)

where Mg (r̃, p̃A , w) ≡ fR (r̃−w)fP A (p̃A −w)fW (w) is the joint density of (R, P A , W ). Appendix C.6
demonstrates that g(·) is nonparametrically identified. For estimation, I approximate hg (r, pA ) ≡
1−FB (g(r,pA )
1−FB (pA )

using a flexible bilinear spline parameterized by θg . As with the estimation of the

seller CDF bounds and the estimation of χ−1 (·), I obtain an estimate of θg using constrained least
squares. I do so by evaluating the left-hand side and right-hand side of (7) on a fixed grid of points
and searching for the parameters θg to minimize the distance between the left- and right-hand sides.
As with preceding steps, I estimate the conditional probability Pr(A = 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃ A = p̃A ) in a
first step; for this two-dimensional conditional probability, I use a tensor product of cubic b-spline
functions. The other objects in (7) consist of densities and CDFs estimated above. Technical details
are found in Appendix C.6.
Summary of Identification. Appendices C.2–C.6 provide nonparametric identification proofs
for each of the objects I estimate. Here I provide a brief summary of the identification. The
step 1 regression controlling for observable heterogeneity identifies the joint distribution of (R̃, P̃ A )
(the residuals). This joint distribution identifies the marginal distributions FR , FP A , and FW ,
estimated in step 2. The underlying buyer distribution, FB , estimated in step 3, is identified by
the probability mass function, Pr(N = n), and by the marginal distribution of auction prices, FP A .
Bounds on the distribution of seller valuations, estimated in step 4, are identified by FR , fP A , and
fW , and by the conditional probabilities of sellers accepting and not quitting, Pr(DS = A|P̃ A = p̃A )
and Pr(DS 6= Q|P̃ A = p̃A ). The object χ−1 (·), estimated in step 5, is identified by FR , FB ,
A

f P , and fW , and by the conditional probability of buyers not walking away from bargaining,
Pr(D1B = 0|P̃ A = p̃A , P̃ A < R̃). The object ρ−1 (·) is identified by FR for any FS lying in the seller
CDF bounds. Finally, the object g(·), estimated in step 6, is identified by FB , fR , fP A , and fW ,
and by the conditional probability of trade, Pr(A = 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃ A = p̃A ).

25

5

Computing Bargaining Efficiency

To evaluate efficiency, I consider several welfare measures and compute these measures for the realworld bargaining and for ex-ante and ex-post efficient mechanisms. Each welfare measure depends
on the estimated densities, CDFs, and lower support functions (b(·) ≡ χ−1 (·) and s(·) ≡ ρ−1 (·))
obtained in the estimation steps 2–5 above. Each welfare measure will also depend on an allocation
function, x. As discussed in Section 3.3, the allocation function corresponding to the real-world
bargaining is xRW (estimated in step 6); the ex-post efficient allocation function is x∗ (s, b; pA ) ≡
1{s ≤ b}; and the ex-ante efficient frontier consists of allocation functions, which I denote xη ,
that place welfare weight of η on the seller’s expected utility and 1 − η on the buyer’s. Several
points η along the ex-ante efficient frontier are of particular interest: x1 , the allocation function
corresponding to a take-it-or-leave-it offer by the seller; x0 , the allocation function corresponding
1

to a take-it-or-leave-it offer by the buyer; and x 2 , the equal-weighted ex-ante efficient mechanism.
1

In discussing results below I will refer to x 2 as the second-best mechanism, x1 as the seller-optimal
mechanism, and x0 as the buyer-optimal mechanism.
The first welfare measure I consider is the overall expected gains from trade. For a given
allocation function x and densities fS and fB , this is given by
Z b "Z
b

where fS (s|pA ) =

b

b(pA )

Z

#

s

s(pA )

fS (s)
1−FS (s(pA ))

(b − s)x(s, b; pA )fS (s|pA )fB (b|pA )ds db fpA (pA )dpA

and fB (b|pA ) =

fB (b)
1−FB (b(pA ))

(8)

are the Bayes-updated beliefs of agents

about their opponents’ types when bargaining starts. This welfare measure, along with the others I
consider, is integrated over realizations of the lower bound of the support of buyer and seller types
(i.e. integrated over the realized auction price pA ). I also evaluate several other welfare measures
that are related to (8): the buyer’s or seller’s gains from trade (constructed by replacing b − s in
(8) with just b or s) and the probability of trade (constructed by replacing b − s with 1).
The efficiency loss due to incomplete information—the loss highlighted in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983)—can be estimated by evaluating the gains from trade using (8) for the ex-post
efficient allocation function (i.e. replacing x(s, b; pA ) in (8) with x∗ (s, b; pA )) and comparing this to
1

(8) evaluated using the second-best allocation function (x 2 ). The efficiency loss due to other sources
beyond those highlighted in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) can be estimated by comparing this
second-best efficient outcome to (8) evaluated at the real-world mechanism (xRW ).20
Evaluating the efficiency of bargaining at a given allocation function x is therefore easy once the
densities, CDFs, and lower support of the bargaining types are known; it simply involves numerically
evaluating integrals like (8). Computing the ex-ante efficient allocation functions themselves (xη ),
20

For the expected gains from trade in the real bargaining, I also incorporate an upper bound on the amount of
bargaining costs incurred in the real-world mechanism (see Appendix C.7.3).

26

however, is extremely computationally involved in my setting. This is because it must be done at
each realization of the lower bound of the support (each pA ) and because the type distributions
I estimate are irregular, in the sense of Myerson (1981). FB and FS are referred to as regular if
1−FB (b)
fB (b)

b−

and s +

FS (s)
fS (s) ,

the virtual valuations of buyers and sellers, are increasing. Myerson

and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987) derived convenient solutions for the mechanisms
along the ex-ante efficient frontier under the assumption of regularity. Without regularity, I am
forced to numerically enforce a large number of incentive compatibility constraints (see Appendix
C.7). Furthermore, although I have point estimates of FB , I only have bounds on FS , and, without
further theory, obtaining bounds on welfare measures would require evaluating each mechanism
at all possible distributions FS within the estimated bounds. Fortunately, I am able to derive a
number of useful monotonicity results that simplify this computation entirely. These results are
summarized in Table 3 and in the following proposition:
Proposition 6. A first order stochastically dominating change in FS will lead to the monotonic
changes in welfare measures described in Table 3.
Each cell in Table 3 marked with a ↓ signifies that the specified measure will decrease given
a first-order stochastically dominating shift in the distribution of seller valuations (e.g. a shift
from FSU to FLS ). Each cell marked with an asterisk indicates that I have no proven monotonicity
result for that welfare measure. For these latter welfare measures, I am forced to obtain bounds
numerically through a massive grid search. This still yields valid bounds on welfare, but is very
computationally expensive.21 Appendix C.7 contains technical details on this numerical procedure
and the procedure for computing the ex-ante efficient allocation functions, xη , which builds on
results from Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) and Williams (1987).

6
6.1

Putting It All Together: How Efficient Is Bargaining?
Distribution Estimates

This section presents the distributions of buyer and seller valuations estimated using the procedures
described in Section 4. In each figure that follows, monetary values are denoted in units of $1,000.
In Figure 1, panels A and B display, for the dealers and fleet/lease samples respectively, the
distribution of the auction price net of unobserved heterogeneity, FP A (the dashed line), and the
estimated underlying distribution of buyer valuations, FB . The distribution of auction prices does
not entirely dominate that of the underlying buyer valuations in a first order stochastic dominance
21
To give a rough idea of the computational burden, even with the techniques I introduce here to reduce this
burden, it takes about one year of computation time for a single machine to compute all of the estimates and
confidence intervals reported in the paper. I parallelize these computations on a high-performance computing cluster
to reduce this time to less than one week.

27

sense. This is due to the distribution of the number of bidders, Pr(N = n), having much of its
mass at two or three bidders.
Panels C and D of Figure 1 show the distribution of secret reserve prices net of unobserved
heterogeneity, FR (the dashed line), and the estimated upper and lower bounds on the distribution
of seller valuations, FSL and FSU , in solid lines. These bounds suggest that, for dealer cars (panel
C), when the first bargaining offer (the auction price) is about -$1,000 (i.e. $1,000 lower than
would be predicted based on car-level heterogeneity), sellers choose to accept this offer or walk
away from it with frequencies that imply that the probability that S is less than -$1,000 is in the
range [0.56, 0.80]. For the fleet/lease sample (panel D) the corresponding probability inferred from
sellers accepting or walking away from an offer of this same magnitude is in the range [0.61, 0.80].
Comparing the top panels of Figure 1 to the bottom panels, it is clear that there is overlap
in the support of buyer valuations and seller valuations. This feature illustrates what is referred
to in the theoretical bargaining literature as the “no gap” case (i.e. there is no gap between
the upper bound of the support of seller valuations and the lower bound of the support of buyer
valuations, and hence there is uncertainty as to whether gains from trade actually exist), and is
the case motivating Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983) (see Fudenberg and Tirole 1991). However,
the actual overlap in terms of mass appears to be small, as most seller values (at least 80% in
each sample) lie below zero—in some cases, far below zero—while buyer values are centered about
zero and are much less dispersed. This implies that the actual efficiency loss due to incomplete
information may be small in this setting. A more precise quantitative analysis of the overlap in
buyer and seller mass will be discussed below, taking into account the support of the types who
actually end up in the bargaining game.

6.2

Graphical Analysis of Bargaining Efficiency

Using the approach described in Section 5, I compute buyer gains and seller gains in the real-world
bargaining mechanism as well as the ex-post and ex-ante efficient frontiers. The performance of
the real-world bargaining relative to these theoretical frontiers is displayed in Figure 2. In panels
A–D, the dashed line displays the ex-post efficient frontier in the space of buyer gains (the vertical
axis) and seller gains (the horizontal axis). The solid line displays the ex-ante efficient frontier.
The solid dot indicates the expected gains in the real-world mechanism. Panels A and B use the
seller CDF lower bound and panels C and D use the upper bound.
Comparing the ex-ante efficient frontier to the ex-post efficient frontier provides an indication
of the size of efficiency loss due strictly to incomplete information. In each case in Figure 2,
the ex-ante efficient frontier lies close to the ex-post efficient frontier. This suggests that, in this
market, incomplete information per se may not be leading to large inefficiencies, likely due to the
limited overlap in buyer and seller distributions suggested by Figure 1. Comparing the real-world

28

bargaining outcome to the ex-ante efficient frontier, on the other hand, provides an indication of
the size of efficiency loss due to the fact that the mechanism used in practice (alternating-offer
bargaining) or its equilibrium may be inefficient. Panels A and B demonstrate that the real-world
mechanism lies not far from the ex-ante efficient frontier when evaluated at the seller valuation CDF
lower bound, but panels C and D demonstrate a clear shortfall in the efficiency of the real-world
mechanism when evaluated at the seller valuation CDF upper bound, where the outcome lies in
the interior of the ex-ante efficient frontier.
Panels E and F of Figure 2 display the probability of trade along the ex-ante efficient frontier
evaluated at the seller valuation CDF upper and lower bounds. Each point on the horizontal axis
represents the weight η ∈ [0, 1] given to the seller’s valuation in evaluating ex-ante efficiency. The
dashed line represents the probability of trade in the real bargaining (conditional on bargaining
occurring). These figures demonstrate that the probability of trade is higher when η is closer to
0.5, and decreases slightly as η approaches 1. The probability of trade decreases dramatically as
the seller’s welfare weight goes to 0, and in this range of η the real-world bargaining outperforms
the ex-ante efficient mechanisms in terms of the probability of trade.

6.3

Quantitative Analysis of Bargaining Efficiency

The graphical analysis in the preceding section does not capture bounds on the difference in welfare between the different mechanisms; it only evaluates these mechanisms at the upper and lower
bounds on seller valuations. This section presents a quantitative analysis of the bounds on welfare
measures and the bounds on differences in welfare described in Section 5. Tables 4 and 5 contain
numerical values for each of these bounds. Panel A displays the expected gains from trade, buyer
and seller gains, and probability of trade for the ex-post efficient mechanism, the second-best mechanism, the buyer-optimal mechanism, the seller-optimal mechanism, and the real-world bargaining.
Panel B displays the expected gains and probability of trade for the difference between ex-post efficiency and the second-best, the second-best and the real-world mechanism, and ex-post efficiency
and the real-world mechanism. Gains are reported in units of $1,000. I do not include the auction
house revenue in the total expected gains from trade in these tables, but I do in my analysis of
auction house fees in Appendix D. Tables 4 displays results using the dealers sample and Table 5
displays results using the fleet/lease sample. The estimated bounds are reported in square brackets
and confidence sets are in parentheses. These confidence sets are constructed using a nonparametric bootstrap of the full estimation procedure (steps 1–6) and the counterfactual computations,
thus accounting for uncertainty in the estimation procedure and counterfactuals. Appendix C.8
describes the confidence sets and proves that they are conservative.
Efficiency and Trade Volume in Dealer Sales. I begin by discussing the estimates in panel
A of Table 4. The first column demonstrates that, in a full-information world, where ex-post
29

efficiency would be achievable, the gain from trade for the bargaining game would lie in a range
$2,442–5,045. Taking the lower bound ($2,442) for illustrative purposes, this number suggests that

(for example) if a car sells for $7,000, the seller might have been willing to sell the car for as low as
$5,558 and the buyer willing to buy the car for as much as $8,000 (because 8, 000 − 5, 558 = 2, 442).

The probability of trade under ex-post efficiency mechanism ranges from 0.818–0.871. This latter
quantity (or rather, one minus this quantity) serves as a direct measure of the amount (in mass)
of overlap between the buyer and seller valuations.
The second column of panel A displays the second-best mechanism—the direct revelation mechanism maximizing the equally weighted expected gains subject to information constraints. I find
that the range of surplus for this mechanism is only slightly below that of ex-post efficiency, suggesting that there is very little loss due solely to incomplete information in this setting. Moving
to panel B of Table 4, the results in the first column confirm this finding, where I display bounds
on the difference between the ex-post and second-best gains from trade and probability of trade.
These bounds indicate that the second-best gains from trade fall below ex-post efficiency by $9–59.
Interestingly, however, the probability of trade in the second-best mechanism can be substantially
lower than under ex-post efficiency (a lower bound of 0.699 as opposed to 0.818 in panel A, and an
upper bound on the ex-post efficient probability of trade minus the second-best of 0.128 in panel
B). Thus the second-best mechanism can miss out on trades that would be ex-post efficient (i.e.
cases where the buyer values the car more than the seller), but these missed trades appear to be
cases where the difference in valuations is small, and hence the surplus level is still close to ex-post
efficient.
The final column of panel A indicates that the expected gains from trade in the real-world
mechanism range from $1,993 to $3,933, with the buyer’s expected gains lying in $822–845 and the
seller’s lying in $1,171–3,088. Relative to the real-world bargaining outcomes, column 3 of panel
B indicates that ex-post efficiency would entail an increase in expected surplus of $422–1,139 per
bargaining transaction. This surplus lost in the real bargaining represents 17–23% of the ex-post
efficient surplus. This lost surplus is a deadweight loss, uncaptured by either party (or by the
auction house).
Efficient bargaining would also yield a higher conversion rate. Table 4 shows that the probability
of trade in the real-world bargaining is 0.646, meaning trade fails 0.354 of the time. The final
column of Panel B demonstrates that probability of trade would increase by 0.172–0.225 under
ex-post efficiency. This implies that 17.2–22.5% of negotiating pairs consist of cases where the
buyer values the car more than the seller but trade fails. Comparing this to the overall failure rate
(35.4%) suggests that approximately half (48.5–63.6%) of failed negotiations are cases where gains
from trade do exist but fail to be realized.
Panel B of Table 4 also demonstrates that the probability of trade would increase by up to 0.182
when moving from real-world bargaining to the second-best mechanism. Note that the lower bound
30

on the improvement in the probability of trade is much lower in the second-best mechanism (0.052),
implying that I cannot reject the possibility that the real bargaining achieves only a slightly lower
trade volume than the second-best mechanism. This again highlights the feature that the secondbest mechanism would guarantee an increase in expected surplus relative to the real bargaining
by capturing higher-value trades, not necessarily a higher volume of trade. However, industry
participants suggest that it is high conversion—a high probability of trade—that is the primary
goal of wholesale auto auction houses (see Treece 2013; Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor 2016),
and thus the real-world mechanism may be achieving this goal relatively well.
Efficiency and Trade Volume in Fleet/lease Sales. The findings for the fleet/lease sample are
shown in Table 5 and display similar patterns. As in the dealers sample, the second-best mechanism
achieves a surplus level that is similar to ex-post efficiency in panel A, and panel B indicates that
an upper bound on the gap between second-best and ex-post efficient gains from trade is $77. The
real-world bargaining falls short of the ex-post efficient gains by $289–864, a deadweight loss of
about 12–20% of the ex-post efficient surplus. Panel A indicates that the probability of trade in
the second-best mechanism is strictly lower than under ex-post efficiency, although still higher than
in the real-world bargaining. This is confirmed in panel B, where the gap in probability of trade
between the second-best and real-world bargaining ranges from 0.045–0.174, but between ex-post
efficiency and real-bargaining the gap ranges from 0.199–0.235. Trade in the bargaining stage of the
game occurs with probability 0.658 in the fleet/lease sample; the 0.199–0.235 improvement under
ex-post efficiency shown in panel B suggests that 58.2–68.7% of failed trades are cases where the
buyer values the car more than the seller but trade fails to occur.
The estimated probabilities of trade for the real bargaining (0.646 in Table 4 and 0.658 in Table
5) come from integrating the estimated allocation function xRW (ρ(S), B; P A ) over all three of its
arguments, as described in Section 5. The corresponding raw probability of trade in the data for
the bargaining stage can be calculated by combining periods 2 and higher from Table 2 (and from
Appendix Table A4). For the dealers sample this number is 0.684 and for the fleet/lease sample
this number is 0.656, each of which is close to the estimated probability of trade from Tables 4–5
for the real bargaining. This comparison is one indication of the good fit of the overall estimation
exercise; other measures are discussed in Appendix C, where I show that the integrated absolute
error for each estimation step is small.
Overall, the results are quite similar in the dealers and fleet/lease samples. This suggests
that, while the observable characteristics of these cars differ (as shown in Table 1), the residual
variation after controlling for these observables—and the players’ behavior in the game—does not
differ drastically between the two samples. As discussed at the end of Section 4, identification of
the key objects of the paper relies on several key objects in the data: the joint distribution of
(R̃, P̃ A ), Pr(N = n), and several conditional probability statements. Appendix Figures A3 and A5

31

display estimates of many of these objects for the two samples, illustrating that these drivers of
identification do not differ much between the two samples.
Buyer-Optimal and Seller-Optimal Mechanisms. The third and fourth columns of panel
A in Tables 4–5 display bounds on welfare outcomes under the buyer-optimal and seller-optimal
mechanisms. These mechanisms also lie along the ex-ante efficient frontier, but place all of the
welfare weight on one party or the other. One interesting feature of these mechanisms is that they
are easy to implement; they simply require letting one party make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the
opposing party.
I find in Table 4 that the buyer-optimal mechanism would yield a much higher payoff for
the buyer ($1,416–3,962) and much lower payoff for the seller ($360–370) than under the current
mechanism. The probability of trade, however has the potential to drop as low as 0.266 under the
buyer-optimal mechanism (with an upper bound of 0.609). Some of these changes are due to the
fact that in this buyer-optimal bargaining the buyer is no longer forced to treat the auction price
as a lower bound on the available bargaining prices.
The seller-optimal mechanism would potentially yield improvements for the seller, with the
seller’s expected gains from trade lying in a range from $1,870–4,349, and the buyer’s gains in this
mechanism dropping to $474–649. The probability of trade under the seller-optimal mechanism
can be as low as 0.634, not nearly as low as in the buyer-optimal mechanism, and close to that of
the real-world bargaining. The bounds on the total expected gains from trade in the seller-optimal
mechanism are similar to those in the second-best mechanism ($2,344–4,999). Table 5 displays
similar results for the fleet/lease sample. Comparing the seller-optimal and real bargaining columns
suggests that the probability of trade in the fleet/lease sample would potentially be lower under
the seller-optimal mechanism ([0.592, .747]) than under the real-world mechanism (0.658).
This highlights an interesting distinction between a secret reserve price and a public reserve
price. In an independent private values environment, a public reserve auction is equivalent to
an auction followed by the seller-optimal bargaining mechanism (Menezes and Ryan 2005) and is
optimal for the seller in most standard auction environments. A secret reserve auction, however,
may be preferred by the intermediating platform—in this case, the auction house—because it may
yield a higher probability of trade. In particular, if industry fees are such that the auction house is
only paid when trade occurs, as is the case in the wholesale auto industry, then an auction house
would prefer to maximize trade volume rather than seller revenue. The combination of secret reserve
prices and bargaining in this setting (and potentially in other settings as well) may therefore be
motivated by a goal to maximize the volume of trade rather than seller revenue (a related point is
made in Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong 1994). Appendix B.6 contains further discussion of
secret vs. public reserve prices.

32

6.4

Bargaining Between a Random Buyer and Seller

I now analyze the estimated expected gains from trade in a setting where bargaining takes place
between the seller and a random buyer rather than the high-value bidder. Note that this alters
the support of the types in the bargaining game for both the buyer and the seller, and this shifts
not only the outcomes achieved in the real-world bargaining, but also the ex-ante and ex-post
efficient frontiers. The allocation function for the real-world bargaining in this setting is possible
to simulate by evaluating the estimated g(r, pA ) function at a very small realized value of pA (I
choose the 0.001 quantile). At this small realization, the valuation of the buyer who bargains
approximately represents a draw from the full support of buyer valuations, [b, b] rather than from
the truncated support used in the main analysis above, [b(pA ), b]. Similarly, the valuation of the
seller who bargains is a draw from the full support of seller valuations, [s, s] rather than from
[s(pA ), s].
Table 6 displays the results. In the dealers sample, the range for the gains from trade under
ex-post efficiency is slightly tighter than in the main results in Table 4, and the estimated bounds
on the gains in the real-world bargaining lie closer to zero than in the main results. The overall loss
in efficiency between the real bargaining and ex-post efficiency is $976–2,204 in the dealers sample,
which corresponds to a loss of 39–45% of the ex-post efficient surplus. This loss is much larger than
the percentage loss in the main results in Table 4, suggesting that bargaining between a random
buyer and seller is more inefficient than bargaining between the high bidder and the seller. For the
fleet/lease sample, the overall efficiency loss of the real bargaining is $1,525–2,765, corresponding
to a percentage loss of about 49–56% of the ex-post efficient surplus, a range in losses that is much
larger than in the main results in Table 5. The results of this exercise suggest that the presence
of the auction (through its roles of truncating the support of the types who arrive at bargaining
and constraining from below the level of the final offer) does indeed improve the efficiency of the
bargaining. The main findings of the paper still hold in this analysis: the real-world bargaining is
inefficient, and nearly all of this inefficiency is due to factors other than the information constraints
highlighted in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983), as the second-best mechanism yields outcomes
that are nearly ex-post efficient.

7

Discussion and Conclusion

The finding of this paper that the ex-ante and ex-post efficient frontiers are close to one another in
this market stands in stark contrast to the result in the most popularly studied theory example of
bilateral bargaining, that of symmetric uniform values (where both buyer and seller valuations are
uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 1]; see, for example, Chatterjee and Samuelson 1983 and
Myerson and Satterthwaite 1983). This case is known to yield a gap between the ex-post efficient

33

and second-best probability of trade. The large gap in this special case, however, may have little
bearing on the gap to be expected in real-world settings, where the features of the distribution
and the extent of asymmetries may diverge far from uniformity and symmetry. Also, as the results
above highlight, even in situations where some efficient trades fail to occur, many of these failed
trades may be cases where only very small gains from trade exist (i.e. where the buyer’s value is
very close to the seller’s), and thus the loss in efficiency due to information constraints need not be
large.
Overall, it is not obvious whether the results of this paper should be interpreted as implying
that the real-world bargaining in this market is relatively efficient or relatively inefficient compared
to other markets, particularly given that there are no existing empirical studies of bargaining with
two-sided uncertainty to which these results may be compared. Estimating a structural model
of one-sided uncertainty, Ambrus, Chaney, and Salitsky (2018) found an efficiency loss of 14% in
studying ransom negotiations, and the losses I find are similar to these (17–23% for dealer cars
and 12–20% for fleet/lease cars). Several papers in the experimental literature can also provide
an interesting comparison. Bazerman, Gibbons, Thompson, and Valley (1998) argued that realworld bargaining can potentially yield more efficient outcomes than the theoretical ex-ante efficient
frontier due to non-traditional utility functions (where one player’s utility nests the other’s), limits
on players’ abilities to mimic other types, and other features of bounded rationality; and Valley,
Thompson, Gibbons, and Bazerman (2002) found evidence in lab experiments that communication
between players can allow them to outperform the ex-ante efficient frontier. In light of these
arguments, the bargaining at wholesale auto auctions might be seen as relatively inefficient given
that it falls short of that frontier at all.22
As discussed in the introduction, a gap between the outcome of actual bargaining and the exante efficient frontier can occur for a number of reasons. First, real-world bargaining mechanisms
can have multiple equilibria, many of which may be inefficient (see Ausubel and Deneckere 1993),
and the actions I observe in the data may correspond to one of these inefficient equilibria. Second,
it may be that this particular bargaining protocol, even in its most efficient equilibria, falls short
of the frontier.23 Third, it may be the case that a gap exists because of a Wilson-doctrine-like
argument: ex-ante efficient mechanisms can be unwieldy to implement in practice (in particular
when η ∈ (0, 1)). These mechanisms require that players and the mechanism designer all have
22

Importantly, nothing in my estimation procedure forced the real-world outcome to lie within the ex-ante efficient
frontier; this is a finding implied by my estimates, not a constraint placed on the model.
23
Ausubel and Deneckere (1993) explain this potential efficiency loss as follows: “In [the second-best mechanism],
each player reveals his private information before hearing his opponent’s report. By way of contrast, in sequential
bargaining, the player who reveals second may be less apt to report truthfully than if he were still ignorant of his
opponent’s report. To the extent that information revelation is inhibited, this might further contribute to waste.”
Ausubel and Deneckere (1993) demonstrated that this efficiency loss need not occur in sequential bargaining with onesided incomplete information when the valuation distribution has a monotone hazard rate (unlike the distributions I
estimate). Ausubel, Cramton, and Deneckere (2002) argued that these results may be extended to alternating-offer
games, but no general exposition exists.

34

knowledge of buyer and seller distributions, and furthermore that the players comprehend that it
is indeed incentive compatible for them to truthfully reveal their valuations. The implementation
of alternating-offer bargaining, on the other hand, does not require such assumptions and the
rules can be easily explained to both the players and the market designer, unlike the black box
that theoretical mechanisms may appear to be from a player’s perspective. It may indeed be
the case, as hypothesized by Wilson (1986) and Ausubel and Deneckere (1993), that “[real-world
bargaining mechanisms] survive because they employ trading rules that are efficient for a wide class
of environments.”24
Actual quantitative estimates of real-world bargaining efficiency from other studies will be a
welcome addition to the literature in the future for comparison to the estimates in this paper. A
fruitful avenue for future empirical research would be to apply the bounding methodology developed
in this paper to study the efficiency of bargaining in other settings, potentially exploiting more
fully all of the offers observed in alternating-offer bargaining data—a form of data that is becoming
increasingly available (e.g. Merlo and Ortalo-Magne 2004; Keniston 2011; Bagwell, Staiger, and
Yurukoglu 2017; Backus, Blake, Larsen, and Tadelis 2018; Hernandez-Arenaz and Iriberri 2018).
My consistent finding is that the ex-ante and ex-post efficient frontiers lie close together in this
market, while the real-world bargaining falls short of the ex-ante efficient frontier. This suggests
that efficiency loss in this market may not be due to incomplete information alone, but to the other
aspects of the real-world bargaining described above. It is important to note, however, that these
other aspects all have roots in incomplete information; if players were to have complete information,
many of these other barriers to efficiency might also disappear.

24

An interesting avenue for future theory research would be to apply recent robust mechanism design techniques
(surveyed in Carroll 2018) to the analysis of alternating-offer bargaining to determine whether there is a designer’s
objective function or information structure under which alternating-offer bargaining is preferable to other mechanisms
for bilateral trade.

35

References
Ambrus, A., E. Chaney, and I. Salitsky (2018): “Pirates of the Mediterranean: An empirical
investigation of bargaining with transaction costs,” Quantitative Economics, 9, 217–246.
An, Y., and X. Tang (2018): “Specification and negotiation in incomplete contracts: An econometric analysis,” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Aradillas-López, A., A. Gandhi, and D. Quint (2016): “A simple test for moment inequality
models with an application to English auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 194, 96–115.
Asker, J. (2010): “A study of the internal organization of a bidding cartel,” American Economic
Review, 100(3), 724–762.
Athey, S., and P. Haile (2007): “Nonparametric approaches to auctions,” Handbook of Econometrics, 6, 3847–3965.
Ausubel, L., P. Cramton, and R. Deneckere (2002): “Bargaining with incomplete information,” Handbook of Game Theory, 3, 1897–1945.
Ausubel, L., and R. Deneckere (1993): “Efficient sequential bargaining,” Review of Economic
Studies, 60(2), 435.
Backus, M., T. Blake, B. Larsen, and S. Tadelis (2018): “Sequential bargaining in the field:
Evidence from millions of online bargaining interactions,” NBER Working Paper 24306.
Bagwell, K., R. W. Staiger, and A. Yurukoglu (2017): “Multilateral trade bargaining:A
first peek at the GATT bargaining records,” Working paper, Stanford University.
Bazerman, M., R. Gibbons, L. Thompson, and K. Valley (1998): “Can negotiators outperform game theory?,” in Debating Rationality: Nonrational Aspects of Organizational Decision
Making, ed. by J. Halpern, and R. Stern, pp. 79–99. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Carroll, G. (2018): “Robustness in mechanism design and contracting,” Annual Reviews, forthcoming.
Chatterjee, K., and W. Samuelson (1983): “Bargaining under incomplete information,” Operations Research, 31(5), 835–851.
Cramton, P. (1991): “Dynamic bargaining with transaction costs,” Management Science, 37(10),
1221–1233.
Crawford, G. S., and A. Yurukoglu (2012): “The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel
television markets,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 643–685.
36

Decarolis, F. (2018): “Comparing public procurement auctions,” International Economic Review, 59(2), 391–419.
Edlin, A., and C. Shannon (1998): “Strict monotonicity in comparative statics,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 81(1), 201–219.
Elyakime, B., J. J. Laffont, P. Loisel, and Q. Vuong (1994): “First-price sealed-bid auctions
with secret reservation prices,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, 34, 115–141.
(1997): “Auctioning and bargaining: An econometric study of timber auctions with secret
reservation prices,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 15(2), 209–220.
Evdokimov, K., and H. White (2012): “Some extensions of a lemma of Kotlarski,” Econometric
Theory, 28(4), 925–932.
Freyberger, J., and B. Larsen (2017): “Identification in ascending auctions, with an application to digital rights management,” NBER Working Paper 23569.
Fudenberg, D., D. Levine, and J. Tirole (1985): “Infinite-horizon models of bargaining with
one-sided incomplete information,” in Game Theoretic Models of Bargaining, ed. by A. Roth,
pp. 73–98. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991): Game Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gallant, A., and D. Nychka (1987): “Semi-nonparametric maximum likelihood estimation,”
Econometrica, 55(2), 363–390.
Genesove, D. (1991): “Coconuts, lemons and pies: Adverse selection, search and bargaining in
the wholesale used car market,” Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.
Grennan, M., and A. Swanson (2019): “Transparency and negotiated prices: The value of
information in hospital-supplier bargaining,” Journal of Politcal Economy, forthcoming.
Gul, F., and H. Sonnenschein (1988): “On delay in bargaining with one-sided uncertainty,”
Econometrica, 56(3), 601–611.
Haile, P., H. Hong, and M. Shum (2003): “Nonparametric tests for common values at first-price
sealed-bid auctions,” Working paper, Yale.
Haile, P., and E. Tamer (2003): “Inference with an incomplete model of English auctions,”
Journal of Political Economy, 111(1), 1–51.
Hernandez-Arenaz, I., and N. Iriberri (2018): “Women ask for less (only from men): Evidence
from bargaining in the field,” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 152, 192–214.
37

Holmström, B., and R. B. Myerson (1983): “Efficient and durable decision rules with incomplete information,” Econometrica, 51(6), 1799–1819.
Huh, W., and K. Park (2010): “A sequential auction-bargaining procurement model,” Naval
Research Logistics (NRL), 57(1), 13–32.
Judd, K. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Keniston, D. (2011): “Bargaining and welfare: A dynamic structural analysis,” Working Paper,
Yale.
Kim, K. I., and J. Lee (2014): “Nonparametric estimation and testing of the symmetric IPV
framework with unknown number of bidders,” Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Kotlarski, I. (1967): “On characterizing the gamma and normal distribution,” Pacific Journal
of Mathematics, 20(1), 69–76.
Krasnokutskaya, E. (2011): “Identification and estimation of auction models with unobserved
heterogeneity,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 293–327.
Lacetera, N., B. J. Larsen, D. G. Pope, and J. R. Sydnor (2016): “Bid takers or market
makers? The effect of auctioneers on auction outcomes,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 8(4), 195–229.
Lang,

S.

(2011):

“Hammer

time:

The

chosen,”

The

Truth

About

Cars,

Url:

http://www.thetruthaboutcars.com/2011/09/hammer-time-the-chosen. Posted Sep. 24, 2011.
Retrieved Dec. 21, 2011.
Larsen, B., and A. Zhang (2018): “A mechanism design approach to identification and estimation,” NBER Working Paper 24837.
Li, H., and N. Liu (2015): “Nonparametric identification and estimation of double auctions with
bargaining,” Working paper, Penn State.
Li, T., I. Perrigne, and Q. Vuong (2000): “Conditionally independent private information in
OCS wildcat auctions,” Journal of Econometrics, 98(1), 129–161.
Li, T., and Q. Vuong (1998): “Nonparametric estimation of the measurement error model using
multiple indicators,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 65(2), 139–165.
Menezes, F., and M. Ryan (2005): “Reserve price commitments in auctions,” Economics Letters,
87(1), 35–39.

38

Merlo, A., and F. Ortalo-Magne (2004): “Bargaining over residential real estate: Evidence
from England,” Journal of Urban Economics, 56(2), 192–216.
Merlo, A., F. Ortalo-Magné, and J. Rust (2015): “The home selling problem: Theory and
evidence,” International Economic Review, 56(2), 457–484.
Merlo, A., and X. Tang (2012): “Identification and estimation of stochastic bargaining models,”
Econometrica, 80(4), 1563–1604.
(2018): “Bargaining with optimism: Identification and estimation of a model of medical
malpractice litigation,” International Economic Review, forthcoming.
Myerson, R. B. (1979): “Incentive compatibility and the bargaining problem,” Econometrica,
47, 61–73.
(1981): “Optimal auction design,” Mathematics of Operations Research, 6(1), 58–73.
Myerson, R. B., and M. A. Satterthwaite (1983): “Efficient mechanisms for bilateral trading,” Journal of Economic Theory, 29(2), 265–281.
NAAA (2009): “2009 Annual Review,” National Auto Auction Association, www.naaa.com.
Perry, M. (1986): “An example of price formation in bilateral situations: A bargaining model
with incomplete information,” Econometrica, 54(2), 313–321.
Roberts, J. W. (2013): “Unobserved heterogeneity and reserve prices in auctions,” RAND Journal
of Economics, 44(4), 712–732.
Rubinstein, A. (1982): “Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model,” Econometrica, 50(1), 97–109.
Satterthwaite, M. A., and S. R. Williams (1989): “Bilateral trade with the sealed bid kdouble auction: Existence and efficiency,” Journal of Economic Theory, 48(1), 107–133.
Scott Morton, F., J. Silva-Risso, and F. Zettelmeyer (2011): “What matters in a price
negotiation: Evidence from the US auto retailing industry,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 9(4), 365–402.
Sieg, H. (2000): “Estimating a bargaining model with asymmetric information: Evidence from
medical malpractice disputes,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(5), 1006–1021.
Silveira, B. S. (2017): “Bargaining with asymmetric information: An empirical study of plea
negotiations,” Econometrica, 85(2), 419–452.
Song, U. (2004): “Nonparametric estimation of an eBay auction model with an unknown number
of bidders,” Working paper, University of British Columbia.
39

Storms, E. (2015): “Monotonicity of trade in PSBNE of bargaining with alternating offers,”
Mimeo, Stanford University.
Treece, J. B. (2013): “Manheim exec: Why do so few sales at auctions close?,” Automotive
News, Url: http://www.autonews.com/article/20131202/RETAIL04/312029992/manheim-execwhy-do-so-few-sales-at-auctions-close. Posted Dec. 2, 2013. Retrieved Dec. 2, 2013.
Valley, K., L. Thompson, R. Gibbons, and M. H. Bazerman (2002): “How communication
improves efficiency in bargaining games,” Games and Economic Behavior, 38(1), 127–155.
Wang, R. (2000): “Bidding and renegotiation in procurement auctions,” European Economic
Review, 44(8), 1577–1597.
Watanabe, Y. (2009): “Learning and bargaining in dispute resolution: Theory and evidence from
medical malpractice litigation,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Williams, S. R. (1987): “Efficient performance in two agent bargaining,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 41(1), 154–172.
Wilson, R. (1986): “Game-theoretic analyses of trading processes,” in Advances in Economic
Theory: Fifth World Congress, ed. by T. Bewley, pp. 33–70. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

40

Figure 1: Distribution Estimates
(A) Buyer Values, Dealers

(B) Buyer Values, Fleet/lease

(C) Seller Values, Dealers

(D) Seller Values, Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display estimated distribution of auctions prices (dashed line) after removing observable and
unobservable game-level heterogeneity, and estimated distribution of buyer valuations (solid line). Panels C and D display
estimated distribution of reserve prices (dashed line) after removing observable and unobservable game-level heterogeneity,
and estimated lower and upper bounds on distribution of seller valuations (solid lines). Panels on left use dealers sample and
on right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

41

Figure 2: Graphical Evaluation of Bargaining Efficiency
(A) Dealers, Gains Using Seller Lower Bound

(B) Fleet/lease, Gains Using Seller Lower Bound

(C) Dealers, Gains Using Seller Upper Bound

(D) Fleet/lease, Gains Using Seller Upper Bound

(E) Dealers, Prob of Trade

(F) Fleet/lease, Prob of Trade

Notes: Panels A and B display estimated expected seller and buyer gains on ex-post efficient frontier (dashed line), on ex-ante
efficient frontier (solid line), and in real-world bargaining (solid dot) using the seller distribution lower bound. Panels C and D
display the same estimates at the seller distribution upper bound. Panels E and F display, in solid lines, the estimated
probability of trade at each η (seller’s welfare weight) along the ex-ante efficient frontier evaluated at the seller valuation
distribution upper and lower bounds. The dashed line in panels E and F displays the probability of trade in the real-world
mechanism for comparison. Panels on left use dealers sample and on right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

A. Full Sample
Trade
Reserve price
Auction price
Auction price if ≥ reserve
Auction price if < reserve
Number of periods
Blue book
Age (years)
Odometer (miles)

Dealers
Mean
S.D.
0.705
0.456
$7,405
$5,196
$6,253
$4,881
$6,197
$4,700
$6,258
$4,899
2.096
0.681
$6,820
$4,828
6.769
3.369
97,938
46,445

Fleet/lease
Mean
S.D.
0.768
0.422
$10,307
$5,789
$9,804
$5,857
$11,063
$6,139
$9,160
$5,600
1.774
0.690
$10,951
$6,144
3.178
2.552
57,481
40,389

133,523

131,443

Sample size
B. Bid Log Sample
Number bidders lower bound
Sample size

Mean
2.924

S.D.
0.340
13,150

Mean
2.973

S.D.
0.443
102,172

Notes: Mean and standard deviation of variables in dealers and fleet/lease samples. Trade is an indicator for whether trade
occurred between the buyer and seller. Number of periods is 1 if game ends through auction price exceeding reserve price or
through buyer opting out of bargaining, 2 if seller accepts at her first bargaining turn, etc. Blue book is an estimate of the
market value of the car, provided by the auction house. Panel A displays full sample and panel B displays subsample
containing bid log records.

43

Table 2: Outcomes of Game By Period: Dealers Sample

Ending
period
1

Player’s

#

% of

%

turn

Obs

Sample

Trade

Full Sample
Conditional on Sale
Reserve Auction Reserve Auction Final
price

price

price

price

price

(Auction) 14,232 10.659% 88.58% $5,818
$6,050
$5,704
$6,197
$6,197
($4,688) ($4,696) ($4,626) ($4,700) ($4,700)

2

S

99,708 74.675% 77.28% $7,632
$6,379
$7,132
$6,003
$6,003
($5,245) ($4,936) ($4,922) ($4,651) ($4,651)

3

B

14,644 10.967% 11.81% $7,192
$5,502
$7,725
$6,508
$6,912
($5,041) ($4,598) ($5,222) ($4,968) ($5,054)

4

S

2,916

2.184%

65.47% $7,828
$6,369
$7,678
$6,359
$6,608
($5,168) ($4,833) ($5,022) ($4,733) ($4,798)

5

B

1,667

1.248%

38.15% $8,267
$6,680
$8,640
$7,174
$7,792
($5,283) ($4,933) ($5,469) ($5,173) ($5,317)

6

S

190

0.142%

75.79% $8,655
$7,068
$8,995
$7,456
$7,965
($5,286) ($4,988) ($5,460) ($5,171) ($5,298)

7

B

139

0.104%

54.68% $8,459
$6,829
$8,865
$7,339
$8,029
($5,260) ($4,963) ($5,394) ($5,153) ($5,315)

8

S

20

0.015%

70.00% $8,935
$7,575
$9,446
$8,157
$8,725
($4,933) ($4,888) ($5,669) ($5,614) ($5,692)

9

B

6

0.004%

66.67% $7,583
$6,225
$6,675
$5,188
$5,838
($4,362) ($4,517) ($2,871) ($2,964) ($2,800)

10

S

1

0.001%

100.00% $14,500

$11,000

$14,500

$11,000

$13,600

.
Notes: Dealers sample. For each period (period 1 = auction, period 2 = seller’s first turn in bargaining, period 3 = buyer’s
turn, etc.), table reports the number of observations ending in that period, percent of total sample ending in that period, and
percent of cases in which trade occurred. Table also reports reserve price and auction price for observations ending in a given
period and, for those observations ending in trade, the reserve price, auction price, and final price conditional on trade.
Corresponding statistics for the fleet/lease sample are found in Table A4.

44

Table 3: Monotonicity Results for Welfare Measures

↓

Buyeroptimal
–

Selleroptimal
–

Real
bargaining
↓

Buyer gains

–

↓

–

↓

Seller gains

–

–

↓

↓

*

*

↓

↓

A. Levels
Expected gains
from trade

Probability of
trade

B. Differences
Expected gains
from trade
Probability of
trade

Ex-post

Second-best

↓

↓

Ex-post minus
second-best
*

Second-best minus
real
↓

*

*

Ex-post minus real
↓

↓

Notes: Table displays monotonicity results for welfare measures proved in Proposition 6. Each cell marked with a ↓ signifies
that the specified measure will decrease given a first-order stochastically dominating shift in FS . Each cell marked with an
asterisk indicates that there is no mathematical proof of a monotonicity result and that the bounds must be determined
numerically. Cases marked with “–” in the second-best column indicate that I will report bounds on these quantities
corresponding to the FS leading to the maximum and minimum bounds on the total expected gains from trade. Cases marked
with “–” in the buyer-optimal column indicate that I will report bounds on these quantities corresponding to the FS leading
to the maximum and minimum bounds on the buyer gains from trade. Cases marked with “–” in the seller-optimal column
indicate that I will report bounds on these quantities corresponding to the FS leading to the maximum and minimum bounds
on the seller gains from trade.

45

Table 4: Bounds on Welfare Measures, Dealers Sample

A. Levels

Buyer-

Seller-

Real

optimal

optimal

bargaining

[2.397, 5.029]

[1.776, 4.332]

[2.344, 4.999]

[1.993, 3.933]

(2.149, 5.227)

(1.473, 4.492)

(2.096, 5.207)

(1.812, 4.085)

[0.553, 0.701]

[1.416, 3.962]

[0.474, 0.649]

[0.822, 0.845]

(0.521, 0.733)

(1.159, 4.102)

(0.457, 0.662)

(0.779, 0.913)

[1.844, 4.328]

[0.360, 0.370]

[1.870, 4.349]

[1.171, 3.088]

(1.578, 4.519)

(0.190, 0.441)

(1.612, 4.561)

(0.947, 3.202)

Ex-post

Second-best

Expected gains

[2.442, 5.045]

from trade

(2.184, 5.247)

Buyer gains

Seller gains

Probability of

[0.818, 0.871]

[0.699, 0.828]

[0.266, 0.609]

[0.634, 0.801]

[0.646, 0.646]

trade

(0.806, 0.894)

(0.672, 0.857)

(0.250, 0.637)

(0.627, 0.811)

(0.638, 0.672)

Ex-post minus

Second-best minus

second-best

real

Expected gains

[0.009, 0.059]

[0.377, 1.123]

[0.422, 1.139]

from trade

(0.004, 0.066)

(0.318, 1.202)

(0.355, 1.219)

Probability of

[0.034, 0.128]

[0.052, 0.182]

[0.172, 0.225]

trade

(0.015, 0.142)

(0.026, 0.194)

(0.159, 0.236)

B. Differences

Ex-post minus real

Notes: Dealers sample. Bounds on welfare measures under ex-post efficient, second-best, buyer-optimal, and seller-optimal
mechanisms compared to real-world mechanism. Panel A displays levels and panel B displays differences. Estimated bounds
are in square braces and 95% confidence set is in parentheses. Gains are in $1,000 units.

46

Table 5: Bounds on Welfare Measures, Fleet/lease Sample

A. Levels

Buyer-

Seller-

Real

optimal

optimal

bargaining

[2.342, 4.165]

[1.762, 3.503]

[2.223, 4.088]

[2.080, 3.370]

(2.102, 4.337)

(1.682, 3.783)

(1.992, 4.253)

(1.843, 3.466)

[0.867, 1.039]

[1.439, 2.953]

[0.664, 0.880]

[1.158, 1.192]

(0.797, 1.058)

(1.278, 3.080)

(0.628, 0.888)

(1.073, 1.219)

[1.475, 3.126]

[0.323, 0.550]

[1.558, 3.208]

[0.922, 2.178]

(1.281, 3.298)

(0.311, 0.720)

(1.350, 3.367)

(0.754, 2.302)

Ex-post

Second-best

Expected gains

[2.408, 4.195]

from trade

(2.168, 4.363)

Buyer gains

Seller gains

Probability of

[0.857, 0.893]

[0.703, 0.832]

[0.377, 0.660]

[0.589, 0.747]

[0.658, 0.658]

trade

(0.847, 0.898)

(0.694, 0.840)

(0.364, 0.678)

(0.551, 0.752)

(0.653, 0.677)

Ex-post minus

Second-best minus

second-best

real

Expected gains

[0.009, 0.077]

[0.223, 0.834]

[0.289, 0.864]

from trade

(0.007, 0.082)

(0.195, 0.955)

(0.260, 0.985)

Probability of

[0.042, 0.155]

[0.045, 0.174]

[0.199, 0.235]

trade

(0.035, 0.157)

(0.029, 0.179)

(0.177, 0.238)

B. Differences

Ex-post minus real

Notes: Fleet/lease sample. Bounds on welfare measures under ex-post efficient, second-best, buyer-optimal, and seller-optimal
mechanisms compared to real-world mechanism. Panel A displays levels and panel B displays differences. Estimated bounds
are in square braces and 95% confidence set is in parentheses. Gains are in $1,000 units.

47

Table 6: Expected Gains From Trade in Bargaining Between a Random Buyer and Seller

Dealers Sample

Fleet/lease Sample

Real

Ex-post

bargaining

minus real

[2.423, 4.837]

[1.539, 2.684]

[0.976, 2.204]

(2.113, 5.049)

(2.026, 4.991)

(1.189, 2.867)

(0.787, 2.675)

[3.095, 4.971]

[2.972, 4.900]

[1.571, 2.207]

[1.525, 2.765]

(2.926, 5.192)

(2.796, 5.144)

(1.464, 2.586)

(1.233, 2.995)

Ex-post

Second-best

[2.515, 4.888]

Notes: Bounds on expected gains from trade in ex-post efficient, second-best, real-world bargaining, as well as the gap
between ex-post efficient and real-world bargaining, when a random buyer (rather than the high bidder) bargains with a
seller. As explained in Section 6.4, this setting is computed by setting the auction price to a low quantile of the auction price
distribution. Units are $1,000. Estimated bounds are in square braces and 95% confidence set is in parentheses.

48

A

Proofs

Before providing the proofs corresponding to results in the main text, I first introduce some additional notation and state some preliminary lemmas. Let Ht ≡ {Pτ }t−1
τ =1 represent the set of offers
made from period 1 up through period t − 1 of the bargaining game. The player whose turn it is
at time t has not yet made an offer and so this offer does not enter into Ht . Let DtS ∈ {A, Q, C}
B ∈ {A, Q, C} represent the buyer’s decision
represent the seller’s decision in period t, and let Dt+1

in period t + 1.
The seller’s payoff at period t of the bargaining game is given by the following. Conditional on
a realization of the history Ht = ht , which includes the buyer’s most recent offer (pB
t−1 ), a seller of
type S = s, chooses to accept (A), quit (Q), or counter (C), yielding the following payoffs:
A : pB
t−1
Q:s
C : VtS (s|ht )
(


B
B
= max p Pr Dt+1
= A|{ht+1 , p} + s Pr Dt+1
= Q|{ht+1 , p} − cS
p

"
B
+ Pr Dt+1

#)
 B

S
B
max Pt+1
, s, Vt+2
s|{ht+1 , p, Pt+1
}


= C|{ht+1 , p} EP B

t+1

B
{ht+1 , p}, Dt+1
=C

where p is the counteroffer chosen by the seller. The seller’s counteroffer payoff takes into account
that the buyer may either accept, quit, or return a counteroffer. In the latter case, the seller receives
her expected payoff from being faced with the decision in period t + 2 to accept, quit, or counter.
The buyer’s payoff at period t + 1 of the bargaining game is defined similarly, with the buyer
receiving b − p if he accepts a price p, 0 if he quits, and an expected counteroffer payoff if he
counters. Conditional on a realization of the history Ht+1 = ht+1 , which includes the seller’s most
recent offer (pSt ), a buyer of type B = b chooses to accept (A), quit (Q), or counter (C), yielding
the following payoffs:
A : b − pSt
Q:0
B
C : Vt+1
(b|ht+1 )
(


S
= max (b − p) Pr Dt+2
= A|{ht+1 , p} − cB
p

"
+ Pr

S
Dt+2


= C|{ht+1 , p} EP S

t+2

#)



S
B
S
max b − Pt+2
, 0, Vt+3
b|{ht+1 , p, Pt+2
}

49

S
{ht+1 , p}, Dt+2

=C

where p is the counteroffer chosen by the buyer. The buyer’s outside option is normalized to zero.
The expected payoff of a buyer of type B = b in the bargaining subgame, conditional on winning
the auction and conditional on entering bargaining when the auction price is pA , is given by

π B (pA , b) = (b − pA ) Pr D2S = A|pA
"



+ Pr D2S = C|pA EP S max b − P2S , 0, V3B b|{pA , P2S }
2

#
pA , D2S = C − cB

This expression is the payoff to the buyer from stating the auction price as a counteroffer, which is
how the bargaining game begins.
Lemma 1. If Assumptions A1–A3 are satisfied, then for any finite T and any realized histories
B (b|h
ht and ht+1 , VtS (s|ht ) is weakly increasing in s and Vt+1
t+1 ) is weakly increasing in b for all

t ≤ T.
Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on the number of periods remaining. I prove the result in
the case where the buyer moves last; analogous reasoning proves that the result also holds if the
seller moves last. Suppose there are T total periods in the game and there is currently one period
remaining: it is the seller’s turn and after her turn the buyer will only be allowed to accept or quit.
At a given realization of HT −1 = hT −1 , the seller’s payoff from countering at a price of p is then
UTS (s, p|hT −1 ) ≡ p Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p}) + s(1 − Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p})) − cS
Let p∗ (s|hT −1 ) ∈ arg maxp UTS (s, p|hT −1 ). That is, VTS−1 (s|hT −1 ) = UTS−1 (s, p∗ (s|hT −1 )|hT −1 ).
Now let VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −1 ) represent the payoff to the seller of type s who mimics type s0 < s
(note that the ability of a seller—or buyer—to mimic another type relies on the i.i.d. properties
in Assumptions A1–A2). Clearly VT −1 (s, s|hT −1 ) ≥ VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −1 ) because VT −1 (s, s|hT −1 ) is
the maximized counteroffer payoff given the seller’s true value, s. It remains to be shown that
VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −1 ) ≥ VT −1 (s0 , s0 |hT −1 ).
Below, p∗ (s0 |hT −1 ) represents the offer that would be optimal for a seller of type s0 given the
realized history hT −1 . Observe that
VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −1 ) = p∗ (s0 |hT −1 ) Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p∗ (s0 |hT −1 )})
+ s(1 − Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p∗ (s0 |hT −1 )})) − cS ,
and
VT −1 (s0 , s0 |hT −1 ) = p∗ (s0 |hT −1 ) Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p∗ (s0 |hT −1 )})
+ s0 (1 − Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p∗ (s0 |hT −1 )})) − cS
50

Thus,
VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −1 ) − VT −1 (s0 , s0 |hT −1 ) = (s − s0 )(1 − Pr(DTB = A|{hT −1 , p∗ (s0 |hT −1 )})) ≥ 0
Therefore, VT −1 (s, s|hT −1 ) ≥ VT −1 (s0 , s0 |hT −1 ), and the seller’s counteroffer payoff is weakly increasing in her type when there is one period remaining.
To complete the proof by induction, let VTS−(t−1) (s|hT −(t−1) ) denote the seller’s counteroffer
payoff with t − 1 periods remaining, and suppose VTS−(t−1) (s|hT −(t−1) ) is weakly increasing in s.
Note that, for s0 < s, when there are t periods remaining, VT −t (s, s|hT −t ) ≥ VT −1 (s, s0 |hT −t ) by
the same argument as above for. It remains to be shown that VT −t (s, s0 |hT −t ) ≥ VT −t (s0 , s0 |hT −t ).
Note that
VT −t (s, s0 |hT −t ) − VT −1 (s0 , s0 |hT −t )




= (s − s0 ) Pr DTB−(t−1) = Q|{hT −t , p∗ (s0 |hT −t )} + Pr DTB−(t−1) = C|{hT −t , p∗ (s0 |hT −t )}
h
n

o
× EP B
max PTB−(t−1) , s, VTS−(t−2) s, s0 |{hT −t , p∗ (s0 |hT −t ), PTB−(t−1) }
T −(t−1)

n

o
− max PTB−(t−1) , s0 , VTS−(t−2) s0 , s0 |{hT −t , p∗ (s0 |hT −t ), PTB−(t−1) }
{hT −t , p∗ (s0 |hT −t )}, DTB−(t−1) = C
≥0
Therefore, VT −t (s, s|hT −t ) ≥ VT −t (s0 , s0 |hT −t ), completing the proof. The proof that the buyer
B (b|h
counteroffer payoff, Vt+1
T +1 ), is increasing in b follows by the same steps.

Lemma 2. In any equilibrium with truthtelling in the auction, fB being positive everywhere on the
support of B implies fP A is positive everywhere on the support of B.
Proof. If fB is positive everywhere on the support of B, then FB is strictly increasing. Equation
(3) demonstrates that, under truthtelling in the auction, FP A is then also strictly increasing, and
so fP A is positive everywhere on the support of B.
Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Consider an arbitrary bidder of type B = b. A bidder’s strategy is the price at which he
stops bidding as a function of his type. Suppose the current price of the ascending button auction
is some value p̄ and suppose the bidder is one of at least two bidders still remaining in the auction
up until the price reaches its current level p̄. The auction will eventually end at some price pA ≥ p̄.
If b > p̄, it is optimal for the bidder to remain in the auction, as dropping out would yield a
payoff of 0 and staying in would yield a non-negative expected payoff because there is some chance
that the bidder will win at a price pA < b. To see that the expected payoff of remaining in the

51

#

bidding is non-negative, consider first the case where the auction price and reserve price satisfy
pA ≥ R; in this case, the car will sell through the auction and the bidder will receive a positive
payoff. Now consider the case where instead pA < R; in this case, the bidder will be given the
option to enter into bargaining, and will only choose to enter if doing so yields a non-negative
expected payoff. Recall that the bidder only pays the cost of bargaining, cB , if he chooses not to
opt out of bargaining at this point.
If b < p̄, the buyer cannot receive a positive expected payoff from remaining in the auction. To
see this, note that if the bidder remains in the auction there is some chance that he will win at
some pA > b. If this occurs and the auction price and reserve price satisfy pA ≥ R, the car will sell
through the auction and the bidder will receive b − pA < 0. If, on the other hand, the bidder wins
and pA < R, the bidder’s payoff conditional on entering bargaining will necessarily be negative
because the final bargained price must be greater than pA and hence, in this case, the bidder will
opt out of bargaining, receiving a payoff of 0.
Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. Note that for b0 > b, π B (χ(b), b0 ) > 0. This follows because, by Lemma 1, V3B (·) is weakly
increasing in b, and this fact, combined with the term (b − pA ) appearing in π B (pA , b), which is
strictly increasing in b, implies that π B (pA , b) is strictly increasing in b. Thus, χ(b0 ) > χ(b), and
hence χ is strictly increasing, and χ−1 exists and is also strictly increasing.
The property that χ−1 (pA ) > pA follows from the following argument. A buyer must pay cB > 0
if he opts to bargain, and the best possible outcome a buyer can expect from bargaining would be
to only have to pay pA . Therefore, for any auction price pA , there exists some buyer with type close
to pA , say pA + ε, where ε < cB , who would prefer to opt out of bargaining rather than receive a
payoff of (at most) ε − cB , which is negative.
Strict monotonicity of ρ(·), along with the fact that ρ(s) ≥ s, is proven separately in Lemma 3
below.
When the auction price is pA and bargaining occurs, it will be common knowledge among the
two bargaining parties that seller’s type s satisfies ρ(s) ≥ pA , and thus s ∈ [ρ−1 (pA ), s]. Similarly,
bargaining occurring means the buyer did not opt out, so χ(b) ≥ pA , implying b ∈ [χ−1 (pA ), b].
Lemma 3. If Assumptions A1–A5 are satisfied, then in any BNE satisfying Assumption A4, the
seller’s optimal secret reserve price, ρ∗ (s), is strictly increasing in s and satisfies ρ∗ (s) ≥ s.
Proof. Suppose for simplicity that there is some positive probability that the buyer does not opt out
of bargaining when R > P A ; as I discuss below, the proposition still holds without this assumption.
In choosing her secret reserve price, ρ(s), a seller of type S = s wishes to maximize her ex-ante

52

payoff, given by
"

"



EP A EB P A ∗ 1 P A ≥ ρ(s) + s ∗ 1 P A < ρ(s), π B (P A , B) < 0

(9)

##
+π

S

A



P , s ∗ 1 P A < ρ(s), π B (P A , B) ≥ 0

P

A

This term consists of three pieces: 1) the auction price, which the seller receives if it exceeds the
reserve price; 2) the seller’s type s, which the seller receives if the auction price is below the reserve

price and the buyer opts out of bargaining; and 3) the seller’s bargaining payoff, π S P A , s =


max P A , s, V2S s|P A , which the seller receives when the price is below the reserve price and
bargaining occurs.
The seller’s payoff can be re-written as
b

Z

pA fP A (pA )dpA +

ρ

pA fP A (pA )dpA +

=

ρ

"Z

ρ

χ−1 (pA )

Z
sfB (b)db +

pA

b
b

Z

Z

Z

ρ

b

πS

χ−1 (pA )

"

s FB (χ−1 (pA )) − FB (pA ) + π S

b

#

fP A (pA )
dpA
pA , s fB (b)db
1 − FB (pA )
#


fP A (pA )
pA , s 1 − FB (χ−1 (pA ))
dpA
1 − FB (pA )

Assumption A4 implies π S (·, s) is continuous and thus the payoff is differentiable. Differentiating
the above expression using Leibniz Rule yields the following derivative with respect to ρ:


FB (χ−1 (ρ)) − FB (ρ)
1 − FB (χ−1 (ρ))
∂
S
= fP A (ρ) −ρ + s
+ π (ρ, s)
∂ρ
1 − FB (ρ)
1 − FB (ρ)

(10)

I next show that fP A (ρ) > 0 for any ρ in the support of R. To see this, first note that fP A (v) > 0
for all v ∈ [b, b] by Lemma 2. Second, choosing any ρ < b would be dominated by instead choosing
a reserve price of b because every buyer has a valuation of at least b. Third, a seller would be
indifferent between any reserve price above b (because no buyer would be willing to pay more than
b). Therefore, any ρ ∈
/ [b, b] would be weakly dominated, and so I can remove fP A (ρ) from the
above expression without dividing by zero. Also note that 1 − FB (ρ) > 0 because fB is positive by
Assumption A5.

Lemma 1 shows that π S pA , s is weakly increasing in s and so
Topkis Theorem then implies that

ρ∗ (s)

∂
∂ρ

is weakly increasing in s.

is weakly increasing in s.

A stronger, strictly increasing result for ρ∗ (s) is then obtained as follows. The proof of Proposition 3 demonstrates (due to costly bargaining) that χ−1 (pA ) > pA , and thus FB (χ−1 (ρ)) > FB (ρ).
Combining these arguments implies that

∂
∂ρ

is strictly increasing in s, which in turn implies, by the

Edlin and Shannon (1998) Theorem, that ρ∗ (s) is strictly increasing on the interior of the support
of R. Let r and r be the infimum and supremum of ρ(s) that are optimal for any s. Suppose the

53

support of R is an interval. For the purposes of applying the Edlin and Shannon (1998) result,
the support of r can be considered to be (r − ε, r + ε) for some ε > 0, and ρ∗ (s) will be strictly
increasing on the interior of this interval. Now suppose the support of R is not an interval, i.e.
suppose there exist a point or points on the interior of [r, r] that are not optimal for any s ∈ [s, s].
Such points would constitute discontinuities of the function ρ∗ (s). By the weakly increasing result
from above (due to Topkis Theorem), any such discontinuities are positive jumps in the function
ρ∗ (s), and therefore ρ∗ (s) will be strictly increasing even if the support of R is not an interval.
The fact that ρ∗ (s) ≥ s follows from a simple rationality argument (no seller would offer a
reserve price less than s given that a reserve price of s yields a weakly higher payoff), but it can
also be seen by noting that the first-order condition above implies that the reserve price is given
by a convex combination of s and a quantity weakly greater than s (i.e. π S (ρ, s)).
Note that if the equilibrium of the game is such that the buyer opts out of bargaining with
probability one when R > P A then the expression in (10) becomes
the optimal reserve price is

ρ∗ (s)

∂
∂ρ

= fP A (ρ) [−ρ + s], and thus

= s, again satisfying the proposition.

Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. Theorem 1 of Storms (2015) (included below as Lemma 4, modified to fit this setting)
implies that, in any BNE of this game, conditional on a realization of the auction price, pA , for
each seller type s, there is a cutoff value g0 (s, pA ) such that trade occurs if and only if the buyer’s
type b satisfies b ≥ g0 (s, pA ). Given the strict monotonicity of ρ(·) (Proposition 3), such a cutoff
function also exists with realizations s replaced with realizations of the reserve price r. Call this
cutoff function g(r, pA ).
Lemma 4. (Due to Storms 2015) If Assumptions A1–A5 are satisfied, then, conditional on any
realization of the auction price P A = pA , in any BNE of the bargaining subgame satisfying A4, for
each seller type s there is a cutoff value g0 (s, pA ) such that s trades with a buyer b if and only if
b ≥ g0 (s, pA ).
Proof. Fix P A = pA throughout this proof. I first prove a preliminary property. Fix any arbitrary
BNE. Let Pr(A = 1|b, ht ) represent the probability of trade for a buyer who mimics the strategy of
a buyer of type b when the history so far in the game is ht . Here, A ∈ {0, 1} is a random variable
indicating whether or not trade occurs, where, from the buyer’s perspective, the seller’s valuation
is unknown. Let y(b, ht ) represent the expected transfer from playing such an action. Also, let
ht (s, b) denote the history of the game in time t when the players’ types are s, b and when they
play their equilibrium strategies.
I will discuss properties that must hold on histories that have a positive probability of being
played in equilibrium (i.e. histories that at least some buyer and seller pair would play). In such

54

histories, in any BNE, each buyer type must weakly prefer to play his own strategy from any history
onward to playing that of another type. Thus, for b0 > b, we have
b Pr(A = 1|b, ht ) − y(b, ht ) ≥ b Pr(A = 1|b0 , ht ) − y(b0 , ht )
b0 Pr(A = 1|b0 , ht ) − y(b0 , ht ) ≥ b0 Pr(A = 1|b, ht ) − y(b, ht )
Combining inequalities demonstrates that, for b0 > b,
Pr(A = 1|b0 , ht ) ≥ Pr(A = 1|b, ht )

(11)

Pr(A = 1|s0 , ht ) ≥ Pr(A = 1|s, ht )

(12)

A similar result holds for s0 < s,

Using this property, Lemma 4 can be proved by contradiction. Such a contradiction would be a
triple s, b, and b0 with b0 > b such that s eventually (at some unspecified time period of the game)
trades with b, but does not at any period of the game reach agreement with a type b0 . For the sake
of clarity, I will give such triples a name, referring to them as Type A triples. Let h∗t be the longest
history of play among all Type A triples such that the strategy for b is the same as that for b0 up
to time t when the seller’s type is s (that is, h∗t = ht (s, b) = ht (s, b0 )). Throughout the remainder
of the proof, let s, b, and b0 be a Type A triple at which h∗t is achieved. The result in (11) implies
that b0 must trade with weakly greater probability than b from ht onward. This weak inequality,
combined with (s, b, b0 ) being a Type A triple, implies that there must be some seller type s0 who
reaches history ht against both b and b0 and who trades with b0 but not b.
Now consider two cases.
1. Case where s0 > s. Since s does not trade with b0 from the history ht+1 (s, b0 ), s cannot trade
with any types b̃ < b0 from ht+1 (s, b0 ), or else (s, b̃, b0 ) would form a counterexample to h∗t
because it would constitute a Type A triple with buyers having t + 1 periods of identical
strategies. But by (12), s must trade more often than s0 conditional on the history ht+1 (s, b0 ),
and hence there must be some type b00 > b0 such that b00 eventually trades with s but not with
s0 when the history is ht+1 (s, b0 ). The triple (s0 , b0 , b00 ) then gives a contradiction because it
constitutes a Type A triple with buyers having t + 1 stages of their strategies being identical.
2. Case where s0 < s. Since s trades with b from the history ht+1 (s, b), s must trade with all
types b̃ > b from ht+1 (s, b), or else (s, b, b̃) would form a counterexample to h∗t because it
would constitute a Type A triple with buyers having t + 1 periods of identical strategies. By
(12), s0 must trade more often than s conditional on the history ht+1 (s, b). It follows that
there must be some type b000 < b that trades with s0 but not s. The triple (s0 , b, b000 ) then gives
55

a contradiction because it constitutes a Type A triple with buyers having t + 1 stages of their
strategies being identical.

Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. Given the structure of additive separability in the willingness to pay/sell, the goal is to
show that the auction price, players’ bargaining counteroffers, and the seller’s secret reserve price
will also be additively separable in the game-level heterogeneity. The buyer’s type is given by
B̃ ≡ B + W ∼ FB̃ , with density fB̃ . The seller’s type is given by S̃ ≡ S + W . For this proof, let
the realization of W be w.
That the auction price will be additively separable in w is obvious, given that there is no
incentive for bidders to deviate from truthful bidding by Proposition 1.
To demonstrate that bargaining offers are also additively separable, the proof proceeds by
induction on the number of periods remaining. Before proving this result, I highlight here that
Proposition 5 only states that bargaining offers will be additively separable if they are accepted
with positive probability; the equilibrium framework does not rule out equilibria in which a player
makes an offer that would not be accepted by any type, and additive separability will not necessarily
hold for such offers.
Suppose there is currently one period remaining in the bargaining game: it is the seller’s turn
and after her turn the buyer will only be allowed to accept or quit (I prove the result in the case
where the buyer moves last; analogous reasoning proves that the result also holds if the seller moves
last).
Suppose for simplicity that the equilibrium does not entail the buyer rejecting all offers with
probability one in the final period (if not, the seller would not choose to counter in period T − 1).
In the final period, a buyer with type B̃ = b̃ will accept a price, p̃, if and only if p̃ ≤ b̃. In period
T − 1, the seller of type S̃ = s̃ chooses p̃∗ to solve
p̃∗ ∈ arg max p̃(1 − FB̃ (p̃)) + s̃FB̃ (p̃) − cS
p̃

= arg max p(1 − FB (p)) + sFB (p) − cS + w(1 − FB (p)) + wFB (p)
p

= w + arg max {p(1 − FB (p)) + sFB (p) − cS }
p

Therefore, the penultimate bargaining offer in the heterogeneous setting will be w above the bargaining offer from the homogeneous good setting, and similarly for the seller’s maximized payoff.
To complete the proof by induction, suppose that offers and payoffs in periods T − (t − 1) and
T − (t − 2) are w higher than their homogeneous good counterparts and the probability of the buyer
accepting, quitting, or countering in period T − (t − 1) will be the same in the heterogeneous good
56

model as in the homogeneous good model. It remains to be shown that the same holds true for
the offers and payoffs in period T − t. Let all (˜·) expressions represent the heterogeneous model
expressions. The seller’s payoffs from accepting, quitting, or countering in period T − t can be
written as follows:
B
A : p̃B
T −(t+1) = w + pT −(t+1)

Q : s̃ = w + s


C : ṼTS−t s̃|h̃T −t




= max p̃ Pr DTB−(t−1) = A|{h̃T −t , p̃} + s̃ Pr DTB−(t−1) = Q|{h̃T −t , p̃}
p̃


B
+ Pr DT −(t−1) = C|{h̃T −t , p̃}
"
#
n

o
× EP̃ B
max P̃TB−(t−1) , s̃, ṼTS−(t−2) s̃|{h̃T −t , p̃, P̃TB−(t−1) }
{h̃T −t , p̃}, DTB−(t−1) = C − cS
T −(t−1)





= w + max p Pr DTB−(t−1) = A|{hT −t , p} + s Pr DTB−(t−1) = Q|{hT −t , p}
p


+ Pr DTB−(t−1) = C|{hT −t , p}
"
#
n

o
B
S
B
B
× EP B
max PT −(t−1) , s, VT −(t−2) s|{hT −t , p, PT −(t−1) }
{hT −t , p}, DT −(t−1) = C − cS
T −(t−1)

The last line follows by removing w from each expression. Note that if the equilibrium entails the
buyer quitting with probability 1 in period T − (t − 1) then the seller would have no incentive
to counter in period T − t and so the additive separability result still holds for offers observed in
equilibrium.
To see that the probability of the buyer accepting, quitting, or countering in period T − (t − 1)
will be the same in the heterogeneous good model as in the homogeneous good model, note that
the buyer’s payoffs for each action are given by:
A : b̃ − p̃ST −t = b − pST −t
Q:0


C : ṼTB−(t−1) b̃|h̃T −(t−1)


= max(b̃ − p̃) Pr DTS −(t−2) = A|{h̃T −(t−1) , p̃} − cB
p̃


+ Pr DTS −(t−2) = C|{h̃T −(t−1) , p̃}
"
#
n

o
× EP̃ S
max b̃ − P̃TS−(t−2) , 0, ṼTB−(t−3) b̃|{h̃T −(t−1) , p̃, P̃TS−(t−2) }
{h̃T −(t−1) , p̃}, DTS −(t−2) = C
T −(t−2)

= VTB−(t−1) b|hT −(t−1)



57

And thus the claim is true because the buyer’s bargaining payoffs are the same in the homogeneous
good and heterogeneous good models. It also immediately follows that π B (χ̃, b̃) = π B (χ, b) by the
above arguments for the buyer’s bargaining payoff, where χ̃ satisfies 0 = π B (χ̃, b̃).
Now consider the seller’s secret reserve price in the setting with game-level heterogeneity w.
Suppose for now that the equilibrium does not entail the buyer opting out of bargaining with
probability 1 when R > P A . From the proof of Lemma 3, the derivative of the seller’s payoff with
respect to the seller’s choice of secret reserve price, r̃ = ρ(s̃), will be given by


F (χ̃−1 (r̃)) − FB̃ (r̃)
1 − FB̃ (χ̃−1 (r̃))
∂
(13)
= fP̃ A (r̃) −r̃ + s̃ B̃
+ π S (r̃, s̃)
∂ r̃
1 − FB̃ (r̃)
1 − FB̃ (r̃)


FB (χ−1 (r̃ − w)) − FB (r̃ − w)
1 − FB (χ−1 (r̃ − w))
S
= fP A (r̃ − w) −r̃ + w + s
+ π (r̃ − w, s)
1 − FB (r̃ − w)
1 − FB (r̃ − w)
(14)
Therefore, the optimal secret reserve price in the heterogeneous setting will be w above the optimal
reserve in the homogeneous setting. Now suppose the equilibrium does involve the buyer opting
out of bargaining with probability 1 when R > P A . In this case, the expression in (13) becomes
∂
∂ r̃

= −r̃ + s̃, and thus the optimal secret reserve price is s + w, again satisfying the proposition.
An immediate implication of these results is a generalization of Proposition 4: At a general

realization W = w, trade occurs if and only if b̃ ≥ g(r̃, p̃A ) ⇒ b ≥ g(r̃ − w, p̃A − w) = g(r, pA ).
Proof of Proposition 6
Proof. I first introduce notation. Let W(x, FS ) refer to any welfare measure under a given allocation
function x and at a given seller valuation distribution FS (suppressing dependence on FB given
that I have point estimates of FB ). I will add specific subscripts to W to denote a particular
type of welfare measure: the total expected gains from trade is WEG (x, FS ), given by (8); the
expected gains from trade for the buyer alone is WB (x, FS ) and for the seller alone is WS (x, FS );
and the expected probability of trade is WPr (x, FS ). The gap between the expected gains from
trade for the ex-post efficient and second-best mechanisms, between the second-best and real-world
mechanisms, and between the ex-post efficient and real-world mechanisms are given by the following
three expressions:
1

1

WEG (x∗ − x 2 , FS ) ≡ WEG (x∗ , FS ) − WEG (x 2 , FS )
1

1

WEG (x 2 − xRW , FS ) ≡ WEG (x 2 , FS ) − WEG (xRW , FS )
WEG (x∗ − xRW , FS ) ≡ WEG (x∗ , FS ) − WEG (xRW , FS )
Similar notation can be used to denote the gap between the probability of trade in different mechanisms.
58

I begin by proving that WEG (x∗ , FS ) will decrease given a stochastically dominating change in
FS . Let WEG (x∗ , FS ; pA ) be the expected gains from trade under ex-post efficiency conditional on
a realization of the auction price pA . This object can be written as
∗

Z

A

s

WEG (x , FS ; p ) =

Λ(s)fS (s|pA )ds

(15)

s(pA )

where Λ(s, pA ) is given by
A

Z

b

(b − s)1{b ≥ s}fB (b|pA )db

Λ(s, p ) =
b(pA )

fS (s)
, and note
1−FS (s(pA ))
A
−1
FS (s(p )) = FS (ρ (pA )) =

Note that this function is weakly decreasing in s. Also recall that fS (s|pA ) =
that the denominator of this term does not vary with FS , because

FS (FS−1 (FR (pA ))) = FR (pA ). It is well known that, for any weakly decreasing Λ(·) in an expectation such as (15), replacing fS with a density corresponding to a distribution that first-order
stochastically dominates fS will lead to a lower value for the evaluated integral WEG (x∗ , FS ; pA ).
Integrating WEG (x∗ , FS ; pA ) over pA yields the desired result. The monotonicity of WPr (x∗ , FS )
follows by the same result.
For the second-best mechanism, the proof of monotonicity of the expected gains from trade is
much more involved and is found in recent work by Zhang (2017). It does not yield an mathematical
proof of the monotonicity of the expected buyer or seller gains or the probability of trade in the
second-best mechanism. For the buyer-optimal mechanism, monotonicity of the buyer gains follows
from the same line of reasoning as in Zhang (2017), but there is no proof of monotonicity of the
total expected gains from trade, seller gains, or probability of trade.
For the seller-optimal mechanism, the allocation function is x1 = 1{b −

1−Fb (b)
f B (b)

≥ s}. As in the

ex-post efficient case, this allocation function does not depend on FS , and thus monotonicity of all
the welfare measures in the seller-optimal mechanism are guaranteed (even for those marked with
“–” in the seller-optimal column of Table 3).
For the real-world mechanism, the proof of monotonicity of the expected gains from trade
exploits that I have defined the real-world mechanism as a function of the reserve price, R, given
that R is a strictly increasing function of S, and hence, holding fixed FR , the allocation function,


xRW (ρ(s), b; pA ) ≡ 1 b ≥ g ρ(s), pA , does not depend on the unknown distribution FS . The
expected gains from trade in the real-world mechanism can be written
RW

WEG (x

Z b "Z

b

Z

#

s
A



(b − s)1 b ≥ g ρ(s), p

, FS ) =
b

b(pA )

where ρ(s) ≡ FR−1 (FS (s)).

s(pA )



A

A

fS (s|p )fB (b|p )ds db fpA (pA )dpA

Holding FR fixed, the object ρ(s) would be unchanged by such

59

a first-order stochastically dominating shift in FS .
FS (s) quantile of FR .

This is because ρ(s) always returns the

To see this, let F̆S first order stochastically dominate FS and let s̆

and s be realizations such that s̆ > s and F̆S (s̆) = FS (s).

Thus, s̆ = F̆S−1 (FS (s)).

ρ̆(s̆) ≡ FR−1 (F̆S (s̆)) = FR−1 (F̆S (F̆S−1 (FS (s)))) = ρ(s), proving the result. The
WB (xRW , FS ), WS (xRW , FS ), and WPr (xRW , FS ) follow by the same argument.

Then

monotonicity of
Note that these

results should not be interpreted as suggesting that the real-world mechanism does not depend
on the distribution of seller valuations; these results simply imply that, because reserve prices are
one-to-one with seller valuations, after conditioning on FR , the estimation of the object ρ(·) will
not depend on the estimate of FS .
For the first column in panel B of Table 3, there is no mathematical proof of monotonicity of
1

the gap between the ex-post and second-best gains from trade, WEG (x∗ − x 2 , FS ), and similarly
for the gap for the probability of trade. For the gap between the expected gains from trade in the
1

second-best mechanism and the real-world mechanism, WEG (x 2 − xRW , FS ), monotonicity follows
from the arguments above (the allocation function xRW does not depend on FS , and the expected
gains from trade for the second-best mechanism are monotonic). For the gap in the probability of
trade there is no proof of monotonicity. For the final column in panel B of Table 3, monotonicity of
the gap between ex-post efficient and real-world expected gains from trade, WEG (x∗ − xRW , FS ),
follows by the same arguments as above for the real-world and ex-post efficient mechanisms, and
similarly for the probability of trade gap.

B
B.1

Additional Model Discussion
Discussion of BNE vs. Other Equilibrium Concepts

Throughout the paper, I assume play corresponds to a BNE. The use of BNE, rather than a
Perfect Bayesian Nash (PBE) framework, for example, does not mean I am modeling the game as
a static game; I am modeling the game as dynamic—I am just not specifying how players update
their beliefs at histories of the game that are never reached. In any BNE, players’ beliefs about
the type of opponent they are facing are updated using Bayes Rule at any history of the game
reached on the equilibrium path, but BNE places no restrictions on how these beliefs are updated
when off-equilibrium (i.e. zero-probability) events occur.25 PBE is a refinement of BNE (and
thus, every PBE is also a BNE) requiring that the researcher also specify how beliefs are updated
when these zero-probability events occur. Refinements such as PBE are useful in some applied
theory settings to narrow down the set of possible equilibria, but they have not proven very useful
25

Because Bayes Rule is the only updating rule allowed on-path in BNE, and because BNE includes no statement
of off-equilibrium beliefs, it is not technically necessary to discuss beliefs at all a BNE framework; it is only for clarity
of exposition that I explicitly state the feature that beliefs are updated using Bayes Rule at all histories of the game
that are reached in equilibrium.

60

for sequential incomplete-information bargaining games like mine.26 In spite of the independence
assumptions in A1–A2, and the simple bargaining structure imposed in Assumption A3, this game is
difficult to analyze, both theoretically and empirically, as two-sided bargaining problems (i.e. games
where both parties can make offers) with two-sided uncertainty (where both parties have private
information) are known to have a multiplicity of equilibria that can be qualitatively quite dissimilar,
and no known characterization of these equilibria exists (see discussion in Ausubel, Cramton, and
Deneckere 2002). The approach I take in this paper will circumvent this problem by only assuming
that participants play some BNE of the game, without attempting to fully characterize or solve for
that equilibrium.

B.2

Additional Discussion of Proposition 1 Truthful Bidding Result

The proof of Proposition 1 is greatly simplified by the rule, discussed in Section 3, that the bargained
price cannot be below the auction price; if this were not the case, proving the proposition would
require ruling out the possibility of buyers bidding above their valuations and then attempting to
bargain down to a lower final price afterward. It is possible to show that such behavior cannot
occur in equilibrium, but the proof is more involved. I state this as the following lemma:
Lemma 5. If the rules of the game are relaxed such that the bargained price is allowed to be lower
than the auction price, then it is still the case that the following cannot occur in equilibrium: Some
bidder i remains in the bidding even after the current bid exceeds bi and, if bargaining occurs and
if given the chance to counteroffer, the bidder makes a counteroffer less than bi and this offer is
accepted by the seller.
Proof. Note that a buyer who bids above his value bears a risk of winning the auction at a price
that exceeds the reserve price, giving the bidder a negative payoff. Therefore, if some bidder i does
want to bid above his value in the auction, it must be because that bidder hopes to eventually end
up in bilateral bargaining with the seller and hopes to have the bargaining game end at a price
weakly below his value, and the bidder believes that the chance of this happening is sufficiently high
to warrant the risk of bidding above his value. That is, for this behavior to occur in equilibrium,
26
Previous work has found that such refinements can lead to predictions of immediate trade or immediate disagreement (Perry 1986) or that equilibria satisfying proposed refinements often fail to exist (see the discussion in
Sections 3.1.2 and 5 of Ausubel, Cramton, and Deneckere (2002) of equilibrium refinements of incomplete-information
bargaining games proposed in Cramton (1984), Rubinstein (1985), Grossman and Perry (1986), Cho (1990), and
Bikhchandani (1992). Gul and Sonnenschein (1988) pointed out that traditional refinements (such as Sequential
Equilibrium or Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium) often do not meaningfully narrow down equilibria in sequential bargaining games because BNE can often be made sequential/perfect by specifying optimistic beliefs: whenever the seller
makes an off-equilibrium offer the buyer believes the seller is the weakest type, and vice versa. The bargaining game
described in Perry (1986) is nearly identical to the setup of the bargaining subgame described herein, but the author
focuses on Sequential Equilibria rather than BNE and finds a unique equilibrium that involves only immediate trade
or immediate disagreement. Cramton (1991) discussed how the Perry (1986) result can be overturned by allowing
for a small amount of time discounting. Cramton (1992) derived a particular equilibrium in a two-sided bargaining
game involving a war of attrition.

61

it must be the case that, in the bargaining game, i makes a counteroffer lower than pA and this
offer is accepted by some seller (the seller should never make such an offer herself because accepting
pA would be preferable). Let the term high-low strategy refer to this strategy of remaining in the
bidding even after the current bid exceeds bi and then, if given the chance to do so, making an offer
less than bi (and hence also less than pA ).
In order for the high-low strategy to be optimal for bi , the following must be true (I will refer
to this as the high-low supposition): the seller cannot distinguish between type bi and some type
b̆ > bi whom the seller believes may not be playing the high-low strategy (and hence may not be
attempting to later counter below pA ). If the seller could distinguish between the two, the seller
would simply accept pA when faced with the bidder known to be playing the high-low strategy.
Note that it cannot be the case that all bidders play the high-low strategy, or else the seller would
always immediately accept the auction price and the bidders would all obtain a negative surplus
and hence all bidders would have been better off not bidding above their values. Thus, in order for
the high-low strategy to be optimal for bi , it must be the case that the seller cannot distinguish
between type bi and some type b̆ > bi whom the seller believes may not be playing the high-low
strategy.
Suppose the high-low supposition is true. Note that, if type bi > pA finds it optimal to play
the high-low strategy, so will all types higher than bi , because π B (pA , bi ) ≥ 0 ⇒ π B (pA , b̆) > 0 for
all b̆ > bi (because V3B (·) is weakly increasing in bi by Lemma 1 and (bi − pA ) is strictly increasing
in bi , so π B (pA , bi ) is strictly increasing in bi ). Therefore, if any buyer finds it optimal to play the
high-low strategy, so will buyer type b̆ > bi , which contradicts our supposition. Therefore, if any
buyer finds it optimal to play the high-low strategy, and if pA is higher than the lowest buyer type
who would find it optimal to play the high-low strategy, then the seller’s best response when facing
an auction price of pA at the beginning of a bargaining game would be to immediately accept pA
if pA ≥ s and quit otherwise.

B.3

Sharpness of Proposition 2 Bounds for Seller Valuations

Proposition 7. If the only maintained assumptions are Assumption A7 and Assumption A2, the
bounds in Proposition 2 are sharp.
Proof. Suppose Assumptions A2 and A7 are satisfied. Let the bounds on FS be given by Pr(DS =
A|P A = pA ) and Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = pA ). I must demonstrate that any FS lying in these bounds
could have generated these exact bounds. The following behavior will generate the bounds exactly.
Given an auction price pA , if s ≤ pA the seller accepts with probability
otherwise the seller counters or the buyer opts out of bargaining; if s ≥
probability

1−Pr(DS 6=Q|P A =pA )
1−FS (pA )

pA

Pr(DS =A|P A =pA )
FS (pA )

and

the seller quits with

and otherwise the seller counters or the buyer opts out of bargaining.

This behavior generates the bounds exactly.
62

An interesting feature of these bounds is that Pr(DS = A|P A = v) and Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = v)
are not necessarily monotonic, but Proposition 7 still holds. This is because these are bounds on a
distribution function, and hence they are bounds on a weakly increasing function (i.e. lying in F).
An alternative, monotonized version of these bounds that emphasizes this point is
sup Pr(DS = A|P A = v) ≤ FS (pA ) ≤ inf Pr(DS 6= Q|P A = v)
v>pA

v<pA

(16)

This ironing-like procedure results in bounds that are monotonic, as illustrated in Figure A1, but
this does not result in bounds on FS that are any tighter than those originally stated in Proposition
2 because FS is already restricted to be a proper CDF.
Importantly, if these monotonized bounds from (16) cross at any point, this would be an
indication of a violation of Assumption A7. Such a violation would mean that there is no weakly
increasing function lying between the monotonized bounds or between the Proposition 2 bounds.
Proposition 7 demonstrates sharpness if the only maintained assumptions are A2 and A7. However, under the assumption of BNE (maintained throughout the paper, but not actually required
for Proposition 2), the bounds are not necessarily sharp because there is no guarantee that the behavior described in the proof of Proposition 7 describes a BNE. Proving sharpness of these bounds
is difficult within an equilibrium framework because, as highlighted above, no full characterization
of equilibria exists for two-sided incomplete-information bargaining settings in the current theory
literature, and hence it is difficult to determine an equilibrium in which the bounds hold with
equality. However, either relaxing the assumptions or restricting the available data can lead to
sharpness. For example, the behavior could indeed constitute a BNE if the buyer were to commit
to never bargain, in which case the seller’s best response would always be to only accept or reject
the auction price. In this case the bounds would hold with equality, but such an equilibrium—where
buyers never bargain—would be unlikely to describe the data well. In light of these arguments, the
bounds in Proposition 2 are conservative.

B.4

Continuation Values from Re-entering the Market

One limitation with the analysis in this paper is that it does not provide a sophisticated model
of player’s continuation payoffs when trade fails: the buyer is modeled as receiving a payoff of 0
and the seller receives her valuation S.27 In practice, buyers who fail to acquire a car may choose
to later bid on a similar car. This is precisely what the market thickness controls described in
27

As highlighted in Section 3.1, this abstraction is only a limitation in that it ignores the possibility that a permanent
change to a new bargaining mechanism would potentially shift the distribution of types who are willing to participate
and also shift the payoff they receive if they choose to re-enter the game when trade fails. My counterfactual analysis
is consistent with a one-time change in the bargaining mechanism: holding fixed the distribution of these inter-game
continuation payoffs, the counterfactuals analyze the effects of a shift from the current bargaining mechanism to a
counterfactual mechanism for the current instance of the game.

63

Appendix C.1 capture in the observed heterogeneity regression, but only in a reduced-form way
through an additively separable effect on prices. The approach I adopt—treating buyers’ outside
option as a 0 payoff—means that what I model as the buyer’s valuation is actually the buyer’s
value of owning the car minus the buyer’s discounted continuation payoff of re-entering the market.
In the third row of Table A6, I restrict the sample to observations in which the number of cars of
the same make and model remaining to be sold on a given day is above the median value of this
measure. In this subsample of the data, these continuation dynamics may look different than in
the full sample, as players have more upcoming opportunities to obtain similar cars. I find that the
estimates do differ from the full-sample estimates; in particular in the fleet/lease sample the upper
bound on the efficiency loss between the real-world mechanism and ex-post efficiency is lower ($654
as opposed to $864 in the main sample). However, overall the qualitative findings in this subsample
are similar to those in the main sample.
When the car fails to sell, the seller may take the car back to her own store or lot, or may leave
the car at the auction house where another sale attempt will take place, typically one month later.
What I model as the seller’s value S is actually the seller’s discounted continuation payoff from
re-entering the market. Similarly, a seller selling multiple cars on a given day may treat these cars
as a portfolio, and the seller’s willingness to sell one car may be related to her set of remaining cars
to be sold. In the fourth row of each panel of Table A6, I restrict the sample to those observations
in which the number of cars remaining to be sold by this same seller on a given day is above the
median value of this measure. In this subsample I find similar results to the full sample for dealers,
and a smaller upper bound on efficiency loss for fleet/lease sellers ($634, close to the estimate from
the third row of Table A6).
In the final row I limit the sample to observations of the seller’s first attempt to sell a given
car (i.e. a given VIN). The main estimates in the paper treat each attempt to sell the car as an
independent observation (Assumption A10), but if sellers’ outside options are not an independent
draw from FS with each attempt to sell the car, the model estimates might differ for cars with
previous failed attempts to sell. In this final row, in both dealers and fleet/lease cars, I find a higher
estimated gains from trade and lower efficiency shortfall for the real-world mechanism than in the
main sample. Importantly, however, the qualitative implications are the same in every subsample:
the real-world bargaining appears to be inefficient, and not solely due to the information constraints
highlighted in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983), as the second-best mechanism achieves a similar
range of surplus as ex-post efficiency.

B.5

Sellers Accepting Offers Below the Secret Reserve Price

This section provides a discussion of several explanations rationalizing why some sellers would set a
secret reserve price and then, in the bargaining stage, accept an offer below the reserve price. These

64

explanations include a specific equilibrium example where this behavior can occur; an extension to
the main model in which seller’s have market-level uncertainty at the time they set their reserve
prices; and seller biases due to over-optimism about buyer demand or due to attempts to influence
auctioneer effort.
B.5.1

An Equilibrium Example

This section demonstrates that the model in the body of the paper can contain BNE in which
sellers accept offers that lie below their previously set reserve prices.28 For simplicity of exposition,
assume the seller has a value of S = 0 and buyer value B is uniformly distributed on [0, 1].
Suppose the buyer commits to reject all counteroffers when pA ≥ 1/2 and the seller refuses to
consider any counteroffer after her first counteroffer when pA < 1/2. The seller’s optimal secret
reserve price must then be at least 1/2. When pA < 1/2, let y(pA ) denote the optimal take-itor-leave-it offer for the seller at her first chance to counteroffer, given the realized auction price.
Suppose also that for each pA < 1/2, there is a unique counteroffer as a function of pA , call it z(pA ),
that the buyer will accept if z(pA ) < B. Define this z(pA ) to be equal to pA at pA = 1/4, to be
equal to y(pA ) outside of [1/4 − ε, 1/4 + ε] for some small ε > 0, and to be the linear interpolation
of pA and y(pA ) along this interval:

z(pA ) =

 A

 |p −1/4| y(pA ) + 1 −
ε

|pA −1/4|
ε

y(pA )



pA

if pA ∈ [1/4 − ε, 1/4 + ε]
otherwise.

For small enough ε, the seller’s optimal reserve price will be 1/2. Moreover, the seller’s best
response counteroffer for pA ∈ [0, 1/2] and pA ∈
/ [1/4 − ε, 1/4 + ε] is y(pA ). Now consider the seller’s
response when pA ∈ [1/4 − ε, 1/4 + ε]. Since the buyer will not consider any counteroffer other than
z(pA ), the seller’s only options are to accept the auction price or to counter at z(pA ). Which option
she chooses will depend on whether the price increase from countering is higher than the cost of
making a counteroffer. The price increase is z(pA ) − pA , which is non-negative since y(pA ) > pA ,
while the cost of an making an offer is cS . Since y(pA ) − pA = 0 for pA = 1/4, for pA sufficiently
close to 1/4, the seller will accept the auction price, while for pA further away from 1/4 she will
counter at z(pA ). This is the seller’s optimal response given that the buyer rejects any counteroffer
other than z(pA ), while the buyer’s strategy of accepting only z(pA ) and accepting it if and only
if z(pA ) is below his valuation is optimal since the seller never offers a lower price. Thus, in this
equilibrium, the seller accepts some auction prices below her reserve price. Note also that this
equilibrium example satisfies Assumption A4.
28

I thank Evan Storms for this example.

65

B.5.2

Model Extension with Market-Level Uncertainty

This section extends the model of Section 3 to allow sellers to have uncertainty, at the time they
set their reserve prices (which is several days in advance of the actual auction day), about what
their own valuation and what the distribution of buyer valuations will be on the day the auction
will take place. This uncertainty is then resolved once the auction takes place and the seller sees
(or learns over the phone through an auction house employee) additional information, such as the
level of buyer turnout/interest, which can be affected by weather, financial news, or other shocks.
Such uncertainty can rationalize why some sellers would set a secret reserve price and then accept
an auction price below the reserve price.
The existence of such uncertainty would not affect certain key results of the model, such as
bidding behavior in the auction. It would also not affect the result that the seller’s secret reserve
price strategy is strictly increasing, as I demonstrate below.
Let ζ be a finite vector parameterizing a seller’s uncertainty about buyer valuations, where
ζ is independent of buyer and seller valuations. Let Fb (·; ζ), fb (·; ζ), fP A (·; ζ), χ−1 (b; ζ), and

π S pA , s; ζ be equivalent to the analogous objects in the main model but conditional on ζ, and
let u(s; ζ) represent the seller’s valuation conditional on the realization of ζ. At ζ = 0, let each
of these functions be equal to its counterpart in the main model (so u(s; 0) = s, Fb (·; 0) = Fb (·),


fb (·; 0) = fb (·), fP A (·; 0) = fP A (·), χ−1 (b; 0) = χ−1 (b), and π S pA , s; 0 = π S pA , s ). At the
time the seller chooses the reserve price, she knows each of these functions but does not know the
realization of ζ. I also assume that u(s; ζ) is weakly increasing in ζ.
The following argument follows the steps of the proof of Lemma 3 and demonstrates that in
this model reserve prices would still be increasing in s. To simplify this proof I assume that the
optimal ρ(s) satisfies fP A (ρ(s); ζ) > 0 for any ζ. The seller’s expected payoff, prior to knowing the
realization of ζ, can be written as
(Z

b

pA fP A (pA ; ζ)dpA

Eζ
ρ

Z

ρ

"Z

χ−1 (pA ;ζ)

+

u(s; ζ)fB (b)db +
pA

b

(Z
=Eζ

Z

#

b

π
χ−1 (pA ;ζ)

S

fP A (pA ; ζ)
p , u(s; ζ); ζ fB (b; ζ)db
dpA
1 − FB (pA ; ζ)
A



b

pA fP A (pA ; ζ)dpA

ρ

Z
+

ρ

"

#
u(s; ζ) FB (χ−1 (pA ; ζ); ζ) − FB (pA ; ζ) + π S pA , u(s; ζ); ζ





1 − FB (χ−1 (pA ; ζ); ζ)

b

f A (pA ; ζ)
× P
dpA
1 − FB (pA ; ζ)



Differentiating the above expression using Leibniz Rule yields the following first-order condition

66

)

for the reserve price:


∂
FB (χ−1 (ρ; ζ); ζ) − FB (ρ; ζ)
= −ρEζ [fP A (ρ; ζ)] + u(s; ζ)Eζ
× fP A (ρ; ζ)
∂ρ
1 − FB (ρ; ζ)


1 − FB (χ−1 (ρ; ζ); ζ)
+ Eζ π S (ρ, u(s; ζ); ζ)
× fP A (ρ; ζ)
1 − FB (ρ; ζ)
Conditional on a realization of ζ, Lemma 1 applies, and hence π S pA , u(s; ζ); ζ



is weakly

increasing in s for any realization of ζ. Also, conditional on a realization of ζ, χ−1 (pA ; ζ) > pA by
the same arguments as in Proposition 3, and thus FB (χ−1 (ρ; ζ); ζ) > Fb (ρ; ζ). Combining these
results demonstrates that

∂
∂ρ

will be strictly increasing in s, and thus the Edlin and Shannon (1998)

Theorem implies that the reserve price will be strictly increasing in s for a given realization of ζ,
and taking expectations over ζ yields the desired result.
However, even simple versions of this market uncertainty model would likely not be empirically
tractable. Suppose buyer and seller valuations are additively separable in ζ, such that u(s; ζ) =
s + ζ, Fb (b; ζ) = Fb+ζ (b), etc., and suppose ζ can be estimated in the data (such as through a
location-by-date fixed effect). In this case, the arguments in Proposition 5 imply that players’
continuous decisions taking place after ζ is realized (the auction price and bargaining offers) will
be shifted by ζ, but the secret reserve price, set before ζ is realized, will be shifted instead by E[ζ].
The advantage of Proposition 5 in the main model is that it allows me to account for game-level
heterogeneity in steps 1–2 and then ignore it in subsequent steps. This would not be feasible in this
alternative model because some later estimation steps would require carrying around the realization
of ζ. For example, the function determining the probability of trade, g(·), is a function of r, b,
and pA , all of which are additively separable in game-level heterogeneity in the main model; in this
additively separable market uncertainty model, however, b and pA are additively separable in ζ but
r is not.
B.5.3

Optimistic Beliefs and Influencing Auctioneers

Sellers accepting prices below their secret reserve price can also be rationalized by sellers having
overly optimistic beliefs about auction prices prior to the auction taking place (Treece 2013) or by
an attempt to influence auctioneers to exert greater effort to achieve higher prices (Lacetera, Larsen,
Pope, and Sydnor 2016; Treece 2013). Such situations can be modeled as the sellers choosing a
reserve price given by the optimal, un-biased reserve price, ρ∗ (s), plus a bias term, h(s), that is
weakly increasing in s. Under such a weakly increasing bias assumption, the observed reserve prices
would be strictly increasing in the underlying seller valuation.29
29

Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor (2016) demonstrated that who gets assigned as an auctioneer for a given sale
can affect the probability of sale, the speed of the sale, and, to a lesser extent, the auction price, and Coey, Larsen,
and Sweeney (2014) demonstrated that this assignment can have meaningful effects on seller revenue. I do not model
any role of human auctioneers in this paper. Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor (2016) also provided evidence in

67

B.6

Secret vs. Public Reserve Prices

I present here a discussion of public vs. secret reserve prices. Consider a modified version of the
game consisting of no bargaining and only a public reserve price set optimally by the seller prior to
the auction. Such a modified game would be equivalent to an auction with no reserve price followed
by a bargaining game in which the seller makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer to the high bidder (see
Menezes and Ryan 2005). In this modified setup, the seller’s valuation would be related to the
optimal public reserve price (RP ) and to the distribution of buyer valuations according to
S = RP −

1 − FB (RP )
fB (RP )

(17)

The existing literature has provided a number of possible explanations for why some real-world
auctions include secret instead of public reserve prices. The findings of my paper are most closely
related to two previous papers, Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong (1994, 1997), both studying
timber auctions in France, which follow a format of a secret reserve auction followed by postauction bargaining (but the auction is a first price auction instead of an ascending auction). An
important point raised in the first paper is that the use of secret reserve prices may be motivated
by a goal to increase the sellers’ revenue rather than seller’s profits (where the latter includes the
seller’s private value). Using their structural model estimates, the authors found that the expected
revenue is 22% higher in the secret reserve auction than it would be in a public reserve auction.
The authors state, “If this superiority in expected sales of the secret reservation price was general,
then this might give a plausible explanation for the frequent use of auctions with secret reservation
price since the organizers of the auctions are paid a percentage of sales.” Wholesale auto auctions
have a similar feature where the auction house is only paid when trade occurs; as explained in
Appendix D, the fee in my setting is primarily a fixed fee. My results in Tables 4–5 suggest
that the seller-optimal mechanism can potentially have a lower probability of trade than the realworld secret-reserve-auction-plus-bargaining mechanism. This is consistent with the findings and
conjecture of Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong (1994): the use of secret reserve prices may be
motivated by auction house incentives to increase trades.
An important point raised in the second paper, Elyakime, Laffont, Loisel, and Vuong (1997), is
that post-auction bargaining “is a consequence of the inability of the seller to commit to a secret
favor of random assignment of auctioneers in their data. Under such random assignment, ignoring these auctioneer
effects in my model would have no effect on the model’s interpretation if the auctioneer primarily affects the number of
bidders N or the bidders’ valuations. This is because N , B, and S are already considered to be mutually independent
in the model, and random auctioneer assignment would serve as one source of the random variation in B and N .
If, however, some auctioneers are better than others at actually influencing sellers to change their valuations then
this would not fit easily into the current model, because the reserve price is chosen before any auctioneer influence.
Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor (2016) provided survey evidence that sellers are not influenced by auctioneers in
this fashion; instead, the authors find survey and quantitative evidence that better auctioneers create more excitement
among bidders, which could be consistent with influencing N or B.

68

or even public reservation price.” A secret reserve price itself may also reflect a seller’s inability to
commit to the optimal bargaining outcome (i.e. a public reserve price). At wholesale auto auctions,
the auction house does not provide an avenue for sellers to commit to or announce a reserve price
before the auction, and the auction house calls up the seller when the secret reserve price is not met,
also reducing a seller’s commitment power. Here I present evidence that the current secret reserve
price mechanism leads to higher reserve prices than would a public reserve auction, potentially due
to this lack of commitment power in the current mechanism.
A simple way to compare secret vs. public reserve prices is to compare the seller valuations
estimated in the body of the paper to those that would be implied from naively treating the secret
reserve prices in the data as optimally set public reserve prices.30 The distribution of these implied
values can be computed by simply plugging in draws from F̂R into (17). Figure A2 displays the
results of this comparison. The results in each panel indicate that the seller valuations estimated in
the body of the paper are, for the most part, lower than those that would be inferred from treating
reserve prices as optimal public reserve prices. Equivalently, the secret reserve prices observed in
the data appear to be for the most part higher than optimal public reserve prices would be. This
may arise because, in the current mechanism, when sellers set a high reserve price and the auction
price falls short of the reserve price, sellers can still have the option to accept the auction price
or take other bargaining actions, whereas in the public reserve setting the seller must commit to
a non-negotiable reserve price. Thus, the downside to setting a high secret reserve price may be
smaller than the downside to setting a high public reserve price. Along these lines, Kim (2013),
Coey, Larsen, Sweeney, and Waisman (2018), and others have noted the asymmetric losses from
choosing a non-optimal public reserve price: the losses in expected revenue from setting too high of
a public reserve price can be large, and are much larger than the losses from setting a public reserve
price too low. Industry commentators suggest that sellers’ reserve prices at wholesale auto auctions
do indeed appear to be surprisingly high (Treece 2013). The exercise presented here suggests that
this feature may be driven at least in part by the fact that the auction mechanism is a secret reserve
auction followed by bargaining, where sellers do not commit ex-ante to a publicly announced reserve
price.
30

Note that the seller CDF bounds estimated in the body of the paper do not rely on the distribution of secret
reserve prices other than through the inequality R ≥ S.

69

C

Technical Details on Estimation Steps

C.1

Additional Details on Sample Restrictions and Controlling for Game-level
Observables

C.1.1

Sample Restrictions

Table A2 describes the order in which I impose sample restrictions and also the number of observations dropped due to each restriction. Panel A describes the first restrictions I impose using
the full dataset, before splitting into dealer and fleet/lease sales, and panel B describes restrictions
I impose separately for the dealers and fleet/lease samples. The full sample contains 1,008,847
runs of vehicles. I first drop observations having missing values for the auction house blue book
estimate or odometer reading (158,520) or the timestamp of the attempted sale (21,246). These
missing values, and other misrecorded observations described below, are in many cases an indication that a planned run of the vehicle did not actually take place. I drop 126 observations with
misrecorded Vehicle Identification Numbers (VINs), such as those having all zeros or less than the
correct number of characters for a VIN, and 4 duplicate observations at the VIN-seller-time level.
I also drop 1,578 observations in which the same car is recorded as having been sold by one seller,
then another seller, and then the original seller; I drop these because I do not trust that they are
recorded correctly. I drop 27,027 observations with both the auction price and the reserve price
missing because these cannot be used in my analysis. I compute each car’s age as the difference
between the model year and the year corresponding to the date the vehicle is run. I drop 5,855
observations that are very old (age > 16 years) or very new (i.e. next year’s model, in which case
age < 0) or that have less than 100 miles or greater than 300,000 miles on the odometer.
I drop a number of atypical observations (18,309) in which the data contains conflicting indicators of whether the vehicle sold (e.g. the vehicle was recorded as having sold but no sales date is
recorded or the bargaining sequence suggests the agents ended in disagreement; or the vehicle was
recorded as having not sold but the auction price exceeded the reserve price). I also take several
steps to clean the bargaining sequences. I drop observations (10,269) in which bargaining began
through a bidder other than the high bidder contacting the auction house with an offer immediately
after a failed auction. In 2,595 observations, this same process occurs but with multiple bidders
reporting what are referred to as “back-up offers” to the auction house in case trade fails with the
current buyer in bargaining. These offers and back-up offers occur infrequently and are not the
primary methods of sale. I also drop 179 observations with inexplicable bargaining sequences (e.g.
the buyer accepts and then the seller counters); 150 observations in which the auction price appears
to have missing or extra zeros; 1,423 observations in which the sale price in the data is not equal
to the auction price or to the final negotiated price; and 9 observations in which the final price is
below the auction price. After all of these drops described in panel A, 761,557 observations remain,

70

427,607 of which are dealer sales and 333,950 of which are fleet/lease sales.
I then impose a number of restrictions separately for the dealers and fleet/lease samples, shown
in panel B. I first drop observations for which the following variables lie outside their respective
0.01 and 0.99 percentiles: blue book price, final price, auction price, and reserve price. Panel B
lists the number of observations dropped in each case along with the particular cutoff values of the
cutoff defining the sample restriction (i.e. the 0.01 or 0.99 quantiles of the corresponding variable).
I also drop a small number of observations in which the later bargaining offers (i.e. beyond the
auction price) take on extreme values (lying outside the 0.01 or 0.99 quantiles of the auction price).
Finally, I drop observations from days on which fewer than 100 cars were offered for sale at a given
auction house on that day and observations in which fewer than ten vehicles were observed at a
given make-model-year-trim-age combination. In the end I am left with 300,740 observations in
the dealers sample and 211,656 observations in the fleet/lease sample. I will refer to these samples
as the regression samples.
Some of these remaining observations record only a secret reserve price or only an auction price
but not both. These observations are not suitable for my final analysis (which requires observing
both the auction price and the reserve price for a given attempted sale) but are still useful in
controlling for observable heterogeneity, and therefore I include these observations in the regression
sample used in the step 1 regression but not in the subsequent estimation steps. Panel C of Table
A2 provides counts for these observations. In the end, I am left with 133,523 dealer observations
and 131,443 fleet/lease observations that can be used in the full estimation procedure. I will refer
to these samples as my final samples.
I remark here briefly on these missing reserve prices and missing auction prices shown in panel
C of Table A2. Missing reserve prices typically occur when the seller chooses not to report a reserve
price, either planning to be present at the auction sale to accept or reject the auction price in person
or planning to have the auction house call her on the phone rather than determining a reserve price
a priori. Missing auction prices can indicate that a planned vehicle run actually never took place;
the auction house does not always have time to run every vehicle it plans to on a given day. Missing
auction prices can also arise from the descending/ascending practice of auctioneers: auctioneers do
not start the bidding at zero; they start the bidding high and then lower the price until a bidder
indicates a willingness to pay, at which point the ascending auction begins. If bidders are slow to
participate, the auctioneer will cease to lower bids and postpone the sale of the vehicle until a later
date, leaving no auction price recorded. See Lacetera, Larsen, Pope, and Sydnor (2016).
If sellers who choose not to report a reserve price have much higher valuations than other sellers,
then my results may be overstating the gains from trade (and the opposite is true if these missing
reserve prices correspond to low-value sellers). A similar argument can be made for missing auction
prices leading to an under- or over-statement of the gains from trade. To explore this possibility,
I estimate the probability of trade in the 19,265 observations in the dealers regression sample and
71

in the 65,393 observations in the fleet/lease regression sample in which the reserve price is missing
(see panel C of Table A2. I compare these numbers to the overall probability of trade in the final
samples, shown in Table 1. In the dealers sample, I find that the probability of trade conditional
on a missing reserve price is 0.691, compared to 0.705 in the final sample. In the fleet/lease sample,
the corresponding numbers are 0.796 and 0.768, suggesting the opposite for fleet/lease cars. In both
cases, the numbers are quite close, suggesting that selection introduced by missing reserve prices
may not be a major concern. For missing auction prices, no similar analysis can be performed
because missing auction prices always correspond to a no-sale.
C.1.2

Observable Heterogeneity Regressions

In the regressions controlling for observable covariates, I include the following controls in xj :
1. Fifth-order polynomial terms (all degrees of the polynomial from one through five) in the
auction houses’ blue-book estimate and the odometer reading
2. The number of previous attempts to sell the car; the number of pictures displayed online; a
dummy for whether or not the odometer reading is considered accurate, and the interaction
of this dummy with the odometer reading; the interaction of the odometer reading with
car-make dummies
3. Dummies for each make-model-year-trim-age combination (where age refers to the age of the
vehicle in years); dummies for condition report grade (ranging from 1-5, observed only for
fleet/lease vehicles); dummies for the year-month combination and for auction house location
interacted with hour of sale; dummies for 32 different vehicle damage categories recorded by
the auction house; and dummies for each seller who appears in at least 500 observations
4. Dummies for discrete odometer bins: four equally sized bins for mileage in [0, 20000);
eight equally sized bins for mileage in [20000, 80000); four equally sized for mileage in
[100000, 200000); one bin for mileage in [200000, 250000); and one bin for mileage greater
than 250000.
5. Several measures of the thickness of the market during a given sale, computed as follows: for
a given car on a given sale date at a given auction house, I compute the number of remaining
vehicles still in queue to be sold at the same auction house on the same day lying in the same
category as the car in consideration. The six categories I consider are make, make-by-model,
make-by-age, make-by-model-by-age, age, or seller identity.
6. Controls for the run numbers, which represents the order in which cars are auctioned. I include
fifth-order polynomials for both the run number within an auction-house-by-day combination,
and the run number within an auction-house-by-day-by-lane combination.
72

The market thickness measures described in bullet 5 above help control for inter-auction dynamics in a reduced-form way; they control for the level of possible alternative sales to which a
buyer might substitute if he fails to win the current sale. Similarly, for the seller, these controls
help account for how the existence of future market opportunities affects the current transaction.
See discussion in Section 3 and Appendix B.4.
For the dealers sample, overall the right-hand side variables in the regression includes 11,285
make-model-year-trim-age category effects and 313 other covariates; for the fleet/lease sample the
corresponding numbers are 7,314 and 284. The adjusted R2 from this first-stage regression is 0.95
in the fleet/lease sample and 0.93 in the dealers sample, implying that most of the variation in
auction prices and reserve prices is explained by observables.
C.1.3

Subsample Analyses

Table A6 displays bounds on the expected gains from trade using several different subsamples of
the data. The first row in each panel uses only observations of cars with below-median blue book
value (less-expensive cars). I find that the gains from trade and the efficiency loss are lower than in
the full sample (Tables 4–5). The second row examines cars with below-median age (newer cars),
where I find larger gains and efficiency shortfall than in the main estimates. The main estimates
of the paper treat observable characteristics X, which includes the blue book value and car age, as
independent of other random variables in the game, such as buyer and seller valuations. Table A6
demonstrates that this is indeed an abstraction, as the estimates do differ in these subsamples. For
less expensive cars, the estimated gains from trade and efficiency shortfall are lower than in the full
sample. For newer cars, the numbers are quite similar to those in the full sample. Importantly, the
qualitative findings of the paper are robust: the ex-ante and ex-post efficient outcomes are close
to one another, and the real-world bargaining falls short of efficiency. Appendix B.4 discusses the
other results in Table A6.

C.2

Technical Details on Estimation for Unobserved Game-Level Heterogeneity
A

Nonparametric identification of fR , f P , and fW follows from immediately arguments used in Li
and Vuong (1998), Krasnokutskaya (2011), Evdokimov and White (2012), Freyberger and Larsen
(2017), and elsewhere; I rely specifically on the assumptions of Evdokimov and White (2012):
Proposition 8. By independence of R, P A , and W , and by Assumption A8, the joint density of
R + W and P A + W nonparametrically identifies the marginal densities of R, P A , and W .
Proof. This result follows by Lemma 1 of Evdokimov and White (2012).
The estimation details are as follows.

For each random variable Y

∈ {W, R, P A },

the density of Y is approximated by normalized orthogonal Hermite polynomials, fY (y) ≈
73

1
σY

P

K
Y
k
k=1 θk H



y−µY
σY

2

1

−
√1 e 2
2π



y−µY
σY

2

, where K is the number of elements in θY ; θY , µY ,

and σY are parameters to be estimated for each Y ∈ {W, R, P A }; and H k are Hermite polynomials,
√
defined recursively by H 1 (y) = 1, H 2 (y) = y, and H k (y) = √1k [yH k−1 (y) − k − 1H k−2 (y)] for
k > 2. A Hermite polynomial approximation for the densities, as advocated by Gallant and Nychka
(1987), has the advantage of being flexible and parsimonious, and also yields an approximation of
the CDFs FW , FR , and FP A as functions of the same parameters as the densities.
I maximize the likelihood in (2) subject to the constraint that, for each Y ∈ {W, R, P A },
PK

Y 2
i=1 (θi )

= 1, which ensures that each approximated function is indeed a density function, and

also subject to the constraint E[W ] = 0. I choose to include K = 5 terms.31 The location and scale
parameters {µY , σY }Y ∈{W,R,P A } are not required but improve the performance of the estimator
and are standard in estimation with Hermite polynomials. I estimate these parameters in an initial
step, maximizing (2) with each density fY being approximated by a N (µY , σ Y ). I then plug in the
estimated values of {µ̂Y , σ̂Y }Y ∈{W,R,P A } into (2) and maximize the likelihood to obtain consistent
estimates of {θY }Y ∈{W,R,P A } . Consistency of this estimation approach is discussed in Gallant and
Nychka (1987), Freyberger and Larsen (2017), and elsewhere.
Throughout the paper, for any estimator requiring integration against the density fW , such
as in (2), I perform this integration using Gauss-Hermite quadrature with 10 nodes. For any
R∞
P GH
x2k
univariate function g(·), Gauss-Hermite quadrature is given by −∞ g(v)dv ≈ K
k=1 g(xk )e wk ,
where K GH is the number of nodes and xk and wk are the Gauss-Hermite quadrature nodes and
weights described in Judd (1998).
C.2.1

Estimates from Unobserved Heterogeneity Step

Figure A3 displays the resulting estimated CDFs. Table A5 shows, in panel A, the variance for each
of the independent components that sum up to the raw reserve prices and auction prices: X 0 γ, W ,
and R and P A . As implied by the high adjusted R2 measures reported in Appendix C.1, over 93%
of the variation in auction prices and reserve prices is explained by observable X. In the dealers
sample, of the residual variation in reserve prices after the step 1 regression, 59% comes from the
variance in W and the remainder from the variance in R (computed by V ar(W )/(V ar(W )+V ar(R))
using draws of R and W from the estimated FR and FW ). In the fleet/lease sample, the unobserved
heterogeneity component W only explains 34% of the residual variance. For auction prices, the
proportion of residual auction prices explained by variance in W is 53% in the dealers sample and
33% in the fleet/lease sample. These numbers suggest that unobserved heterogeneity especially
plays a large role for dealer cars.
31
The above framework can be treated as a semi-nonparametric maximum likelihood setting, letting K grow
appropriately with the sample size and choosing K through cross-validation. I instead fix K = 5, treating this as
a flexible parametric approximation, as suggested in Kim and Lee (2014) and Freyberger and Larsen (2017). I find
that choosing K larger than 5 does not affect estimates noticeably.

74

One measure of the fit of the maximum likelihood procedure performed in step 2 is shown in
panel B of Table A5, where I display the correlation of the raw reserve prices and auction prices
compared with the correlation of R + W and P A + W simulated from their estimated distributions
FR , FP A , and FW . In the dealers sample, these numbers are 0.513 in the raw residuals vs. 0.557
in the simulation, and in the fleet/lease sample these numbers are 0.293 vs. 0.341. In each sample
the correlations differ by less than 0.05. A graphical evaluation in a similar vein is shown in Panels
A and B of Figure A5, where I plot the empirical CDF of the difference between the raw variables,
Rraw − P A,raw , along with the simulated CDF of R − P A , with R and P A drawn independently
from the estimated FR and FP A . In both panels A and B the two CDFs are indistinguishable,
suggesting that the fit is quite good.
C.2.2

Evaluating Additive Separability

I evaluate here the appropriateness of my additively separable model of heterogeneity. The variables
R, P A , and W are assumed to be independent and are not restricted to have positive support and
are added to X 0 γ (which they are assumed independent of) to yield the raw, observed reserve
prices and auction prices. Therefore, nothing prevents my estimates from suggesting that some
reserve prices and auction prices might be negative (even though in the data all raw prices are
non-negative). However, in practice, the observable heterogeneity term X 0 γ has most of its mass
far above zero, and the random variables R, P A , and W have most of their mass lying in a small
interval around zero, and thus the sums X 0 γ + W + R and X 0 γ + W + P A have the majority of
their mass being positive. I demonstrate this in panel A of Table A5, which displays the 0.1 to 0.9
quantile range of X 0 γ̂ and of the estimated distributions of R, P A , and W . Even at the 0.1 quantile
of X 0 γ̂, the negative 0.1 quantiles for the other components of prices are small enough in magnitude
that the model does not predict large negative observed prices. To evaluate this point further, I
simulate from the estimated distributions (taking draws of X 0 γ from the empirical distribution of
the predicted value X 0 γ̂ and taking draws of R, P A , and W from the estimated FR , FP A , and
FW ). I find that this exercise predicts negative values of X 0 γ + W + R with probability 0.008 in
the dealers sample and 0.005 in the fleet/lease sample; the corresponding predictions for negative
values of X 0 γ + W + P A are slightly larger but still small (0.042 and 0.010). Thus, the additively
separable model I use is at best an approximation—because in reality the raw, observed prices are
never negative—but appears to be a good approximation.

C.3

Technical Details on Buyer Distribution Estimation

Proposition 9. FB is nonparametrically identified by FP A and Pr(N = n).
Proof. This result follows immediately from the fact that the right-hand side of (3) is strictly
monotonic in FB (·) (see, for example, Athey and Haile 2007).
75

To estimate FB (·), I first replace FP A (v) in (3) with the maximum likelihood estimate F̂P A (v)
c
from (2) evaluated on a grid of values for v. I estimate Pr(N
= n) using the empirical probability
mass function of the lower bound of the number of bidders from the bid logs subsample discussed
in Section 2. This treats the distribution of the lower bound as though it is the true distribution
of the number of bidders. I discuss this further below in Appendix C.3.1. I also discuss evidence
below in Appendix C.3.2 consistent with the underlying assumption that N is independent of buyer
valuations.
c
With Pr(N
= n) and F̂P A (v) in hand, I then obtain F̂B (v) by numerically solving (via a bisection
method) for the value u such that
0 = F̂P A (v) −

X



c
Pr(N
= n) nun−1 − (n − 1)un

(18)

n

Consistency of this type of order statistics inversion estimator is shown in Menzel and Morganti
(2013). The error in this estimation procedure can be made arbitrarily small—up to machine
precision and the estimation error in FP A and P r(N = n)—as this procedure corresponds to
numerically solving for zeros of an identity.
C.3.1

Robustness to Distribution of Number of Bidders

In order to guide the choice of Pr(N = n), the distribution of the number of bidders, I first manually
collected additional data by visiting multiple auction house locations and physically observing over
200 auctions. For each auction sale, I recorded the number of bidders who appeared to be actively
participating or interested in the car. The mean of these observations, conditional on cases where
at least two bidders appeared to be active, was 2.62, close to the mean of the lower bound on the
number of bidders from the bid log sample (2.924 and 2.973 in the dealers and fleet/lease samples).
However, I also present evidence here that the key estimates in the paper are not sensitive to
how Pr(N = n) is specified. In doing so I compare several possibilities for Pr(N = n). The first
is that which is used in the body of the paper, which is the empirical probability mass function of
the lower bound on the number of bidders in each auction in the bid log sample. Let this random
variable be denoted N . The next is the empirical probability mass function of a (very conservative)
upper bound on the number of participants in each auction in the bid log sample. This upper
bound comes from adding the total number of bidders who signed in through the online portal
for a given lane on a given day (I observe this number in the bid log data, whether or not these
signed-in bidders placed any bids) to the total number of floor bids (physically present bids, as
described in Section 2); thus, this treats each floor bid as having come from a distinct bidder. Let
this random variable be denoted N . The mean of this upper bound is 15.64 in the dealers bid log
subsample and 25.99 in the fleet/lease bid log subsample. An additional possibility is that N is
drawn from some parametric distribution, such a Poisson, Negative Binomial, etc. Here I consider
76

cases in which N follows a Poisson distribution with mean λ ∈ {3, 7, 10, 20}, conditional on N ≥ 2
(thus, these latter four are truncated Poisson distributions).
I find that the qualitative findings of the paper are not sensitive to the approximation chosen
for Pr(N = n), and the estimates themselves do not vary drastically. In Table A7, for each of
these choices of Pr(N = n), I display bounds on the expected gains from trade and probability of
trade. Panel A shows bounds for ex-post efficiency, the second-best mechanism, and the real-world
bargaining, and bounds on the difference between ex-post efficiency and the real-world mechanism.
The estimated expected gains are lower under specifications of Pr(N = n) that place more mass on
higher N . Panel B displays similar results for the probability of trade and also demonstrates that
the estimated probability of trade is lower under specifications for Pr(N = n) that place more mass
on higher N .32 Both panels indicate only small changes in the estimated bounds across different
specifications for Pr(N = n).
I now present a discussion of why these welfare measures are relatively insensitive to this choice.
The welfare measures I evaluate depend on the estimated distribution of buyer valuations, but in
a particular way: they depend primarily on the distribution of the valuation of the highest bidder
(the buyer who bargains) conditional on the auction price, integrated against the auction price
density; this yields the distribution of the maximum order statistic of buyer valuations. To see this,
note that the maximum order statistic distribution (averaged over values of N ) can be computed
as
FB (1) (v) =

X

Pr(N = n)FB (v)n ,

(19)

n

or, alternatively, it can be computed from the density of the maximum order statistic conditional
on the second order statistic integrated against the density of the second order statistic, given by
Z
FB (1) (v) =

v

Z

y

=
b

b

fB (y)
f A (pA )dpA dy.
1 − FB (pA ) P

(20)

Each of the welfare measures evaluated in this paper (described in Section 5) depend on an object
similar to the latter formulation, although the relationship between (20) and what I evaluate is not
exact—for example, the denominator in my welfare measures is 1 − FB (χ−1 (pA )), and in estimating
χ−1 (·) and g(·) in estimation steps 5–6 terms appear that are not exactly the same as maximum
order statistic distributions.
Figure A6 demonstrates that the distribution of the maximum order statistic is much less
sensitive than the underlying distribution FB to the choice of Pr(N = n). Panels A and B show
32
To create Table A7, I run estimation step 3 under a given specification of Pr(N = n), yielding an estimate of
FB , and then I use this new FB in re-doing estimation steps 5–6 and in computing counterfactuals. I do not estimate
bounds on the probability of trade for the second-best mechanism in Table A7, as calculating bounds on this quantity
is computationally intensive, as described in Proposition 6 and Table 3.

77

the estimates of the underlying distribution, FB , which differ widely as Pr(N = n) changes. Panels
C and D show the distribution of the maximum order statistic, obtained by using FP A (v) and
Pr(N = n) to obtain FB (v) by solving (3) and then using this FB (v) and Pr(N = n) to obtain
FB (1) (v) using (19) or (20). Panels C and D demonstrate that the distribution of the maximum
order statistic is quite insensitive to the choice of Pr(N = n) used in this procedure.
For certain choices of Pr(N = n), including the Poisson distribution, it is possible to prove
analytically that the computed maximum order statistic distribution will be entirely insensitive to
Pr(N = n). I state this as the following proposition.33 Below, note that FB (2) denotes the second
order statistic distribution (averaged over values of N ), which is equivalent to FP A in the body of
the paper.
Proposition 10. If Pr(N = n) is given by a Poisson distribution with parameter λ, and FB (2)
is known, then, at any point v, the maximum order statistic distribution FB (1) (v) obtained by the
following two steps will have zero derivative with respect to λ: 1) use FB (2) (v) and Pr(N = n) to
obtain FB (v) by solving (3); 2) use this FB (v) and Pr(N = n) to obtain FB (1) (v) using (19) or
(20).
Proof. When Pr(N = n) is a Poisson with mean λ, it can be shown that FB (v) = ψ(FB (2) (v); λ),
where ψ(FB (2) (v); λ) is defined implicitly as the solution to
FB (2) (v) = (1 + λ(1 − ψ(FB (2) (v); λ)))eλ(ψ(FB(2) (v);λ)−1)

(21)

and the maximum order statistic distribution is given by
FB (1) (v) = eλ(ψ(FB(2) (v);λ)−1)

(22)

Holding fixed v and FB (2) (v), implicitly differentiating (21) with respect to λ yields


dF (1) (v)
dψ(FB (2) (v); λ)
FB (1) (v) + (1 − λ(1 − ψ(FB (2) (v); λ))) B
0 = 1 − ψ(FB (2) (v); λ) − λ
dλ
dλ
(23)
where I take into account that FB (1) will depend on λ. Note that


dFB (1) (v)
dψ(FB (2) (v); λ)
λ(ψ(FB (2) (v);λ)−1)
=e
ψ(FB (2) (v); λ) − 1 + λ
dλ
dλ

(24)

Plugging (24) into (23) yields
0 = λ(1 − ψ(FB (2) (v); λ))
33

I thank Zhaonan Qu for help with this proof.

78

dFB (1) (v)
dλ

(25)

Recall that ψ(FB (2) (v); λ) = FB (v). This expression in (25) must hold at all v, even at v where
FB (v) 6= 1. Thus, it must be the case that

dFB (1) (v)
dλ

= 0.

Proposition 10 should not be misinterpreted as an unconditional statement that the distribution
of the maximum order statistic does not depend on λ. Rather, the result demonstrates that,
conditional on FB (2) , the exercise of inverting FB (2) to obtain FB , and then computing FB (1) from
this FB , is invariant to λ. It may be possible to prove this mathematical result for a larger class
of Pr(N = n), for, as demonstrated in Figure A6, even at non-Poisson distributed N (such as the
distributions of the upper and lower bounds on the number of bidders or the truncated Poisson
distributions), FB (1) is very insensitive to the choice of Pr(N = n).
To my knowledge, Proposition 10 is new to the literature, and may be of some independent
interest, as it suggests assumptions under which one can compute the marginal distribution of the
maximum order statistic solely from knowledge of the marginal distribution of the second order
statistic, without knowing N or even fully specifying the distribution of N .34 In turn, these two
objects—the marginal distributions of the first and second order statistics—can then be used to
identify many objects of interest in auction settings, such as bidder surplus, seller profits, and
optimal reserve prices, as pointed out by Aradillas-Lopez, Ghandi, and Quint (2013).
C.3.2

Valuations Independent of Number of Bidders

The estimation of buyer valuations in Section 4 relies on the assumption (stated in Assumption A1)
that buyer valuations are independent of N , the number of bidders. Here I examine the validity of
this assumption.
For any k ≤ n and any v, let
n!
ψk:n (v) ≡
(n − k)!(k − 1)!

Z

v

tk−1 (1 − t)n−k dt

0

Proposition 2 of Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2016) demonstrated the following (modified to
the environment of this paper). Suppose buyer values (given by the random variable B̃ = B+W ) are
non-negatively correlated within a given auction, as they will be in an environment of conditionally
independent private values with independent, additively separable unobserved heterogeneity. Then
for any v and any n > n0 , valuations being independent of N implies
−1
ψn−1:n
(FB̃ n−1:n (v)) ≥ ψn−1
0 −1:n0 (FB̃ n0 −1:n0 (v))

(26)

where, for any n, FB̃ n−1:n represents the distribution of the auction price (including unobservable
34

Precisely, these assumptions are symmetric, conditionally independent, private values (or independent private
values with separable unobserved heterogeneity) with valuations independent of N and with N distributed according
to a Poisson distribution with unknown mean λ.

79

heterogeneity) when n bidders are present. Importantly, Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2016)
demonstrated that standard models of endogenous entry in auctions, such as those of Samuelson
(1985) and Levin and Smith (1994), would violate (26).
I apply this result by performing the inversion in (26) for different values of n in the bid log
subsample. For this exercise, I treat the lower bound on the number of bidders in a given auction
in this subsample as though it represents the true number of bidders in that auction. Panels E and
−1
F of Figure A6 display estimates of ψn−1:n
(FB̃ n−1:n (·)) for the most prevalent values of n observed

in the bid log subsample. In both the dealers and fleet/lease samples, a pattern emerges consistent
with the inequality in (26) and inconsistent with the models of endogenous entry highlighted in
Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2016), lending credence to the assumption that valuations are
independent of N .

C.4

Technical Details on Estimation of Seller Valuation Bounds

I begin this section with a nonparametric identification proof. Below, and throughout the appendix,
for any function f (v) : RK 7→ R, let its Fourier transform be denoted
Z

f (v)e−2πiv·u dv

FTf (u) =

where v · u represents the inner product. When I take a Fourier transform of any function that
does not necessarily have full support, I consider its support to be extended such that the function
is zero outside of its original support.
Proposition 11. The functions FSL and FSU are nonparametrically identified by fP A , fW , FR ,
Pr(DS = A|P̃ A = v), and Pr(DS 6= Q|P̃ A = v).
Proof. First, note that a solution exists satisfying the constraints in Φ, defined in the sentence
L , F U ) represent a pair of bounds in
below (4); one such solution is FSL = FSU = FR . Let (FS,0
S,0
L ) and q(v; F U ) are then q(v; ·)
Φ such that the objective function in (4) is minimized; q(v; FS,0
S,0
L ) and q(·; F U )
evaluated at this pair of functions. I now demonstrate that these functions q(·; FS,0
S,0
L , F U ), demonstrating that (F L , F U ) is identified. Let
uniquely determine (FS,0
S,0
S,0
S,0

L

q̄ (v) =

L
q(v; FS,0
)

Z


MS (v, z)dz

Z
=

L
FS,0
(v − w)fP A (v − w)fW (w)dw

L , the term in (4) that depends on F L can be written
Then, evaluated at FS,0
S

S

Pr(D = A|P̃

A

Z
= v)

MS (v, z)dz

80

2


− q̄(v)

(27)

The object q̄ L (v) is a convolution of a(v) ≡ FSL,0 (v)fP A (v) against the density fW (w). Specifically, for any u ∈ R,
Z Z



a(v − w)fW (w)dw e−2πivu dv
Z

Z
= fW (w)
a(v − w)e−2πivu dv dw
Z

Z
−2πi(y+w)u
= fW (w)
a(y)e
dy dw
Z
Z
−2πiwu
=
fW (w)e
dw
a(y)e−2πiyu dy

FTq̄L (u) =

= FTfW (u)FTa (u)
where y = v − w and dy = dv. Rearranging yields
FTa (u) =

FTq̄L (u)
FTfW (u)

(28)

By Assumption A8(i), FTfW (u)—the characteristic function of fW —has only isolated zeros, and
hence (28) does not divide by zero except on a set of measure zero. Taking the inverse Fourier
L by dividing by
transform then yields a(v). This function can then be rearranged to solve for FS,0
L ) uniquely identifies F L .
fP A (v), which is positive at every v in the support of P A . Thus, q̄(v; FS,0
S,0
U .
A similar argument applies for FS,0

To estimate the bounds on the distribution of seller valuations, I parameterize FSL (·) and FSU (·)
using piecewise linear splines. A spline approximation—or other linear sieve approximation—to an
unknown function has the advantage of being linear in parameters while remaining very flexible
A
S
in fitting the function. Let {vkS }K
k=1 represent a fixed vector of KS knots on the support of P̃ ,

and LSS (·) : R 7→ RKS be the piecewise linear spline transformation for this vector of knots. An
approximation to FS is then given by FS (·; θS ) ≡ LSS (v)0 θS and an approximation to the density is
given by fS (v; θS ) ≡ LSS0 (v)0 θS , where θS is a KS -by-1 vector of parameters.35 I choose the knots
A
S
{vkS }K
k=1 to be uniformly spaced between the 0.001–0.999 quantiles of P̃ , and I choose KS = 200

as the number of knots for each bound (KS = 250 or KS = 300 yield similar results, as shown in
Panels A and B of Appendix Figure A7).
The lower and upper bounds can then be denoted FSL (v) = LSS (v)0 θS,L and FSU (v) =
LSS (v)0 θS,U , where (θS,L , θS,U ) are each KS -by-1 vectors of parameters to be estimated. I esti35

S
S
Specifically, let mk (v) = (v − vkS )/(vk+1
− vkS ) and let v ∈ [vkS , vk+1
] for some k ∈ {1, ..., KS − 1}. Then LSS (v)
th
returns a KS -by-1 vector with (1 − mk (v)) as the k element, mk (v) as the (k + 1)th element, and zeros elsewhere.
S
S
Thus, letting ∆k = (θk+1
− θkS )/(vk+1
− vkS ), FS (v; θS ) is given by θkS + (v − vkS )∆k . For the density, LSS0 (v) returns
the derivative of the vector LSS (v) with respect to v, and thus fS (v; θS ) = ∆k .

81

mate these parameters by solving the following constrained least squares problem:
KS
X
 L S S,L 2

min
Ω (vk ; θ ) + ΩU (vkS ; θS,U )2

θS,L ,θS,U

(29)

k=1

where
Ω

L

(vkS ; θS,L )

c S 6= Q|P̃ A
ΩU (vkS ; θS,U ) ≡ Pr(D

Z 


f S (v S )0 θS,L
M̂S (vkS , z)dz − LS
k
Z 

f S (v S )0 θS,U
= vkS )
M̂S (vkS , z)dz − LS
k

c S = A|P̃ A = v S )
≡ Pr(D
k

f S (v S ) is a KS -by-1 vector with the `th element given by
and where LS
k

R

(LSS (vkS −

w)0 e(`))M̂S (vkS , w)dw and e(`) is a KS -by-1 selection vector with 1 in the `th spot and zeros elsef S (v S ), which requires
where. An advantage, again, of the spline approximation is that this object LS
k

numerical integration against fW , can be computed outside the optimization problem; this also simplifies the computation of analytical derivatives to supply to the optimization algorithm. I impose
several constraints on the minimum distance problem in (29): (i) FSL lies graphically above FR and
graphically below FSU ; (ii) FSL and FSU lie in [0, 1]; (iii) FSL and FSU are weakly increasing; and (iv)
S . These last three
FSL (v) and FSU (v) are equal to 0 for any v < v1S and equal to 1 for any v > vK
S

constraints ensure that FSL (v) and FSU (v) will correspond to proper distribution functions.
Computing the objective function in (29) requires estimates of F̂R , fˆP A , and fˆW , as well as
c S = A|P̃ A = p̃A ), and Pr(D
c S 6= Q|P̃ A = p̃A ). Estimates of the first three objects come
Pr(D
c S = A|P̃ A = p̃A ) using a local
from the maximum likelihood procedure in (2). I estimate Pr(D
c S 6=
linear regression of the event 1{DS = A} on realizations of P̃ A = p̃A .36 I estimate Pr(D
Q|P̃ A = p̃A ) analogously. In (29) the combination of a nonparametric first-stage estimate of a

R
c S = A|P̃ A = v S )
M̂S (vkS , z)dz ) followed by a parametric second
nuisance vector (e.g. Pr(D
k
stage estimated through minimum distance falls into the class of two-step semiparametric GMM
estimators, discussed in Ackerberg, Chen, and Liao (2014) and references therein, and is consistent
for estimating θ̂S,L , θ̂S,U .
For this optimization exercise, I find that the left tail of the bounds, in particular the left tail
of FSU , can be sensitive to the starting values. To evaluate this sensitivity, estimated the bounds
using starting values of FSL (v) = FSU (v) = 1 everywhere, starting values of FSL (v) = FSU (v) = FR (v)
For this local linear regression, as well as the local linear regressions run in estimating χ−1 (·), I use a Gaussian
kernel with the rule-of-thumb bandwidth presented in Ruppert, Sheather, and Wand (1995), who suggested computing
the bandwidth on the sample lying between the α and 1 − α quantiles for some α ∈ [0, 1] in order to reduce sensitivity
to data in the tails. I use α = .001. I replace any estimates of conditional probabilities lying outside of [0, 1] with 0
and 1, following Frölich (2006).
As highlighted in Section 4, by construction, the Proposition 2 population bounds will not cross. Empirical estimates
of these bounds may cross, however. For example, a local linear approximation to the conditional probabilities in
Proposition 2 may cross; I find that such crossing is very minimal in my application. A kernel regression approximation
of these bounds (or other local constant approach to approximating a conditional average) will not cross.
36

82

everywhere, and 20 additional cases varying uniformly between FSL (v) = FSU (v) = 1 and FSL (v) =
FSU (v) = FR (v). Panels E and F of Figure A7 show the estimates under the FSL (v) = FSU (v) = 1
starting values in solid lines; the estimates under the FSL (v) = FSU (v) = FR (v) starting values in
dotted lines; and, in dashed lines, the estimates under the case that achieved the smallest objective
value of (29) for the 22 cases tested. Searching over a large number of cases is computationally
burdensome, especially when bootstrapping the estimation procedure. I use the FSL (v) = FSU (v) = 1
starting values for my estimation throughout the paper because the objective value under these
starting values is very close to that under the dashed-line case.
I now discuss briefly the surjectivity of these bounds in this context as well as in other
alternating-offer settings. As explained in Section 3, the revealed preference bounds proposed
in this paper can be used in other alternating-offer settings to identify bounds on the valuations
of the player who responds to the first bargaining offer, whom I will refer to as the first responder.
In order for these bounds to be surjective (i.e. provide bounds for the whole range of the CDF
from [0, 1]) when evaluated on a given range of knots, the data must contain some realizations of
the first bargaining offer that are extreme enough that the first responder accepts with probability
close to one and some realizations of the first bargaining offer such that the first responder rejects
(quits) with probability close to one. If this is not the case in a given dataset, specific institutional
details may aid in identifying the support of the bounds, as I now describe.
In examining the surjectivity of the bounds in the current application, I find that there is
sufficient variation in the data for the lower bound to be surjective over the range of chosen knots.
The estimate of FSU reaches a value of 1, but does not fully reach a value of 0; in particular, I find
an estimate of θ̂1S,U (the lowest spline parameter) of approximately 0.075 in the dealers sample and
0.09 in the fleet/lease sample, meaning that the estimate of FUS does not rule out the possibility
that 7.5% of sellers (or 9% of sellers in the fleet/lease sample) have values less than or equal to v1S ,
the lowest knot; as explained above, this lowest knot is equal to the 0.001 quantile (approximately
the minimum) of the auction price distribution. I therefore treat FSU as having a mass point at v1S .
This mass point could be placed at any arbitrary point weakly below v1S . I choose to place it at
v1S based on Assumption A9, that is, s ≥ b, which I believe is a conservative lower bound for the
support of seller’s values.37
The goodness of fit of the estimated bounds can be evaluated using the integrated absolute
Surjective estimates of the bounds correspond to the case where θ̂1S,U and θ̂1S,L are close to 0 and the estimates
S,L
of
and θ̂K
are close to one. If the bounds are not surjective, the following arguments provide a complete
S
S
description of FSL (v) and FSU (v) for points v that lie outside of the support of the chosen knots: (i) for v > vK
,
S
S,L
−1 S,L
L
S
S
,
FS (v) is given by a horizontal line at θ̂KS from vKS to F̂R (θ̂KS ) and by F̂R (v) above that point; (ii) for v > vK
S
U
S
L
S
U
FS (v) = 1; (iii) for v < v1 , FS (v) = F̂R (v); (iv) for v < v1 , F̂S (v) = 0 (or, if the assumption that s ≥ b were to be
relaxed, F̂SU (v) for v < v1S would be given by a horizontal line at θ̂1S,L ). If the estimates of FSL and FSU are surjective,
then specifying conditions (i)–(iv) is unnecessary. The only condition that is binding in practice in my application is
condition (iv).
37

S,U
θ̂K
S

83

error, which I compute as follows for FSL :
KS
X

1
PKS

S
k=1 M̂S (vk , z)dz

|ΩL (vkS ; θ̂S,L )|

(30)

k=1

I compute an analogous measure for FSU , with ΩL (vkS ; θ̂S,L ) replaced with ΩU (vkS ; θ̂S,U ). These integrated absolute error measures can be interpreted as the average percent by which the conditional
probability statement estimated directly from the data fails to be fit by its corresponding model
equivalent, where this average is weighted by where the data lies. I find this error to be less than
0.4% for the estimates of FSL and FSU in both the dealers and fleet/lease samples, as shown in Table
A5. Panels C and D in Figure A5 display these estimated conditional probability statements and
the corresponding fitted estimates. Table A5 also shows the integrated absolute error restricting
to cases that constitute violations of the conditional probability statements in (29), computed as
KS
X

1
PKS

S
k=1 M̂S (vk , z)dz k=1

n
o
ΩL (vkS ; θ̂S,L )1 ΩL (vkS ; θ̂S,L ) > 0

for FSL and by
KS
X

1
PKS

S
k=1 M̂S (vk , z)dz k=1

o
n
−ΩU (vkS ; θ̂S,U )1 ΩU (vkS ; θ̂S,U ) < 0

for FSU . These quantities are 0.2% or smaller in both samples.

C.5

Technical Details on Estimation of Lower Bound of Support of Types Who
Bargain

I begin this section with a nonparametric identification proof.
Proposition 12. For any function FS (·) lying in the estimated bounds [F̂SL (·), F̂US (·)], the functions
ρ(s) and ρ−1 (r) are nonparametrically identified by FR . At every point in the support of P A and less
than the upper bound of the support of R, the function χ−1 (·) in (6) is nonparametrically identified
by FR , fP A , fW , FB , and Pr(D1B = 0|P̃ A = p̃A , P̃ A < R̃).
Proof. For any function FS (·) lying in the estimated bounds [F̂SL (·), F̂US (·)], the function ρ(s) can
be constructed as ρ(s) = FR−1 (FS (s)), with FR replaced with the estimated F̂R from (2). Similarly,
ρ−1 (r) can be constructed as ρ−1 (r) = FS−1 (FR (r)).
Identification of χ−1 is more involved. Equation (6) can be written as
Pr(D1B

= 0|P̃

A

A

= p̃ , P̃

A

Z
< R̃)

A



Mχ (p̃ , z)dz

84

Z
=

1 − FB (χ−1 (p̃A − w))Mχ (p̃A , w)
dw (31)
1 − FB (p̃A − w)

where Mχ (p̃A , w) ≡ fP A (p̃A − w)(1 − FR (p̃A − w))fW (w) is the likelihood of the event (P A =
p̃A − w, P̃ A < R̃, W = w). Now let
aχ (v) ≡

(1 − FB (χ−1 (v)))fP A (v)(1 − FR (v))
1 − FB (v)

(32)

The integrand on the right-hand side of (31) is a convolution of aχ (v) against the density fW (w),
given by
Z
qχ (v) =

aχ (v − w)fW (w)dw

By the same argument as in the proof of Proposition 11, for any u ∈ R,
FTaχ (u) =

FTqχ (u)
FTfW (u)

(33)

By Assumption A8(i), FTfW (u) has only isolated zeros, and hence (33) does not divide by zero
except on a set of measure zero. Taking the inverse Fourier transform then yields aχ (v). This
function can then be rearranged to solve for χ−1 (·) as
−1

χ

(v) =

FB−1



aχ (v)(1 − FB (v))
1−
(1 − FR (v))fP A (v)

Note that this expression does not divide by zero at any v that is in the support of P A and that
is less than the upper bound of the support of R; at such v, (1 − FR (v))fP A (v) is positive. Also,
FB (·) is invertible (because fB (·) is positive by Assumption A5). Thus χ−1 (·) is nonparametrically
identified.
Note that Proposition 12 only demonstrates identification of χ−1 (pA ) at each pA that is less
than the upper bound of the support of R. This is because at each point beyond this upper bound,
the term 1 − FR (pA ) is equal to zero. However, knowing χ−1 beyond this point is unnecessary
because at such a pA the game will always end at the auction (because the auction price is larger
than the largest R).
For estimation, I let hχ (·) ≡ 1 − FB (χ−1 (·)), and I approximate this function as a flexible
piecewise linear spline, denoted hχ (·; θχ ) ≡ LSχ (·)0 θχ , where θχ is a vector of spline parameters
K

χ
and LSχ (·) : R 7→ RKχ is the linear spline transformation for a fixed vector of knots {vkχ }k=1
,

defined analogously to the linear spline transformation described in Appendix C.4 for estimating
K

χ
seller valuation bounds. I choose the knots {vkχ }k=1
to be uniformly spaced between the 0.001–0.999

quantiles of P̃ A , and set χ−1 (v) = v for any v outside of these knots. I choose Kχ = 25. I estimate

85

θχ by solving the following constrained least squares problem:

min
χ
θ

Kχ
X

"
c 1B = 0|P̃ A = v χ , P̃ A < R̃)
Pr(D
k

Z

cχ (v χ , z)dz
M
k



#2
f χ (v χ )0 θχ
− LS
k

(34)

k=1

f χ (v χ ) is a Kχ -by-1 vector with the `th element given by
where LS
k
Z

(LSχ (vkχ − w)0 e(`))M̂χ (vkχ , w)
1 − F̂B (vkχ − w)

dw

and e(`) is a Kχ -by-1 selection vector with 1 in the `th spot and zeros elsewhere. I impose the
constraints that hχ (·; θχ ) is decreasing and 0 ≤ hχ (vkχ ; θχ ) ≤ 1 − FB (vkχ ) for each k. Computing the
objective function in (34) requires the estimates of F̂B , F̂R , fˆ A , and fˆW from above. The object
P

cχ (·) comes from evaluating Mχ (·) using these estimated distributions. To estimate Pr(D
c B =
M
1
0|P̃ A = p̃A , P̃ A < R̃), I use a local linear regression of the event 1{D1B = 0} on realizations of
P̃ A = p̃A using observations where the auction price falls below the reserve (P̃ A < R̃). As with the
estimator described in (29), the estimator in (34) falls into the class of two-step semiparametric
GMM estimators and will be consistent for θ̂χ . From estimates of hχ (·), an estimate of χ−1 (·) is
given by χ−1 (·) = FB−1 (1 − hχ (·)).38
Panels A and B of Figure A4 display the estimates for ρ̂−1 (·) evaluated at the upper and lower
bounds for the seller CDF. Panels C and D display the estimates for χ̂−1 (·). The goodness of fit of
the estimates for χ̂−1 (·) can be evaluated using the integrated absolute error, as in (30), comparing
c B = 0|P̃ A = v χ , P̃ A < R̃) estimated from the data to its
the conditional probability statement Pr(D
1

k

fitted equivalent from (34). I find this error to be less than 0.1% in both the dealers and fleet/lease
samples, as shown in Table A5. Panels E and F in Figure A5 display this estimated conditional
probability and the corresponding fitted estimates.

C.6

Technical Details on Estimation of the Direct Mechanism Corresponding
to Real-World Bargaining

I begin this section with a nonparametric identification proof.
Proposition 13. The function g(·) in (7) is nonparametrically identified by fR , fP A , fW , FB , and
Pr(A = 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃ A = p̃A ).
The estimation of χ−1 , ρ, and ρ−1 each require constructing inverse functions (of FB , FR , and FS ); I construct
these via linear interpolation of their respective CDF estimates. I do the same for inverse CDFs discussed in Appendix
C.6.
38

86

Proof. Equation (7) can be written as
Pr(A = 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃

A

Z



A

= p̃A )

Mg (r̃, p̃ , z)dz

Z
=


1 − FB g(r̃ − w, p̃A − w) Mg (r̃, p̃A , w)
dw
1 − FB (p̃A − w)
(35)

where Mg (r̃, p̃A , w) ≡ fR (r̃ − w)fP A (p̃A − w)fW (w). Now let
a(v1 , v2 ) ≡

1 − FB (g(v1 , v2 ))fR (v1 )fP A (v2 )
1 − FB (v2 )

(36)

and let v = (v1 , v2 ). The integrand on the right-hand side of (35) is a convolution of a(v) against
the density fW (w), given by
Z
qg (v) =

a(v1 − w, v2 − w)fW (w)dw

Identification of a(v) follows from a convolution theorem argument. Taking the Fourier transform
of qg yields the following, where y = (y1 , y2 ), y1 = v1 − w, y2 = v2 − w, and hence dy = du:
Z

Z



a(v1 − w, v2 − w)fW (w)dw e−2πi(v1 u1 +v2 u2 ) dv
Z

Z
−2πi(v1 u1 +v2 u2 )
=
fW (w)
a(v1 − w, v2 − w)e
dv dw
R
R2
Z

Z
−2πi((y1 +w)u1 +(y2 +w)u2 )
=
fW (w)
a(y1 , y2 )e
dy dw
R2
RZ
Z
=
fW (w)e−2πiw(u1 +u2 ) dw
a(y1 , y2 )e−2πi(y1 u1 +y2 u2 ) dy

FTqg (u) =

R2

R

R2

R

= FTfW (u1 + u2 )FTa (u)
Because FTfW has only isolated zeros (Assumption A8(i)), it follows that
FTa (u) =

FTqg (u)
FTfW (u1 + u2 )

Taking the inverse Fourier transform then yields a(v1 , v2 ). This function can then be rearranged
to solve for g(·) as
g(v1 , v2 ) =

FB−1



a(v1 , v2 )(1 − FB (v2 ))
1−
fR (v1 )fP A (v2 )

where fR (v1 )fP A (v2 ) is positive at every v1 in the support of R and v2 in the support of P A ; and
FB (·) is invertible (because fB (·) is positive by Assumption A5). Thus g(·) is nonparametrically
identified.

87

For estimation, I approximate the function hg (r, pA ) ≡
spline defined on a two-dimensional grid for r̃ and
Let these grid points be denoted

A
{vkR }K
k=1

and

p̃A ,

1−FB (g(r,pA )
1−FB (pA )

using a flexible bilinear

with KA = 25 grid points in each dimension.

A
A
{vjP }K
j=1 .

2 = 625 parameters to
This yields Kg = KA

be estimated. I chose these knots to be uniformly spaced between the 0.001 and 0.999 quantiles of R̃
and P̃ A , respectively. I denote this approximation hg (r, pA ; θg ) ≡ BL(r, pA )0 θg , where BL(·) : R2 7→
RKg .39 Like the linear spline approximation used to estimate χ−1 and bounds on FS , this bilinear
approximation has several advantages: it is very flexible; it allows me to perform the integration
against fW in a first step, outside of the optimization over θg ; and it eases the calculation of
analytical derivatives of the objective function to feed to the optimization routine.
I estimate θg by solving the following constrained least squares problem:

min
g
θ

KA X
KA
X

"
PA

c
Pr(A|
R̃ = vkR , P̃ A = vj )

Z

PA

cg (v R , vj , z)dz
M
k



#2
PA

gg (v R , vj )0 θg
− BL
k

(37)

k=1 j=1

gg (v R , v P A ) is a Kg -by-1 vector with the `th element given by
where BL
j
k

R

(BLg (vkR − w, vjP

A

−

PA

w)0 e(`))M̂g (vkR , vj , w)dw and e(`) is a Kg -by-1 selection vector with 1 in the `th spot and zeros
elsewhere. The constraints I impose are that hg (r, pA ) ∈ [0, 1]; hg (r, pA ) is decreasing in r; and
g(r, pA ) ≥ g(r, pA ) ≡ max{pA , ρ−1 (r)} ⇒ h(r, pA ) ≤

1−FB (g(r,pA ))
.
1−FB (pA )

I enforce this latter constraint

by evaluating ρ−1 (r) = FS−1 (FR (r)) at FS = F̂SL . This ensures that the estimated real-world
mechanism is consistent with the estimated valuation distributions in that it does not imply trade
occurring for cases where S > B.
cg (·) comes from
In (37), the objects F̂B , fˆR , fˆP A , and fˆW are those estimated above, and M
evaluating Mg (·) using these estimated distributions. To estimate the conditional probability
c
Pr(A
= 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃ A = p̃A ) I use a tensor product of two univariate cubic b-spline functions,
with fifteen knots in each dimension (uniformly spaced between the 0.001 and 0.999 quantiles of
R̃ and P̃ A , respectively).40 As with (29) and (34), this estimator falls into the class of two-step
semiparametric GMM estimators, which will be consistent for estimating θ̂g . With estimates of θ̂g ,
39

A

A

R
P
For r ∈ [vkR , vk+1
], pA ∈ [vjP , vj+1
], BL(r, pA ) returns a vector of Kg elements, with one element corresponding
A

P
A
A
to each combination of grid points from {vkR }K
}K
j=1 (and hence one element corresponding to each
k=1 and {vj
A
element of θg ). Specifically, BL(r, p ) returns zeros everywhere except for the following locations, where m(r, pA ) =
A
A
R
PA
R
PA
(vk+1
− vkR )(vj+1
− vjP ): it returns (vk+1
− r)(vj+1
− pA )/m(r, pA ) for the element in θg corresponding to (vkR , vjP );
A

A

A

P
R
R
(r − vkR )(vj+1
− pA )/m(r, pA ) for the element in θg corresponding to (vk+1
, vjP ); (vk+1
− r)(pA − vjP )/m(r, pA ) for
A

A

P
the element in θg corresponding to (vkR , vj+1
); and (r − vkR )(pA − vjP )/m(r, pA ) for the element in θg corresponding
A

R
P
to (vk+1
, vj+1
).
40
c
This yields 121 parameters to be estimated in the estimation of Pr(A
= 1|R̃ = r̃, P̃ A = p̃A ). Given a set of I knots,
{ti }Ii=1 , a univariate b-spline transformation of degree d evaluated at a point v is defined as follows. BS1 (v) returns
an (I −d−1)-by-1 vector with 1 as its ith element if ti ≤ v < ti+1 and 0 otherwise. BSk (v), for k ∈ {2, ..., d}, is defined
ti+k+1 −v
v−ti
BSi,k−1 (v)+ ti+k+1
BSi+1,k−1 (v).
recursively, returning a vector with the ith element given by BSi,k (v) = ti+k
−ti
−ti+1
A cubic b-spline is given by BS3 (v), and with I = 15 knots, yields I − d − 1 = 11 parameters to be estimated. The
tensor product of two such univariate b-splines thus yields 121 parameters to be estimated. In estimating this
conditional probability, I replace any estimates lying outside of [0, 1] with 0 and 1.

88

I then obtain g(r, pA ) = FB−1 (1 − (1 − FB (pA ))hg (r, pA ; θ̂g )).
Panels E and F of Figure A4 display the estimates for ĝ(·) evaluated at P A = 0. The goodness
of fit of the estimates for ĝ can be evaluated using the integrated absolute error, just as in (30)
c
for the seller distribution bounds. This compares the conditional probability statement Pr(A|
R̃ =
A

vkR , P̃ A = vjP ) estimated from the data to its fitted equivalent from (37). I find this error to be
6.0% in the dealers sample and 2.47% in the fleet/lease sample, as shown in Table A5. This error
is somewhat larger than that of the estimates of FSL , FSU , and χ−1 , as the estimation of g requires
fitting a two-dimensional flexible function rather than just a one-dimensional function.

C.7

Technical Details on Computation of Ex-ante Efficient Mechanisms and
Welfare Measures

C.7.1

Ex-ante Efficient Mechanisms

The focus of this paper is the efficiency of the bilateral bargaining between the seller and the high
bidder. To analyze this, I integrate welfare measures over the support of buyer and seller types who
bargain in a given instance of the game, ([b(pA ), b], [s(pA ), s]), and then integrate over realizations
of the auction price pA . Because valuations and transfers are additively separable in game-level
heterogeneity, W will play no role in evaluating welfare measures.
Allocation functions xη corresponding to mechanisms along the ex-ante efficient frontier can be
fS (s)
1−FS (s(pA ))
conditional on pA

computed as follows. For a given realization of the auction price, pA , let fS (s|pA ) =
and fB (b|pA ) =

fB (b)
1−FB (b(pA ))

represent the densities of seller and buyer valuations

at the beginning of the bargaining (i.e. these are the Bayesian updated beliefs about valuations
after the auction stage). Let FS (s|pA ) and FB (s|pA ) represent their corresponding distributions.
Let q represent the expected utility of the lowest seller type (s(pA )). The allocation function xη is
the solution to the linear programming problem,



max η[q(x; p ) + U S (x; p )] + (1 − η)[Γ(x; p ) − q(x; p ) + U B (x; p )]
A

A

A

x

A

A

(38)

subject to x(s, b; pA ) ∈ [0, 1] ∀(s, b) ∈ [s(pA ), s] × [b(pA ), b]
Z s
xB (b; pA ) ≡
x(s, b; pA )fS (s|pA )ds weakly increasing in b
s(pA )

xS (s; pA ) ≡

Z

b

x(s, b; pA )fB (b|pA )db weakly decreasing in s

b(pA )

Γ(x; pA ) ≥ 0
See Section 2 of Williams (1987). The values ŪS (x) and U B (x) are the ex-ante expected utilities

89

(prior to knowing their valuations) of the seller and buyer, given by
ŪS (x; pA ) =

Z

b

Z

b(pA )
A

Z

b

s

Z

(39)

x(s, b; pA )(1 − FB (b|pA ))fS (s|pA )dsdb

(40)

s

ŪB (x; p ) =
b(pA )

x(s, b; pA )fB (b|pA )FS (s|pA )dsdb

s(pA )

s(pA )

The objects Γ(x; pA ) and q(x; pA ) are given by
A

Z

b

Z

s

Γ(x; p ) =
b(pA )



(b − s)x(s, b; pA )fS (s|pA )fB (b|pA )dsdb − U S (x; pA ) + U B (x; pA ))

s(pA )


0 if η ≤ 1
2
A
q(x; p ) =
Γ(x; pA ) if η >

1
2

The monotonicity constraints on xB and xS in (38) ensure that the mechanism will be incentive
compatible. Williams (1987) referred to these constraints as the “troublesome constraints,” and he
demonstrated that these constraints can be ignored if the distributions FS and FB are regular. To
define regularity, let
φS (s, α1 ; pA ) ≡ s + α1

FS (s|pA )
fS (s|pA )

φB (b, α2 ; pA ) ≡ b − α2

and

1 − FB (b|pA )
fB (b|pA )

(41)

Regularity corresponds to φS (·, 1; pA ) and φB (·, 1; pA ) being increasing functions. When this is the
case, the mechanisms along the ex-ante efficient frontier can be written as follows:

xα1 (η),α2 (η) (s, b; pA ) = 1 φB (b, α2 (η); pA ) ≥ φS (s, α1 (η); pA )

(42)

where the parameters (α1 (η), α2 (η)) can be solved for at any given η as described in Theorem 3 of
Williams (1987). This simplifies the linear programming problem in (38) considerably to merely
solving for a scalar.
When distributions are not regular, however, as in my application, I am required to solve the full
linear programming problem (38) subject to all of the original constraints. Plugging in estimates
of densities, CDFs, and lower support functions from steps 2–5 of the estimation procedure, I use
linear programming to solve the problem in (38) separately at each value of pA (i.e. each realization
of the lower bound of the support of bargaining types) on a grid of points for the s and b dimensions.
Appendix C.7.4 discusses this grid choice and also discusses numerical integration. I also solve this
problem separately at different FS lying in the estimated CDF bounds, as described in the Section
C.7.2.

90

C.7.2

Computing Bounds on Welfare

Each of the welfare measures described in Section 5 can be computed by plugging in the corresponding empirical estimates from Section 4 and using any seller valuation CDF lying between the
estimated seller CDF bounds. Let the space of such CDFs be given by F ∗ = {FS ∈ F : FS (v) ∈
[FSL (v), FSU (v)]∀v ∈ [s, s]}. As in the proof of Proposition 6, let the notation W(x, FS ) refer to a
welfare measure under a given allocation function x and at a given seller valuation distribution FS
(suppressing dependence on FB given that I have point estimates of FB ). In the spirit of Reguant
(2016), bounds on any welfare measure W(x, FS ), denoted [W(x), W(x)], can be computed by



min W(x, FS ), max∗ W(x, FS )

FS ∈F ∗

FS ∈F

(43)

Numerically computing these bounds is extremely burdensome, as it requires searching over a
high-dimensional parameter vector FS and solving a linear programming problem at each realization of the lower bound of the support of types at each guess of FS . To reduce this computational
complexity, in computing bounds on welfare I reduce the number of knots in the spline approximation to KS0 = 25, with these knots uniformly spaced over the range of the original KS = 200
knots. Panels C and D of Appendix Figure A7 demonstrate that this number of knots still approximates the bounds well. Let the subset of these uniformly spaced indices be denoted K and
: k 0 ∈ K}; that is, these vectors
: k 0 ∈ K} and the vector θ̃S,U = {θ̂kS,U
let the vector θ̃S,L = {θ̂kS,L
0
0
are subsets of the original estimated spline coefficients from Section 4 corresponding to the uniformly spaced KS0 knots. The search to find bounds on welfare can then be performed over the set
S ∀k < K 0 } following (43).
ΘS ≡ {θS : θkS ∈ [θ̃kS,L , θ̃kS,U ] and θkS ≤ θk+1
S

To ease the computational burden further, I derive the monotonicity results presented in Proposition 6 and summarized in Table 3. Each cell in Table 3 marked with a ↓ signifies that the specified
measure will decrease given a first-order stochastically dominating shift in the distribution of seller
valuations. Each cell marked with an asterisk indicates that there is no mathematical proof of a
monotonicity result and that the bounds must be determined numerically using (43). The buyer
and seller gains in the column labeled second-best are marked with “–” because, in the analysis
below, I will report bounds on these quantities that correspond to the respective player’s surplus
under the FS that leads to the maximum and minimum bounds on the total gains from trade.
Similarly, for the buyer-optimal column, bounds on the total gains from trade and seller gains
correspond to the FS that leads to the maximum and minimum bounds on the buyer gains from
trade, and similarly for the seller-optimal column (although it turns out that some of these welfare
measures also satisfy the monotonicity property, as discussed in the proof of Proposition 6).

91

C.7.3

Bounding Bargaining Costs

For the real-world mechanism, bargaining costs will enter into the computation of the expected
gains from trade. For the lower bounds on expected gains from trade in the real-world bargaining
(W EG (xRW ), W B (xRW ), and W S (xRW ) in the notation of the proof of Proposition 6), I incorporate
these costs by subtracting an upper bound on expected bargaining costs, described below. To obtain
an upper bound on gains from trade, bargaining costs are set to zero.
Bounds on the parameters cB and cS can be derived from cases in which a player chooses to make
a counteroffer. A necessary condition for a party to choose to counter is that the payoff in the state
where the opponent accepts with probability one must exceed the player’s payoff from accepting
B
S
the current offer on the table. That is, pS2 − cS ≥ pB
1 for a seller offer and b − p3 − cB ≥ b − p2 for

a buyer offer. Rearranging yields
pS2 − pB
1 ≥ cS

(44)

pS2 − pB
3 ≥ cB

(45)

Thus, an upper bound on cS is given by the minimum gap between period 2 and period 1 offers
and an upper bound on cB is given by the minimum gap between period 2 and period 3 offers (in
cases where such offers took place). Rather than use the minimum over all observations, I follow
Chernozhukov, Lee, and Rosen (2013) to obtain a bias-corrected, one-sided 95% confidence bound
for cS and cB and treat these as upper bounds on cS and cB , which I denote cS and cB .41
Let the random variable T be the period in which the game ends. The buyer’s and seller’s exante expected disutility due to bargaining costs are then given cB E [bT /2c] and cS E [b(T − 1)/2c],
respectively, because by round t of the game the buyer has made a total of b 2t c offers (where b·c is
the floor function), and similarly for the seller.
Applying this approach yields estimates of an upper bound of less than $25 for both cS and cB
in the dealers sample and $50 for both cS and cB in the fleet/lease sample. The upper bound on
the total expected loss due to bargaining costs is $23.3 for buyers and $4.1 for sellers in the dealers
sample, and $33.6 for buyers and $5.2 for sellers in the fleet/lease sample.
C.7.4

Numerical Integration

The integrals in the welfare measures I evaluate involve integration in three dimensions, pA , b,
and s. For integration in the pA dimension, this integral is computed using Gauss-Chebyshev
quadrature with 25 nodes. For any univariate function g(·) to be integrated over [v, v], Gauss41

Chernozhukov, Lee, and Rosen (2013) explained that taking the minimum over all observations using inequalities
such as those in those in (44) and (45) will be biased downward, precisely because they are derived from taking
a minimum. The authors suggested a bias-corrected 1 − α confidence bound (which the authors refer to as being
half-median unbiased) given, in this case, by taking the 1 − α quantile of bootstrapped estimates of the minimum. I
perform this using 200 bootstrap replications.

92

Chebyshev quadrature is given by

Rv
v

π(v−v) PK GC
GC is the number of
k=1 g(xk )wk , where K
2K GC
(1 − zk2 )1/2 ; and zk = cos(π(2k − 1)/(2K GC )) (see Judd

g(v)dv ≈

nodes; xk = (1/2)(zk + 1)(v − v) + v; wk =
1998).

The integration in the s and b dimension is required not only for evaluating welfare measures
but also for solving the linear programming problem in (38); the pA dimension, on the other hand,
is only involved in computing a simple average. For the s and b dimensions, therefore, I choose
a larger number of nodes (50 in each dimension) to achieve a high degree of accuracy in solving
for the ex-ante efficient mechanisms. I choose these nodes to be evenly spaced quantiles of FS and
FB , which works particularly well here for numerical integration due to the fact that the seller
valuation distribution bounds can be multi-modal (corresponding to a CDF that is nearly flat over
large portions of the seller support). I construct fS and fB for these numerical integrals by finite
differences of FS and FB .

C.8

Computing Confidence Sets for Welfare Bounds

Confidence sets for the bounds on welfare can be computed by bootstrapping. Specifically, for any
estimated bounds on a welfare measure, which constitute an interval, [W(x), W(x)], the lower 95%
bootstrapped confidence band about W(x) and the upper 95% bootstrap confidence band about
W(x) will provide a conservative 95% confidence interval for the set [W(x), W(x)]. This claim
follows by a simple Bonferroni inequality argument: For a fixed α ∈ [0, 1], let cα/2 be the lower
critical value for the 1 − α confidence band for W(x) and c1−α/2 be the upper critical value for the
1 − α confidence band for W(x). Also, let A be the event that W(x) ≥ cα/2 and let A be the event
that W(x) ≤ c1−α/2 . Therefore, Pr(A) = Pr(A) = 1 − α/2. Bonferroni inequalities imply
Pr(A ∩ A) ≥ Pr(A) + Pr(A) − Pr(A ∪ A) ≥ Pr(A) + Pr(A) − 1 = 1 − α,
thus completing the argument. To compute these confidence sets I use 200 bootstrap replications of
the full estimation procedure and counterfactual computations: for each replication, I take a sample
of observations the same size as the original sample, drawn with replacement from the original
sample, and use this bootstrap sample to perform all estimation steps 1–6 and all counterfactual
computations, including the large numerical search for welfare bounds where required by Table
3/Proposition 6.
This approach yields very similar results to the method proposed by Chernozhukov, Hong,
and Tamer (2007) (CHT) but has the advantage of yielding an asymmetric confidence set that is
guaranteed to lie within the range of bootstrapped estimates, i.e. the confidence set will naturally
be contained within the minimum and maximum bootstrapped estimates, as it is composed of
quantiles that are on the interior of these estimates. This is not the case with the symmetric
confidence sent of CHT, for example, where it is possible for one end of the estimated confidence
93

set to lie outside the extremes of the bootstrapped estimates. For example, even if the estimated
gap between the expected gains from trade in the second-best and real-world mechanisms is positive
in every bootstrap sample, the CHT confidence set can contain zero. Given this feature, and given
that the above confidence sets are easier to compute, I adopt the above approach throughout the
paper.

D

Auction House Fees

At wholesale auto auctions, when a buyer and seller agree on a price, both parties pay a fee to
the auction house to consummate the trade. These fees introduce a trade-reducing wedge: if a
buyer values the car more than the seller, but that difference in valuations is less than the sum of
the buyer and seller fees, the parties will not trade. The analysis in the body of the paper does
not remove this wedge, but rather lets these same fees be paid in counterfactual mechanisms just
as they are in the real-world mechanism. In this section, I compute the ex-post efficient outcome
absent auction house fees. I also compute the mechanism that implements the optimal broker fees,
also discussed in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983).
From results in Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983), when an intermediating broker is paid by the
buyer and seller whenever trade occurs, and when buyer and seller distributions are regular, then
the mechanism that would maximize expected revenue for this broker is given by xα1 (η),α2 (η) (s, b; pA )
from (42) with α1 = α2 = 1. Thus, in the regular case, no optimization problem need be solved
to determine the broker-optimal mechanism. When distributions are not regular—as is the case
with my estimates—it is much more complex to solve for the broker-optimal mechanism. The
mechanism is given by the solution to
max Γ(x; pA )

(46)

x

subject to x(s, b; pA ) ∈ [0, 1] ∀(s, b) ∈ [s(pA ), s] × [b(pA ), b]
Z s
A
xB (b; p ) ≡
x(s, b; pA )fS (s|pA )ds weakly increasing in b
xS (s; pA ) ≡

Z

s(pA )
b

x(s, b; pA )fB (b|pA )db weakly decreasing in s

b(pA )

As with the ex-ante efficient mechanisms, I solve for the broker-optimal mechanism by solving the
linear program in (46) separately for each value of pA on a grid of points for the s and b dimensions,
and I do so separately for different FS lying in the estimated CDF bounds, as described in Section
C.7.2.
I now describe how I compute the ex-post efficient outcome absent auction house fees. In
practice, buyer and seller fees can consist of both a fixed fee and a percentage commission, but

94

the latter makes up only a small portion of the overall fee. Here I consider these fees to be solely
a fixed component, which I approximate using the average of seller fees and the average of buyer
fees observed in the data, denoted hS and hB here. This structure implies that the distribution
of buyers’ willingness to pay and sellers’ willingness to sell absent auction house fees is simply
a mean-shift of the buyer and seller valuation distributions estimated in Section 4; these shifted
distributions can be denoted FB ∗ and FS ∗ , where B ∗ ≡ B +hB and S ∗ ≡ S −hS .42 After performing
this mean-shift to the estimated distributions of buyer and seller valuations, I compute the ex-post
efficient outcome exactly the same as in the main counterfactuals (which use the non-adjusted
valuation distributions).
Table A8 displays the results of my analysis of auction house fees, with panel A showing results
for the dealers sample and panel B for the fleet/lease sample. The first column displays the expected
gains from trade and probability of trade under ex-post efficiency in the absence of auction house
fees. The second column reports the outcome of the broker-optimal mechanism, along with the
revenue this would raise for the auction house. The final column is similar to the real-world
bargaining welfare results from Tables 4–5, but here I also report the auction house revenue itself,
and I include this revenue in the calculation of gains from trade.43
The expected auction house fees in the real bargaining is $199 in both samples (the last row,
last column in panels A and B). The expected gains from trade under ex-post efficiency with these
fees removed (the first column in panels A and B) are naturally higher than those reported in
Tables 4–5. Part of this is mechanical due to removing the $199 fee. But Table A8 shows that
removing auction house fees increases the ex-post efficient gains from trade by more than just this
amount; this is because, in an ex-post efficient world, removing fees would allow additional buyers
and sellers (those whose valuations differ by less than the fee amount) to profitably trade.
I find that the optimal revenue for the auction house is $1,270–3,652 in the dealers sample
and $1,134–2,464 in the fleet/lease sample. These numbers are far above the revenue numbers
in the real mechanism. Both buyer gains and seller gains would be much lower in the brokeroptimal mechanism than in the real mechanism, as the majority of surplus would be taken by the
auction house. The probability of trade would also fall due under the broker-optimal mechanism
to the broker’s rent-extraction behavior, decreasing from 0.646 in the real-world to 0.271–0.560 in
the dealers sample, and from 0.658 to 0.303–0.501 in the fleet/lease sample. This optimal revenue
could only be achieved if the auction house were a monopolist provider of wholesale dealer-to-dealer
42

The following is an example of how to interpret these adjusted distributions relative to the original FB and FS
distributions referred to elsewhere in the paper: if a buyer has a valuation of B = b, this buyer is willing to pay
a price b to the seller plus the auction house fee. Absent auction house fees, the buyer would be willing to pay
more—b∗ = b + hB —directly to the seller. Similarly, a seller with valuation S = s is willing to accept a price of s
from the buyer and also pay hS to the auction house. Absent auction house fees, the seller would be willing to accept
a lower price—s∗ = s − hS —from the buyer.
43
Auction house revenue is the sum of the buyer and seller fee when trade occurs and 0 when trade fails. The buyer
and seller fee conditional on trade is reported in Appendix Table A3.

95

trading. In practice, auction houses owned by different companies compete in most major cities,
and buyers and sellers have other outlets for buying and selling cars. This competition prevents
auction houses from fully exploiting the broker-optimal mechanism.

Appendix References
Abreu, D. and F. Gul (2000): “Bargaining and reputation,” Econometrica, 68(1), 85–117.
Ackerberg, D., J. Chen and Z. Liao (2014): “Asymptotic efficiency of semiparametric two-step
GMM,” Review of Economic Studies, 81(3), 919–943.
Admati, A. R. and Perry, M. (1987). Strategic delay in bargaining. Review of Economic Studies,
54(3), 345.
Aradillas-Lopez, A., A. Ghandi, and D. Quint (2013): “Identification and inference in ascending
auctions with correlated private values,” Econometrica, 81(2), 489–534.
Ausubel, L. M. and R. J. Deneckere (1989): “Reputation in bargaining and durable goods
monopoly,” Econometrica, 511–531.
Bikhchandani, S. (1992). A bargaining model with incomplete information. Review of Economic
Studies, 59(1), 187.
Binmore, K., M. J. Osborne, and A. Rubinstein (1992): “Noncooperative models of bargaining,”
Handbook of Game Theory, 1, 179–225.
Chatterjee, K. and L. Samuelson (1987): “Bargaining under two-sided incomplete information: An
infinite horizon model with alternating offers,” Review of Economic Studies, 54(2), 175–192.
Chatterjee, K. and L. Samuelson (1988): “Bargaining under two-sided incomplete information: The
unrestricted offers case,” Operations Research, 36(4), 605–618.
Chernozhukov, V., H. Hong, and E. Tamer (2007): “Estimation and confidence regions for parameter sets in econometric models,” Econometrica, 75(5), 1243–1284.
Chernozhukov, V., S. Lee, and A. M. Rosen (2013): “Intersection bounds: Estimation and inference,” Econometrica, 81(2), 667–737.
Cho, I. (1990). Uncertainty and delay in bargaining. Review of Economic Studies, 57(4), 575.
Coey, D., Larsen, B., and K. Sweeney (2014): “The bidder exclusion effect,” NBER Working Paper
20523.

96

Coey, D., Larsen, B., Sweeney, K., and C. Waisman (2018): “The simple empirics of optimal online
auctions,” NBER Working Paper 24698.
Compte, O. and P. Jehiel (2002): “On the role of outside options in bargaining with obstinate
parties,” Econometrica, 70(4), 1477–1517.
Cramton, P. C. (1984). Bargaining with incomplete information: An infinite-horizon model with
two-sided uncertainty. Review of Economic Studies, 51(4), 579.
Cramton, P. C. (1992).Strategic delay in bargaining with two-sided uncertainty. Review of Economic
Studies, 59, 205–225.
Feinberg, Y. and A. Skrzypacz (2005): “Uncertainty about uncertainty and delay in bargaining,”
Econometrica, 73(1), 69–91.
Frölich, M. (2006): “Non-parametric regression for binary dependent variables,”Econometrics Journal, 9(3), 511–540.
Fudenberg, D. and J. Tirole (1983): “Sequential bargaining with incomplete information,” Review
of Economic Studies, 50(2), 221.
Gantner, A. (2008): “Bargaining, search, and outside options,” Games and Economic Behavior,
62(2), 417–435.
Grossman, S.J. and Perry, M. (1986). Sequential bargaining under asymmetric information. Journal
of Economic Theory, 39(1), 120–154.
Gul, F., H. Sonnenschein, and R. Wilson (1986): “Foundations of dynamic monopoly and the Coase
conjecture,” Journal of Economic Theory, 39(1), 155–190.
Kennan, J. and R. Wilson (1993): “Bargaining with private information,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 31(1), 45–104.
Kim, Dong-Hyuk (2013). Optimal choice of a reserve price under uncertainty,” International Journal
of Industrial Organization, 31(5), 587–602.
Levin, D. and J. L. Smith (1994): “Equilibrium in auctions with entry,” American Economic
Review, 84(3), 585–599.
Menzel, K. and P. Morganti (2013): “Large sample properties for estimators based on order statistics approaches in auctions,” Quantitative Economics, 4(2), 329–375.
Reguant, M. (2016): “Bounding outcomes in counterfactual analysis,” Working paper, Northwestern University.
97

Roth, A. E. (1995): “Bargaining experiments,” in The Handbook of Experimental Economics, ed.
by J. H. Kagel, and A. E. Roth, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Rubinstein, A. (1985a). A bargaining model with incomplete information about time preferences.
Econometrica, 1151–1172.
Rubinstein, A. (1985b): “Choice of conjectures in a bargaining game with incomplete information,”
in Game Theoretic Models of Bargaining, ed. by A. Roth, Cambridge Univ Pr, 99–114.
Ruppert, D., S. J. Sheather, and M. P. Wand (1995): “An effective bandwidth selector for local
least squares regression,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(432), 1257–1270.
Samuelson, W. F. (1985): “Competitive bidding with entry costs,” Economics Letters, 17(1-2),
53–57.
Sobel, J. and I. Takahashi (1983): “A multistage model of bargaining,” Review of Economic Studies,
50(3), 411.
Watson, J. (1998): “Alternating-offer bargaining with two-sided incomplete information,” Review
of Economic Studies, 65(3), 573–594.
Zhang, A. J. (2017): “Surplus monotonicity in second-best bargaining,” Working paper, Stanford
University.

98

Figure A1: Weakly Increasing Property of Seller Distribution Bounds (Illustration Only)

Notes: This figure illustrates an example of conditional probabilities from Proposition 2 (displayed as solid lines) that are not
monotone. The dashed lines displays the monotonized version of the seller CDF bounds from equation (16), but this
alternative version does not provide any tighter bounds on the seller distribution because CDFs are monotone by definition.
This figure is an illustration only; it does not display estimates.

Figure A2: Comparison of Public vs. Secret Reserve Prices
(A) Inferred FS , Dealers

(B) Inferred FS , Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display the bounds on FS (solid lines) along with CDF of seller valuations inferred from naively
treating reserve prices as optimal public reserves (dashed line). Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the right use
fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

99

Figure A3: Distributions of Reserve Prices, Auction Prices, and Unobserved Heterogeneity
(A) Reserve Price, Dealers

(B) Reserve Price, Fleet/lease

(C) Auction Price, Dealers

(D) Auction Price, Fleet/lease

(E) Unobserved Heterogeneity, Dealers

(F) Unobserved Heterogeneity, Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A–D display distributions of reserve prices and auction prices prior to removing unobserved heterogeneity
(dashed lines) and after removing unobserved heterogeneity (solid lines). Panels E and F display the estimated distribution of
unobserved heterogeneity. Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

100

Figure A4: Estimates of ρ−1 (·), χ−1 (·), and g(·)
(A) ρ−1 , Dealers

(B) ρ−1 , Fleet/lease

(C) χ−1 (·), Dealers

(D) χ−1 (·), Fleet/lease

(E) g(·), Dealers

(F) g(·), Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display estimates of ρ−1 (R) using the upper and lower bound on the distribution of seller values (solid
lines) as well as the 45 degree line (dashed line). Panels C and D display the estimates of χ−1 (P A ) (solid line) and the 45
degree line (dashed line). Panels E and F display estimates of g(·, 0); that is, the g(R, P A ) function evaluated at P A = 0.
Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

101

Figure A5: Fit of Estimates
(A) Dealers

(B) Fleet/lease

(C) Dealers

(D) Fleet/lease

(E) Dealers

(F) Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display the CDF of R − P A based on draws from the estimated FR and FP A distributions compared
to the CDF of the difference between the raw values in the data (Rraw − P A,raw ). Panels C and D display the estimated
conditional probability statements, Pr(D S = A|P̃ A ) and Pr(DS 6= Q|P̃ A ), compared to the fitted estimates (from the
right-hand-side quantities in (5) used to estimate FSL and FSU ). Panels E and F display the estimated conditional probability
statement Pr(D1B = 0|P̃ A , P̃ A < R̃) compared to the fitted estimate (from the right-hand-side of (6) used to estimate χ−1 ).
Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

102

Figure A6: Robustness of Buyer Distribution Estimates
(A) FB , Dealers

(B) FB , Fleet/lease

(C) FB (1) , Dealers

(D) FB (1) , Fleet/lease

(E) Order Statistics Inversion of Correlated

(F) Order Statistics Inversion of Correlated Buyer

Buyer Values, Dealers

Values, Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display estimates of FB under different distributions for the number of bidders. Values for λ represent
the mean number of bidders under a Poisson distribution. N and N represent distribution of the upper bound and lower
bound on the number of bidders derived from bid log data. Panels C and D display the distribution of the maximum order
−1
statistic, B (1) . Panels E and F display estimates of ψn−1:n
(FB n−1:n +W (·)) for varying n, following the logic proposed in
Aradillas-López, Gandhi, and Quint (2016) using the bid log subsample. Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the
right use fleet/lease sample. Units = $1, 000.

103

Figure A7: Robustness of Seller Distribution Bound Estimates
(A) Alternative Knots, Dealers

(B) Alternative Knots, Fleet/lease

(C) 25 Knot Approximation, Dealers

(D) 25 Knot Approximation, Fleet/lease

(E) Varying Start Values, Dealers

(F) Varying Start Values, Fleet/lease

Notes: Panels A and B display bounds on seller distribution using linear splines with 200 knots (solid lines), as in the main
results displayed in Figure 1; 250 knots (dashed lines); 300 knots (dotted lines). Panels C and D display 25 uniformly spaced
knots from the main 200 knots and their corresponding estimated coefficients. Panels E and F display the main bounds on FS
(solid lines), obtained using start values of FSL (v) = FSU (v) = 1 everywhere, as well as estimates under two other start values
(dotted and dashed lines) discussed in Appendix C.4. Panels on the left use dealers sample and on the right use fleet/lease
sample. Units = $1, 000.

104

Table A1: Theoretical Incomplete-Information Bargaining Literature

One-sided offers

Alternating offers

Fudenberg and Tirole (1983)

Rubinstein (1985, 1985b)

incomplete

Sobel and Takahashi (1983)

Bikhchandani (1992)

information

Admati and Perry (1987)

One-sided

Two-sided

2-types

Cont.

Fudenberg, Levine, and Tirole (1985, 1987)

Grossman and Perry (1986)

types

Gul, Sonnenschein, and Wilson (1986)

Gul and Sonnenschein (1988)

Ausubel and Deneckere (1989)

Cramton (1991)

Fudenberg and Tirole (1983)

Chatterjee and Samuelson (1987,1988)

Feinberg and Skrzypacz (2005)

Compte and Jehiel (2002)

2-types

incomplete
information

Gantner (2008)
Cont.

Cramton (1984)

Cramton (1992)

types

Cho (1990)

Perry (1986)

Ausubel and Deneckere (1992, 1993)

Watson (1998)
Abreu and Gul (2000)

Notes: While by no means exhaustive, this table presents a list of a variety of theoretical papers on incomplete-information
bargaining settings, demonstrating that most of these papers do not model such games as being cases of two-sided incomplete
information with a continuum of buyer/seller valuations, where both parties can make offers. Rather, the literature focuses
primarily on settings of one-sided uncertainty (Fudenberg and Tirole 1983; Sobel and Takahashi 1983; Fudenberg, Levine, and
Tirole 1985; Rubinstein 1985a; Rubinstein 1985b; Gul, Sonnenschein, and Wilson 1986; Grossman and Perry (1986); Admati
and Perry 1987; Gul and Sonnenschein 1988; Ausubel and Deneckere 1989; Cramton 1991; Bikhchandani 1992), settings of
one-sided offers (Cramton 1984; Cho 1990; Ausubel and Deneckere 1993; Feinberg and Skrzypacz 2005), settings with
two-types rather than a continuum of types (Chatterjee and Samuelson 1988; Compte and Jehiel 2002), or settings with
uncertainty not being about valuations (Watson 1998; Abreu and Gul 2000). Two papers that did model bargaining as an
alternating-offer game and a continuum of types with two-sided incomplete information, where the incomplete information is
about players’ valuations, are Perry (1986), which predicted immediate agreement or disagreement, and Cramton (1992),
which modeled the bargaining game as beginning with a war of attrition and consisting of players signaling their valuations
through the length of delay between offers, as in Admati and Perry (1987). An additional line of research considers static
bargaining games with two-sided incomplete information referred to as k double auctions (see Chatterjee and Samuelson 1983
and Satterthwaite and Williams 1989), discussed in the body of the paper. See Binmore, Osborne, and Rubinstein (1992),
Kennan and Wilson (1993), Roth (1995), and Ausubel, Cramton, and Deneckere (2002) for additional surveys of the
theoretical and experimental bargaining literature.

105

Table A2: Observations Dropped Through Sample Restrictions

A. Drops in combined sample (original combined sample size = 1,008,847)
Missing blue book or odometer reading
Missing timestamp for run
Misrecorded VIN
Duplicate record at location-VIN-seller-time level
Car switched from seller A to seller B than back to A
Missing auction price and reserve price
Extreme age (<0 or >16 years) or odometer reading (<100 or >300,000 miles)
Inconsistent data on whether trade occurred or not
Bargaining begins with non-high-bidder offer
Bargaining sequence includes “back-up” offer(s)
Inexplicable bargaining sequence
Misrecorded prices (obvious mistakes of extra (or missing) zeros)
Final price not equal to auction price or final negotiated price
Final price below auction price

# Obs.
158,520
21,246
126
4
1,578
27,027
5,855
18,309
10,269
2,595
179
150
1,423
9

Total observations remaining
Dealers observations remaining
Fleet/lease observations remaining

761,557
427,607
333,950
Dealers
# Obs.
Cutoff
4,328
375
4,285
25,550
1,567
300
760
24,300
5,661
0
292
25,000
3,279
750
898
27,500
70
9,890
95,837

Fleet/lease
# Obs.
Cutoff
3,496
550
3,351
30,825
2,175
400
795
29,500
5,554
1
291
29,000
5,175
0
204
31,000
42
20,737
80,474

Total observations remaining

300,740

211,656

C. Obs that can be used only in Step 1 regression
Reserve price recorded, auction price missing
Auction price recorded, reserve price missing

Dealers
148,075
19,142

Fleet/lease
15,034
65,179

Total observations remaining for full estimation

133,523

131,443

B. Drops within dealers vs. fleet/lease samples
Blue book ≤ q(.01)
Blue book ≥ q(0.99)
Final price ≤ q(.01)
Final price ≥ q(0.99)
Auction price ≤ q(.01)
Auction price ≥ q(0.99)
Reserve price ≤ q(.01)
Reserve price ≥ q(0.99)
Counteroffers ≤ q(.01) or ≥ q(0.99) of auction price
Day with < 100 cars sold
Make-model-year-trim-age combo obs < 10 times

Notes: Panel A displays the number of observations that each sample restriction (enforced in the order shown) drops from the
original sample. Appendix C.1.1 describes these restrictions. Panel B displays the number of observations dropped from
additional sample restrictions enforced (in the order shown) separately for the dealers and fleet/lease samples. For sample
restrictions involving trimming at the 0.01 or 0.99 quantiles (denoted q(0.01) and q(0.99)), Panel B also lists values of those
quantiles. Panel C displays the number of observations for which the reserve price or auction price is missing. These
observations can be used in the step 1 regression but not in the subsequent steps. The final sample size is shown in the last
row.

106

Table A3: Additional Descriptive Statistics

Dealers
A. Trade Sample
Reserve price
Auction price
Final price
Buyer fee
Seller fee
Number of periods
Blue book
Age (years)
Odometer (miles)

Mean
$6,978
$6,057
$6,075
$162
$146
1.957
$6,435
7.021
100,875

Sample size
B. No-trade Sample
Reserve price
Auction price
Number of periods
Blue book
Age (years)
Odometer (miles)
Sample size

S.D.
$4,926
$4,673
$4,681
$36
$54
0.587
$4,603
3.278
45,690

Fleet/lease
Mean
S.D.
$10,401
$5,943
$10,246
$5,996
$10,255
$5,994
$209
$45
$94
$15
1.591
0.579
$11,173
$6,335
3.216
2.539
56,001
39,637

94,170
Mean
$8,427
$6,720
2.431
$7,740
6.166
90,909

100,983
S.D.
$5,663
$5,316
0.767
$5,215
3.503
47,471

39,353

Mean
$9,996
$8,337
2.382
$10,212
3.051
62,390

S.D.
$5,232
$5,104
0.681
$5,397
2.590
42,419
30,460

Notes: Mean and standard deviation of variables in dealers and fleet/lease samples. Number of periods is 1 if game ends
through auction price exceeding reserve, 2 if seller accepts at her first bargaining turn, etc. Blue book is an estimate of the
market value of the car, provided by the auction house. Panel A displays subsample where trade occurs and panel B displays
subsample where no trade occurs.

107

Table A4: Outcomes of Game By Period: Fleet/lease Sample

Ending
period
1

Player’s

#

% of

%

turn

Obs

Sample

Trade

Full Sample
Conditional on Sale
Reserve Auction Reserve Auction Final
price

price

price

price

price

(Auction) 45,204 34.391% 98.35% $10,202 $10,969 $10,246 $11,063 $11,063
($6,044) ($6,154) ($6,053) ($6,139) ($6,139)

2

S

73,718 56.084% 74.01% $10,694 $9,647 $10,586 $9,683
$9,683
($5,764) ($5,700) ($5,885) ($5,833) ($5,833)

3

B

10,630

8.087%

10.86% $8,345
$6,426
$8,533
$7,357
$7,817
($4,395) ($3,986) ($4,260) ($4,113) ($4,189)

4

S

896

0.682%

55.25% $8,500
$6,819
$8,845
$7,219
$7,539
($4,615) ($4,214) ($4,824) ($4,383) ($4,472)

5

B

920

0.700%

31.20% $8,884
$7,187
$9,385
$7,888
$8,509
($4,650) ($4,268) ($4,923) ($4,572) ($4,687)

6

S

36

0.027%

52.78% $8,775
$6,968
$8,726
$7,124
$7,711
($4,196) ($4,334) ($3,565) ($3,801) ($3,836)

7

B

35

0.027%

31.43% $10,454 $8,587 $12,991 $10,632 $11,727
($6,339) ($5,790) ($9,732) ($8,854) ($9,237)

8

S

2

0.002%

0.00%

$16,250

$14,500

($7,425) ($6,364)
9

B

2

0.002%

0.00%

$11,750

$9,925

($8,132) ($7,743)

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
–

.
–

.
–

Notes: Fleet/lease sample. For each period (period 1 = auction, period 2 = seller’s first turn in bargaining, period 3 = buyer’s
turn, etc.), table reports the number of observations ending in that period, percent of total sample ending in that period, and
percent of cases in which trade occurred. Table also reports reserve price and auction price for observations ending in a given
period and, for those observations ending in trade, the reserve price, auction price, and final price conditional on trade.
Corresponding statistics for the dealers sample are found in Table 2.

108

Table A5: Model Dispersion and Fit

A. Dispersion

Dealers
Variance

Fleet/lease

0.1

0.9

Quantile

Quantile

Variance

0.1

0.9

Quantile

Quantile

X 0 γ̂

24.760

2.007

14.593

32.381

3.289

18.072

W

0.728

-0.979

0.885

0.478

-0.698

0.656

R

0.515

-0.379

1.102

0.908

-0.731

1.242

PA

0.653

-1.642

0.074

0.967

-1.302

0.836

B. Corr(R + W ,P A + W )

Dealers

Fleet/lease

W ,P A

0.513

0.293

Corr(R + W ,P A + W ) simulated

0.557

0.341

C. Probability of Negative Prices

Dealers

Fleet/lease

0.008

0.005

0.042

0.010

Corr(R +

Pr(X 0 γ
Pr(X 0 γ

+ W ) from Step 1 residuals

+ W + R < 0)
+W +

PA

< 0)

D. Integrated Absolute Error

Dealers

Fleet/lease

FSL (·)
FSU (·)
FSL (·) violations
FSU (·) violations
χ−1 (·)

0.0039

0.0030

0.0027

0.0017

0.0017

0.0020

0.0018

0.0011

0.0005

0.0003

g(·)

0.0600

0.0247

Notes: Panel A displays the variance, 0.1 quantile, and 0.9 quantile of Xγ, W , R, and P A , simulated by drawing with
replacement J draws from the estimated distribution of each of these objects, where J is the sample size (J = 133, 523 in the
dealers sample and 131,443 in the fleet/lease sample). In the case of Xγ, I sample directly from the estimates of Xγ from the
step 1 regression. Panel B compares the correlation in the residuals from the regression from estimation step 1 to the
correlation in simulated draws from the estimated distributions for R, P A , and W . Panel C shows the model’s predicted
probability of observing a raw reserve price or auction price that is not positive. Panel D displays the integrated absolute
error from the constrained least squares problems in steps 4–6 of the estimation. Rows labeled violations show this same
measure but where the only errors included in the integration are those that constitute violations of the conditional
probability bounds in (4).

109

Table A6: Expected Gains From Trade Using Alternative Sample Restrictions

Real

Ex-post

bargaining

minus real

[1.694, 2.926]
(1.645, 3.044)

[1.421, 2.400]
(-0.049, 2.482)

[0.241, 0.583]
(0.225, 3.009)

[2.492, 5.808]
(2.142, 6.104)

[2.434, 5.796]
(2.110, 6.093)

[1.988, 4.397]
(1.744, 4.632)

[0.471, 1.445]
(0.324, 1.549)

More Cars Remaining
of Same Make-Model

[2.565, 5.261]
(2.169, 5.498)

[2.527, 5.238]
(2.125, 5.483)

[2.135, 4.210]
(1.819, 4.444)

[0.399, 1.081]
(0.295, 1.128)

More Cars Remaining
of Same Seller

[2.137, 5.228]
(2.016, 5.597)

[2.083, 5.209]
(1.979, 5.577)

[1.664, 3.871]
(1.579, 4.173)

[0.445, 1.386]
(0.350, 1.476)

First Run of Car

[2.605, 4.804]
(1.997, 5.123)

[2.569, 4.792]
(1.965, 5.110)

[2.314, 4.220]
(1.786, 4.485)

[0.241, 0.633]
(0.163, 0.711)

[1.896, 3.604]
(1.843, 3.741)

[1.832, 3.574]
(1.779, 3.710)

[1.622, 2.846]
(1.550, 2.905)

[0.232, 0.800]
(0.227, 0.897)

Newer Cars

[2.583, 4.316]
(2.382, 4.604)

[2.524, 4.291]
(2.328, 4.596)

[2.223, 3.422]
(1.958, 3.722)

[0.321, 0.934]
(0.311, 1.092)

More Cars Remaining
of Same Make-Model

[2.997, 4.136]
(2.762, 4.389)

[2.951, 4.121]
(2.708, 4.375)

[2.616, 3.549]
(2.369, 3.685)

[0.314, 0.654]
(0.289, 0.801)

More Cars Remaining
of Same Seller

[2.800, 4.178]
(2.403, 4.443)

[2.748, 4.155]
(2.355, 4.416)

[2.442, 3.612]
(2.083, 3.747)

[0.290, 0.634]
(0.255, 0.827)

First Run of Car

[2.663, 3.997]
(2.385, 4.101)

[2.614, 3.978]
(2.333, 4.081)

[2.369, 3.550]
(2.126, 3.614)

[0.231, 0.510]
(0.201, 0.575)

A. Dealers Sample

Ex-post

Second-best

Less Expensive Cars

[1.711, 2.933]
(1.666, 3.053)

Newer Cars

B. Fleet/lease Sample
Less Expensive Cars

Notes: Table displays expected gains from trade as in Tables 4–5 but using specific subsamples of the data, described in
Appendix B.4 and C.1.3. Panel A contains dealer sellers and panel B fleet/lease sellers. Estimated bounds are in square
braces and 95% confidence set is in parentheses. Units are $1,000.

110

Table A7: Expected Gains and Probability of Trade Under Different Pr(N = n)

Real

Ex-post

bargaining

minus real

[2.397, 5.029]

[1.993, 3.933]

[0.422, 1.139]

[2.367, 4.965]

[2.328, 4.952]

[1.946, 3.892]

[0.394, 1.101]

λ=7

[2.321, 4.910]

[2.286, 4.899]

[1.923, 3.853]

[0.370, 1.084]

λ = 10

[2.318, 4.905]

[2.284, 4.894]

[1.922, 3.851]

[0.369, 1.082]

λ = 20

[2.317, 4.904]

[2.283, 4.893]

[1.921, 3.851]

[0.368, 1.081]

N

[2.251, 4.832]

[2.222, 4.823]

[1.874, 3.780]

[0.350, 1.080]

N

[2.408, 4.195]

[2.342, 4.165]

[2.080, 3.370]

[0.289, 0.864]

λ=3

[2.305, 4.089]

[2.248, 4.063]

[1.984, 3.291]

[0.282, 0.837]

λ=7

[2.229, 4.006]

[2.179, 3.983]

[1.923, 3.238]

[0.267, 0.807]

λ = 10

[2.225, 4.002]

[2.176, 3.979]

[1.924, 3.242]

[0.262, 0.798]

λ = 20

[2.223, 3.999]

[2.174, 3.976]

[1.921, 3.236]

[0.264, 0.802]

N

[2.114, 3.883]

[2.073, 3.864]

[1.828, 3.147]

[0.247, 0.774]

A. Expected Gains

Ex-post

Second-best

N

[2.442, 5.045]

λ=3

Dealers Sample

Fleet/lease Sample

B. Probability of Trade

Ex-post minus

Ex-post

Real bargaining

N

[0.818, 0.871]

[0.646, 0.646]

[0.172, 0.225]

λ=3

[0.804, 0.867]

[0.642, 0.642]

[0.162, 0.225]

λ=7

[0.793, 0.862]

[0.637, 0.637]

[0.155, 0.225]

λ = 10

[0.792, 0.862]

[0.637, 0.637]

[0.155, 0.225]

λ = 20

[0.792, 0.862]

[0.638, 0.638]

[0.154, 0.225]

N

[0.777, 0.857]

[0.628, 0.628]

[0.149, 0.229]

N

[0.857, 0.893]

[0.658, 0.658]

[0.199, 0.235]

λ=3

[0.844, 0.885]

[0.655, 0.655]

[0.188, 0.230]

λ=7

[0.830, 0.878]

[0.651, 0.651]

[0.179, 0.227]

λ = 10

[0.829, 0.878]

[0.652, 0.652]

[0.177, 0.225]

λ = 20

[0.829, 0.878]

[0.651, 0.651]

[0.178, 0.226]

N

[0.812, 0.869]

[0.644, 0.644]

[0.168, 0.225]

real

Dealers Sample

Fleet/lease Sample

Notes: This table displays bounds on the expected gains from trade (panel A) and probability of trade (panel B) estimated by
altering the specification of Pr(N = n) in estimation step 3, yielding different estimates of FB . These FB estimates are then
used in re-doing estimation steps 5–6 and in computing counterfactuals. N denotes the lower bound based on bid log data and
N the upper bound. The λ rows denote truncated Poisson approximations (i.e. restricted to have N ≥ 2) with mean λ = 3, 7,
10, or 20.

111

Table A8: Auction House Fees and the Broker-Optimal Mechanism

Ex-post

Broker-

Real

without fee

optimal

bargaining

[2.702, 5.317]
(2.451, 5.517)

[1.806, 4.371]
(1.503, 4.613)

[2.192, 4.133]
(2.012, 4.285)

Buyer gains

[0.215, 0.475]
(0.181, 0.482)

[0.822, 0.845]
(0.779, 0.913)

Seller gains

[0.321, 0.245]
(0.169, 0.394)

[1.171, 3.088]
(0.947, 3.202)

[0.271, 0.560]
(0.226, 0.567)

[0.646, 0.646]
(0.638, 0.672)

[1.270, 3.652]
(1.001, 3.799)

[0.199, 0.199]
(0.196, 0.207)

[1.711, 3.382]
(1.594, 3.682)

[2.279, 3.569]
(2.042, 3.668)

Buyer gains

[0.341, 0.596]
(0.326, 0.649)

[1.158, 1.192]
(1.073, 1.219)

Seller gains

[0.236, 0.322]
(0.202, 0.504)

[0.922, 2.178]
(0.754, 2.302)

[0.303, 0.501]
(0.289, 0.556)

[0.658, 0.658]
(0.653, 0.677)

[1.134, 2.464]
(0.965, 2.597)

[0.199, 0.199]
(0.198, 0.205)

A. Dealers Sample
Expected gains
from trade

Probability of
trade

[0.862, 0.891]
(0.849, 0.922)

Auction house
revenue
B. Fleet/lease Sample
Expected gains
from trade

Probability of
trade

[2.675, 4.470]
(2.435, 4.639)

[0.903, 0.924]
(0.891, 0.929)

Auction house
revenue

Notes: Bounds on expected gains from trade and auction house revenue (in $1,000 units) and on probability of trade from the
ex-post efficient mechanism in the absence of auction house fees, the broker-optimal mechanism, and the real-world
bargaining. Real-world bargaining estimates come from panel A of Tables 4–5 with one exception: auction house revenue in
this table is included in the total expected gains from trade. Panel A displays dealers sample and panel B fleet/lease.
Estimated bounds are in square braces and 95% confidence set is in parentheses.

112

