                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE AGRICULTURAL ORIGINS OF TIME PREFERENCE

                                               Oded Galor
                                               Ömer Özak

                                         Working Paper 20438
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w20438


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2014




The authors wish to thank Alberto Alesina, Quamrul Ashraf, Francesco Cinerella, Marc Klemp, Anastasia
Litina, Isaac Mbiti, Stelios Michalopoulos, Dan Millimet, Louis Putterman, Uwe Sunde, David Weil,
Glenn Weyl, participants of the conferences on "Deep Rooted Factors in Comparative Economic Development",
2014, Summer School in Economic Growth, Capri, 2014, Demographic Change and Long-Run Development,
Venice, 2014, and seminar participants at Bar-Ilan, Haifa, Southern Methodist and Tel-Aviv Universities
for helpful discussions. Galor's research is supported by NSF grant SES-1338426. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2014 by Oded Galor and Ömer Özak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference
Oded Galor and Ömer Özak
NBER Working Paper No. 20438
August 2014
JEL No. O1,O4,Z1

                                              ABSTRACT

This research explores the origins of the distribution of time preference across regions. It advances
the hypothesis, and establishes empirically, that geographical variations in natural land productivity
and their impact on the return to agricultural investment have had a persistent effect on the distribution
of long-term orientation across societies. In particular, exploiting a natural experiment associated with
the expansion of suitable crops for cultivation in the course of the Columbian Exchange, the research
establishes that agro-climatic characteristics in the pre-industrial era that were conducive to higher
return to agricultural investment, triggered selection and learning processes that had a persistent positive
effect on the prevalence of long-term orientation in the contemporary era.


Oded Galor
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
oded_galor@brown.edu

Ömer Özak
Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer Street
Suite 301, Umphrey Lee Center
Box 0496
Dallas, TX 75275-0496
omer@omerozak.com
1       Introduction
                                                                  “Patience is bitter, but its fruit is sweet.”
                                                                                                     – Aristotle
    The rate of time preference has been largely viewed as a pivotal factor in the determination of
human behavior. The ability to delay gratification has been associated with a variety of virtuous
outcomes, ranging from academic accomplishments to physical and emotional health.1 Moreover,
in light of the importance of long-term orientation for human and physical capital formation,
technological advancement, and economic growth, time preference has been widely considered as a
fundamental element in the formation of the wealth of nations. Nevertheless, despite the central
role attributed to time preference in comparative development, the origins of variations in time
preferences across societies have remained obscured.2
    This research explores the origins of the distribution of time preference across regions. It
advances the hypothesis, and establishes empirically, that geographical variations in natural land
productivity and their impact on the return to agricultural investment have had a persistent effect
on the distribution of long-term orientation across societies. In particular, exploiting a natural
experiment associated with the expansion of suitable crops for cultivation in the course of the
Columbian Exchange, the research establishes that agro-climatic characteristics in the pre-industrial
era that were conducive to higher return to agricultural investment, triggered selection and learning
processes that had a persistent positive effect on the prevalence of long-term orientation in the
contemporary era.3
    The proposed theory generates several testable predictions regarding the effect of the natural
return to agricultural investment on the rate of time preference. The theory suggests that in
societies in which the ancestral population was exposed to a higher crop yield, for a given growth
cycle, long-term orientation had gradually increased, as the representation of traits for a higher long-
term orientation had gradually propagated in the population. In particular, the theory suggests that
descendants of individuals who resided in geographical regions in which crop yield was historically
higher are characterized by higher long-term orientation. Moreover, the theory further suggests
that regions that benefited from the expansion in the spectrum of suitable crops in the post-1500
period experienced further gains in the degree of long-term orientation in society, beyond the initial
level triggered by the caloric yield in the pre-1500 period.
    The empirical analysis exploits an exogenous source of variation in potential crop yield and
    1
       Following the pioneering exploration of the causes and effects of the ability to delay gratification and to exert
self-control (Mischel and Ebbesen, 1970), this ability has been shown to be correlated with a wide variety of attributes,
ranging from body mass to educational outcomes (Ayduk et al., 2000; Dohmen et al., 2010; Mischel et al., 1988, 1989;
Shoda et al., 1990).
     2
       The effect of time preference on intertemporal choice has been widely explored (e.g., Frederick et al., 2002;
Laibson, 1997; Loewenstein and Elster, 1992). Furthermore, evolutionary biologists have studied the evolutionary
forces that underline time-discounting (see e.g. Fawcett et al., 2012; Rosati et al., 2007), and their consequences for
human behaviors (Stevens and Hauser, 2004).
     3
       Consistent with this predicted decline in time preference in the course of human history, Godoy et al. (2004) find
that a forager society (i.e., Tsimane’ Amerindians in the Bolivian Amazon) is less long-term oriented than Western
Societies.



                                                           1
potential crop growth cycle across the globe to establish a positive, statistically and economically
significant effect of higher pre-industrial crop yields on various measures of long-term orientation
at the country, region, and individual levels. Moreover, it exploits a natural experiment associated
with the Columbian Exchange (i.e., the changes in the spectrum of potential crops in the post-1500
period) to identify the persistent historical effect of crop yield on long-term orientation independent
of potential selection of high time preference individuals into regions with high agricultural returns.
    The study constructs a novel measure of potential caloric yield across regions of the world
using the Food and Agriculture Organization‘s global estimates of yield and growth cycle for 48
crops in grids with cells size of 50 × 50 and the US Department of Agriculture’s measure of food’s
caloric content. In particular, in order to capture the conditions that were prevalent during the pre-
industrial era, while mitigating possible endogeneity concerns, this research constructs estimates
of the potential (rather than the actual) caloric yield per hectare per year, under low level of
inputs and rain-fed agriculture – cultivation methods that presumably characterized early stages
of development. Moreover, the employed estimates of each crop yield are based on agro-climatic
constraints that are largely orthogonal to human intervention. These restrictions remove potential
concerns that the estimates of caloric yield reflect endogenous choices that could be potentially
correlated with long-term orientation.
    Since crops’ caloric yield is correlated with other geographical, institutional, cultural, and hu-
man factors that might have directly and independently affected the reward for a longer planning
horizon and hence the formation of time preferences, the analysis accounts for a wide range of
potential confounding factors. In particular, it controls for the effects of absolute latitude, average
elevation, terrain roughness, distance to navigable water, as well as islands and landlocked regions.
These factors may capture the effect of climatic variability, the sources and fluctuations in food
supply, and the feasibility and type of trade on the planning horizon. Furthermore, unobserved
continent-specific geographical, cultural, and historical characteristics may have codetermined the
global distribution of time preference. Hence, the analysis accounts for these characteristics by
the inclusion of a complete set of continental fixed effects, and when the sample permits country
fixed-effects.
    Moreover, the empirical analysis considers the confounding effect of the advent of sedentary
agriculture, as captured by the years elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution, on the
evolution of the rate of time preference. The onset of agriculture could have generated various
conflicting effects on the evolution of time preference. In particular, the rise of institutionalized
statehood in the aftermath of the transition to agriculture was associated with the taxation of crop
yield and thus in a reduction in the incentive to invest (Mayshar et al., 2013; Olsson and Paik,
2013). In contrast, the effect of the Neolithic Revolution on technological advancements (Ashraf
and Galor, 2011; Diamond, 1997) and public investment in agricultural infrastructure may have
countered this adverse effect on the net crop yield. Thus, the effect of the agricultural revolution
on the rate of time preference appears a priori ambiguous.
    Consistent with the predictions of the theory, the empirical analysis establishes that indeed


                                                  2
higher potential crop yield experienced during the pre-industrial era increased the long-term orien-
tation of individuals in the modern period. The analysis establishes this result in five layers: (i) a
cross-country analysis of variations in time preference, that accounts for the confounding effects of a
large number of geographical controls, the onset of the Neolithic Revolution, as well as continental
fixed effects; (ii) within-country analysis across second-generation migrants, that accounts for host
country fixed effects, the sending country’s geographical characteristics as well as migrants’ individ-
ual characteristics, such as gender, age, and education, (iii) a cross-country individual level analysis
that accounts for the country’s geographical characteristics as well as individuals’ characteristics,
such as income and education; (iv) cross-regional individual level analysis that accounts for the
region’s geographical characteristics, individuals’ characteristics, such as income and education,
and country fixed-effects; and (v) cross-regional analysis that accounts for the confounding effects
of a large number of geographical controls, as well as country fixed-effects.
   The first part of the empirical analysis examines the effect of crop yield on the rate of time
preference across countries. Using the average level of long-term orientation of individuals living in
a country during the late XXth century, as proxy for the country’s rate of time preference (Hofstede,
1991), the analysis establishes that, conditional on crop growth cycles, higher pre-industrial caloric
yield has a positive effect on the levels of long-term orientation in the modern period. The findings
are robust to the inclusion of continental fixed-effects, a wide range of confounding geographical
characteristics, and the years elapsed since the country transitioned to agriculture. In particular,
the estimates suggest that a one-standard deviation increase in potential crop yield increases a
country’s long-term orientation by about half a standard deviation.
   Importantly, the analysis establishes the historical nature of the effects of these geographical
characteristics as opposed to a potential contemporary link between geographical attributes, devel-
opment outcomes and the rate of time preference. In particular, restricting the attention to crops
that were available for cultivation in pre-1500CE era, or to regions where crops used in the pre-1500
period were dominated by new crops in the post-1500 period does not affect the qualitative results
either. Furthermore, accounting for the potential effect of higher crop yield on population density
and urbanization in the past and thus on contemporary economic development, does not affect the
qualitative results, suggesting that indeed crop yield had a direct effect on time preferences rather
than an indirect one via the effect of geographical factors on the process of development. The
results are additionally robust to pre-industrial trade, economies of scale, and climatic variability
and therefore the risk associated with agricultural investment.
   Reassuringly, the estimated effect of crop yield on the rate of time preference is stronger if rather
than estimating the effect of crop yield in the contemporary geographical location, one accounts
for migration flows in the post-1500 period and thus estimates the effect on the contemporary rate
of time preference of the potential crop yield to which the ancestors of contemporary populations
were exposed. These results suggest that indeed the portable, culturally-embodied, components of
potential crop yield, rather than the persistent geographical attributes correlated with crop yield,
are the ones that have a long-lasting effect on the rate of time preference.


                                                   3
   Additionally, this research establishes that long-term orientation is the main cultural charac-
teristic of countries that is determined by potential crop yield. In particular, it establishes that
crop yield has largely insignificant effects on country-level measures of generalized levels of trust;
individualism or collectivism; internal cooperation or competition; tolerance and rigidness; and
hierarchy and inequality of power. This suggests that the effect of crop yield on long-term orienta-
tion is not mediated by these other cultural characteristics. In particular, these additional cultural
characteristics do not have a statistically significant effect on long-term orientation, nor do they
alter the effect of crop yield on it.
   Furthermore, the research demonstrates the significance of these findings for the understanding
of comparative development. In particular, it demonstrates that crop yield, as well as long-term
orientation, is positively correlated with the contemporary level of education across countries. In
particular, the estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in the pre-1500 crop yield
experienced by ancestors of a country is associated with one additional year of schooling in the
country in the year 2005.
   The second part of the empirical analysis exploits the European Social Survey, to examine the
effect on the long-term orientation of second-generation migrants in Europe of the crop yield in their
parental country of origin. This analysis accounts for host country fixed-effects and thus overcomes
a possible concern about the effect of country-specific characteristics on the estimated effects in
the first part of the analysis (e.g., institutions, such as the social security system, that mitigate
individuals’ concern about their future well-being). Furthermore, this setting assures that the
effect of crop yield on long-term orientation captures cultural elements that have been transmitted
across generations, rather than a direct effect of a possibly omitted characteristic of the country of
immigration (Fernández, 2012).
   In line with the theory, the findings suggests that higher crop yields in the parental country of
origin have a positive, statistically and economically significant effect on the long-term orientation
of second-generation migrants. This effect is robust to host country fixed effects, individual char-
acteristics, a wide range of geographical characteristics of the parental country of origin, as well as
the number of years since the country of origin transitioned to agriculture. Furthermore, restricting
attention to crops that were available for cultivation in the pre-1500CE era, or to regions where
crops used in the pre-1500 period were dominated by new crops in the post-1500 period, does not
affect the qualitative results. These results further indicate that indeed the portable, culturally-
embodied, components of potential crop yield, rather than the persistent geographical attributes
correlated with crop yield, are the ones that have a long-lasting effect on long-term orientation.
   The third part of the empirical analysis explores the effect of crop yield on individual’s long-term
orientation based on the World Values Survey, both across countries as well as across regions within
a country. The results lend further support for the proposed theory. In particular, they show that
the probability of having long-term orientation increases for individuals who live in a region with
higher crop yields. This result is robust to the inclusion of continental or country fixed effects, a
wide range of confounding regional geographical characteristics as well as individual characteristics.


                                                  4
Furthermore, restricting attention to potential crops that were available for cultivation in pre-
1500CE era, or to regions where crops used in the pre-1500 period were dominated by new crops
in the post-1500 period, does not affect the qualitative results. Moreover, the estimated effect of
crop yield on the rate of time preference is stronger if rather than estimating the effect of crop
yield in the contemporary geographical location, one accounts for migration flows in the post-1500
period, and thus estimates the effect on the contemporary rate of time preference of crop yields to
which the ancestors of contemporary populations were exposed. These results suggest that indeed
the portable, culturally-embodied, components of potential crop yield, rather than the persistent
geographical attributes correlated with crop yield, are the ones that have a long-lasting effect on
the rate of time preference. Moreover, the qualitative results are not affected by the inclusion of
country fixed-effects, despite potential internal migration.
    This research constitutes the first attempt to decipher the bio-geographical origins of regional
variations in the rate of time preference across the globe. Moreover, it sheds additional light on the
geographical and bio-cultural origins of comparative economic development (e.g., Ashraf and Galor,
2013; Diamond, 1997; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2013), and the persistence of cultural characteristics
(e.g., Belloc and Bowles, 2013; Bisin and Verdier, 2000; Fernández, 2012; Guiso et al., 2006).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a basic model that
predicts a positive relation between crop yield and long-term orientation. Section 3 presents the
data and empirical strategy. Sections 4, 5, and 6 present the empirical findings. Section 7 concludes.
Additional results and supporting material are presented in the appendix.


2        The Model
This section develops a dynamic model that captures the evolution of time preference during the
agricultural stage of development – a Malthusian era in which individuals that generated more re-
sources had a larger reproductive success.4 The model establishes that, in the absence of financial
markets, higher crop yields reduced the threshold level of the discount factor above which engage-
ment in agricultural practices that permit higher but delayed return is optimal. Nevertheless, the
adoption of crops with higher yields and their effect on resources and thus on reproductive success,
gradually increased the representation of high long-term orientation individuals in the population.
Moreover, the engagement in profitable investment mitigated the tendency to discount the future.
Thus, societies characterized by greater return on agricultural investment are also characterized by
higher long-term orientation in the long-run.
    Consider an overlapping-generations economy in an agricultural stage of development. In every
time period the economy consists of three-period lived individuals who are identical in all respects
except for their rate of time preference. In the first period of life - childhood - agents are economi-
cally passive and their consumption is provided by their parents. In the second and third periods of
life, individuals have access to identical land-intensive production technologies that allow them to
    4
        See Ashraf and Galor (2011), Dalgaard and Strulik (2013) and Vollrath (2011).



                                                          5
generate income by hunting, fishing, herding, and land cultivation. Some of the available modes of
production require investment (e.g., planting) and delayed consumption, and thus, in the absence
of financial markets, individuals’ choices regarding their preferred mode of production reflect their
rate of time preference.
    The composition of the population in terms of the rate of time preference evolves endogenously.
Time preference is transmitted from parents to children and it is enhanced by rewarding investment
decisions during the individual’s life time.5 Differences in reproductive success across households,
therefore, affect the evolution of the average rate of time preference in the economy and its long-run
level. In particular, given the positive effect of resources on reproductive success in the agricultural
(Malthusian) stage of development, a low rate of time preference and its effect on the undertaking
of profitable investment decisions, increases income and thus reproductive success, leading to the
propagation of this trait in the population.

2.1    Production
Adult individuals face the choice between two modes of agricultural production: a endowment mode
and an investment mode. The endowment mode exploits the existing land for hunting, gathering,
fishing, herding, and subsistence agriculture. It provides a constant level of output, R0 > 1, in
each of the two working periods of life. The investment production mode, in contrast, is associated
with the planting and harvesting of crops. It requires an investment of I0 in the first period of
life, leaving the individuals with 1 unit of output (generated by e.g., hunting, gathering, fishing,
herding, or horticulture), but it provides a higher level of resources, R1 , in the second working
period of life.
    Hence, depending on the choice of production mode, the income stream of member i of gener-
ation t (born in period t − 1) in the two working periods of life, (yi,t , yi,t+1 ), is6
                                               
                                                   0   0
                                                (R , R ) under endowment mode
                                               
                           (yi,t , yi,t+1) =                                                                      (1)
                                               
                                                   (1, R1 )       under investment mode,
                                               


where ln(R1 ) > 2 ln(R0 ).7
   5
      Bowles (1998), Bisin and Verdier (2000), Galor and Moav (2002), Rapoport and Vidal (2007), Doepke and Zili-
botti (2008), and Galor and Michalopoulos (2012) explore additional mechanisms behind the evolution of preferences.
In particular, Dohmen et al. (2012) establish empirically the presence of intergenerational transmission of cultural
traits and the importance of socialization in this transmission process.
    6
      This constant average productivity of labor reflects a Malthusian-Boserupian economy in which the adverse
effect of an increase in population on the average productivity of labor is mitigated by the advancement in technology
that is generated by the scale of the population. These characteristics are consistent with the positive growth of
population in the world economy throughout human history.
    7
      As will become apparent this assumption assures that the investment mode is profitable for some but not all
individuals. Nevertheless, the qualitative analysis will not be altered if all individuals choose the investment mode.




                                                              6
2.2    Preferences and Budget Constraints
In each period t, a generation consisting of Lt individuals becomes economically active. Each
member of generation t is born in period t − 1 to a single parent and lives for three periods.
    Individuals generate utility from consumption in each period of their working life and from the
number of their children. In particular, the preference of a member i of generation t is represented
by the utility function:

                   ui,t = ln ci,t + βti [γ ln ni,t+1 + (1 − γ) ln ci,t+1 ];    γ ∈ (0, 1),             (2)

where ci,t and ci,t+1 are the levels of consumption in the first and the second period of the working
life of member i of generation t and ni,t+1 is the individual’s number of children. Furthermore,
βti ∈ [0, 1] is individual i’s discount factor, i.e., βti ≡ 1/(1 + ρit ), where ρit ≥ 0 is the rate of time
preference of member i of generation t.
    In the first working period, in the absence of financial markets and storage technologies, member
i of generation t consumes the entire income, yi,t . Hence, consumption of member i of generation t
in the first working period, ci,t , is
                                              
                                                 0
                                               R under endowment mode
                                              
                              ci,t ≤ yi,t =                                                            (3)
                                              
                                                  1   under investment mode.
                                              


    In the last period, member i of generation t allocates her income, yi,t+1 , between consumption,
ci,t+1 , and expenditure on children, τ ni,t+1 , where τ is the resource cost of raising a child. Hence,
the budget constraint of individual i of generation t in the last period of life is
                                                      
                                                         0
                                                       R under endowment mode
                                                      
                      τ ni,t+1 + ci,t+1 ≤ yi,t+1 =                                                     (4)
                                                      
                                                          R1 under investment mode.
                                                      


2.3    Allocation of Resources between Consumption and Children
Members of generation t allocate their last period income between consumption and child rear-
ing so as to maximize their utility function (2) subject to the budget constraint (4). Given the
homotheticity of preferences, individuals devote a fraction (1 − γ) of their last period income to
consumption and a fraction γ to child rearing. Hence, the level of last period consumption and the
number of children of member i of generation t, ci,t+1 and ni,t+1 , are

                                              ci,t+1 = (1 − γ)yi,t+1 ;
                                                                                                       (5)
                                              ni,t+1 = γyi,t+1 /τ.

    Given these optimal choices, the level of utility generated by member i of generation t is there-

                                                          7
fore,
                                       v i,t = ln yi,t + βti [ln yi,t+1 + ξ],                        (6)

where ξ ≡ γ ln(γ/τ ) + (1 − γ) ln(1 − γ)].

2.4     Choice of Production Mode
Each member i of generation t chooses the desirable mode of production that maximizes life time
utility, v i,t . Differences in the desirable mode of production across individuals reflect variations in
their rate of time preference.
    As follows from (1) and (6), given the discount factor, β i , the life time utility of a member i of
generation t, v i,t , under each of the two modes of production is
                                
                                      0   i      0
                                 ln R + βt [ln R + ξ] under endowment mode
                                
                      v i,t =                                                                        (7)
                                
                                    ln 1 +   βti [ln R1   + ξ]   under investment mode.
                                


    Hence, there exists an interior level of the discount factor, β̂(R1 ), such that an individual who
possesses this discount factor is indifferent between the endowment and the investment modes of
production. In particular,

                                ln R0 + β̂(R1 )[ln R0 + ξ] = β̂(R1 )[ln R1 + ξ],                     (8)

and therefore
                                                        ln R0
                                       β̂(R1 ) =                  ∈ (0, 1).                          (9)
                                                    ln R1 − ln R0
    The segmentation of the population between the investment and the endowment mode of pro-
duction is determined by β̂(R1 ). In particular, the production mode of a member i of generation t
would be                                            
                                                     endowment if
                                                                            βti ≤ β̂(R1 )
                        Production mode =                                                           (10)
                                                    
                                                          investment   if   βti   ≥   β̂(R1 ).
                                                    

    Thus, in an environment in which the investment mode generates a higher return, R1 , individuals
with a higher rate of time preference would be engaged in this production mode. Also, the threshold
level of the discount factor above which individuals are engaged in the investment mode is lower if
the return on agricultural investment, R1 , is higher, i.e.,

                                     ∂ β̂(R1 )         − ln R0
                                               =                      < 0.                          (11)
                                       ∂R1       R1 [ln R1 − ln R0 ]2




                                                             8
2.5     Time Preference, Income and Fertility
The income stream of member i of generation t in the two working periods of life, (yi,t , yi,t+1 ), is
determined by the threshold level of β̂(R1 ) of the discount factor. In particular,
                                                   
                                                       0   0              βti ≤ β̂(R1 )
                                                    (R , R ) if
                                                   
                              (yi,t , yi,t+1 ) =                                                            (12)
                                                   
                                                       (1, R1 )      if βti > β̂(R1 ).
                                                   


    Consequently, as follows from (5), the number of children of member i of generation t is deter-
mined by the threshold level of future discount factor, β̂(R1 ).

                                                        γ 0
                                                   
                                                       τR      ≡ nE if       βti ≤ β̂(R1 );
                                     γyi,t+1       
                          ni,t+1   =         =                                                              (13)
                                       τ               γ 1
                                                        τR      ≡   nI   if   βti   >   β̂(R1 ).
                                               


    Hence, since R1 > R0 , the number of children of individuals that are engaged in the investment
mode of production, nI , is larger than that of individuals that are engaged in the endowment mode,
nE , i.e.,
                                                       nI > nE .                                            (14)

2.6     The Evolution of Time Preference
2.6.1        Evolution of Time Preference within a Dynasty

Suppose that time preference is transmitted across generations. Suppose further that the rate
of time preference is affected by the experience of individuals over their life time. In particular,
individuals who are engaged in the endowment mode of production maintain their inherited time
preference, βti , and transmit it to their offspring, whereas those who are engaged in the investment
mode learn to tolerate delayed gratification and transmit to their offspring this acquired tolerance,
φ(βti ; R1 ) that is an increasing, strictly concave function of their inherited time preference, βti .
Unlike the experience of individuals who are engaged in the endowment mode of production that
has no positive reinforcement on their rate of time preference, the experience of individuals who are
engaged in investment provides a positive reinforcement to their patience, enhancing their ability
to delay gratification. The discount factor (i.e., the patience) that they transmit to their offspring
increases to φ(βti , R1 ), reflecting their inherited rate of time preference, βti , as well as their acquired
patience due to the reward on their investment in the last period of life, R1 .8 The higher is the
reward to their investment, the better is their experience with delayed gratification (as reflected by
higher income and higher reproductive success), and the larger is the increase in their patience.
    8
      Bowles (1998) provides an overview of the evidence that preferences may change by individual’s experiences.
Bandura and Mischel (1965) show in an experimental setting that children become more long-term oriented when
observing a long-term oriented adult.




                                                            9
                                                                                             i , is
    Hence, the rate of time preference that is inherited by a member i of generation t + 1, βt+1
                                                  
                                                     i                      βti ≤ β̂(R1 )
                                                   βt
                                                                    if
                                        i
                                       βt+1   =                                                 (15)
                                                  
                                                      φ(βti ; R1 )   if    βti   ≥   β̂(R1 ),
                                                  


where for βti ≥ β̂(R1 ),
                                       βti ≤ φ(βti ; R1 ) ≤1;             φR (βti ; R1 ) >0;
                                                                                                (16)
                                              φβ (βti ; R1 ) >0;          φββ (βti ; v) <0.
    As depicted in Figure 1, given the evolution of the time preference among individuals who
are engaged in the investment mode of production, there exist a unique level of time preference,
β̄ I (R1 ) > β̂(R1 ), such that
                                                       β̄ I = φ(β̄ I ; R1 ).                    (17)




                        Figure 1: The Evolution of Time Preference within a Dynasty


    Moreover, as depicted in Figure 1, as long as the steady-state equilibrium is locally stable
(i.e., φβ (β̄ I ; R1 ) < 1), every member i of generation t who is engaged in the investment mode of
production converges to the same steady-state equilibrium, i.e., if β0i > β̂(R1 ) then

                                                      lim βti = β̄ I (R1 ).                     (18)
                                                      t→∞

The discount factor (i.e. the degree of patience) in the steady-state is higher if the investment
mode generates a higher rate of return,9 i.e.,

                                            ∂ β̄ I (R1 )     φR (βti ; R1 )
                                                         =                    > 0.              (19)
                                               ∂R1         1 − φβ (βti ; R1 )
   9
       It is assumed here that β̄ I (R1max ) ≤ 1.



                                                                10
2.6.2     Evolution of Time Preference Across Generations

Suppose that, as depicted in Figure 1, in period 0, individuals’ discount factors in the economy,
β0i , are distributed over the interval [0, β̃], where β̃ ∈ (β̂(R1 ), β̄ I (R1 )).10 Suppose further that the
initial size of the population of generation 0 is L0 = 1, i.e.,
                                                    Z      β̃
                                            L0 =                ν(β0i )dβ0i = 1,                              (20)
                                                       0

where ν(β0i ) is a continuous distribution function.
      Given the threshold level of the discount factor, β̂(R1 ), above which the investment mode of
production is beneficial, the size of the population of generation 0 that is engaged in the endowment
mode of production, LE
                     0 , and the size of the population of generation 0 that is engaged in the
investment mode of production, LI0 , are:
                                                       R β̂(R1 )
                                            LE
                                             0 =        0             ν(β0i )dβ0i ;
                                                                                                              (21)
                                                       R β̃
                                             LI0   =    β̂(R1 )
                                                                ν(β0i )dβ0i .

      Since the critical level, β̂(R1 ), is stationary over time, it follows from (15), that the distribution
of β i across individuals with a discount factor below β̂(R1 ) is unchanged over time. Additionally,
income and therefore the number of children of individuals who are engaged in the endowment
mode of production and of those engaged in the investment mode is constant over time.
      Thus, in generation t the size of the population of each group (i.e., the endowment type, S,
and the investment type, I) is determined by its initial size and the number of children per adult.
Specifically,
                                                          γ 0 t E
                                         LE     E t E
                                          t = (n ) L0 = ( γ R ) L0 ,
                                                                                                              (22)
                                         LIt = (nI )t LI0 = ( γγ R1 )t LI0 ,
where
                                                   LE    I
                                                    t + Lt = Lt .                                             (23)

      The average rate of time preference of generation t, β̄t , is therefore the weighted average of the
average time preference of the endowment type, β̄tE , and of the investment type, β̄tI , in this gener-
ation.11 The weights are determined by the relative size of two types of individuals in generation
t.
      Hence, the average rate of time preference in society in period t, β̄t , is


                                           β̄t = θtE β̄tE + (1 − θtE )β̄tI ,                                  (24)
     10
      This initial condition assures that some individuals will be engaged in each mode of production. Moreover, it
assures that for individuals who are engaged in the investment mode of production there are learning opportunities
about the virtues of patience.
   11
      Note that since there is no learning among the endowment type, β̄tE = β̄0E .


                                                                 11
where θtE is the fraction of offsprings in generation t born to individuals who were engaged in the
endowment mode of production in generation 0, i.e.,

                                   LE
                                    t               (R0 )t
                         θtE ≡           =                           = θtE (R1 ).               (25)
                                 LE    I
                                  t + Lt   (R0 )t + (R1 )t (LI0 /LE
                                                                  0)

   The fraction of the subsidence type in generation t, θtE , decreases as the return to agricultural
investment, R1 , increases, i.e.,
                                           ∂θtE (R1 )/∂R1 < 0.                                  (26)

Moreover, for a given rate of return, R1 ,the fraction of the endowment type declines asymptotically
to zero, reflecting their lower reproductive success;

                                             lim θtE (R1 ) = 0.                                 (27)
                                            t→∞


2.7    Steady-State Equilibrium
As the economy approaches a steady-state equilibrium, the fraction of the endowment type in each
generation declines asymptotically to zero. Hence, it follows from (18) and (24) that the steady-
state level of average time preference in the economy, β̄, is equal to steady-state level of time
preference among individuals who are engaged in the investment mode of production, i.e.

                                               β̄ = β̄ I (R1 ),                                 (28)

where as established in (19), ∂ β̄(R1 )/∂R1 > 0.
   Thus, while an increase in the rate of return to investment lowers the threshold level of the
discount factor above which individuals will chose the investment mode of production, the gradual
increase in the ability to delay gratification among individuals engaged in the investment mode of
production, and the increase in the relative share of individuals engaged in the investment mode of
production, due to their higher resources and thus reproductive success, brings about an increase
in the average discount factor, and thus lowers the average rate of time preference in society as a
whole in the steady-state.
   Furthermore, if after the economy reaches the steady-state equilibrium, β̄ I (R1 ), new potential
crops are introduced into the economy and the return on the investment mode of production
increases from R1 to R1 + ∆R, then the economy’s average rate of time preference will fall. This
is depicted in Figure 2, where this increment increases the steady-state level of β̄ I (R1 + ∆R) and
the economy gradually transitions to this new steady state.
   Moreover, consider two countries, A and B, that are identical in all respects except for the
return to the investment mode of production. Suppose that RA < RB . Then, as depicted in Figure
3, the high return country, B, would have a higher discount factor in the steady-state (and thus a
lower rate of time preference), i.e., β̄(RB ) > β̄(RB ).



                                                     12
       Figure 2: The Effect of the Introduction of New Potential Crops on the Long-Run Rate
                                   Steady-State of Time Preference




                        Figure 3: Time Preference Across Countries RB > RA



2.8     Testable Predictions
The model generates several testable predictions regarding the relationship between crop yield and
the rate of time preference. First, the theory suggests that across economies identical in all respects
except for their return on agricultural crops, the higher the crop yield is, the lower will be the rate
of time preference in the long-run. In particular, given the crop growth cycle, the higher the crop
yield, the lower is the average rate of time preference and thus the higher is the average level of
long-term orientation.12
    Second, the theory suggest that expansion in the spectrum of crops in the post-1500 period,
(i.e., due to the adoption of new crops), generated an additional increase in the degree of patience
  12
     It should be noted that the return to the endowment mode R0 does not affect the steady-state cross-country
variation in time-preference.



                                                      13
in society, beyond the initial level generated by the pre-1500 crops.
    Third the theory suggest that an increase in the crop growth cycle generates conflicting effects
on the rate of time preference. On the one hand, an increase in the crop growth cycle, holding the
crop yield constant, is equivalent to a reduction in the return on investment, and hence it reduces
the effect of the rewarding investment experience on the mitigating time preference. However, the
increase in the duration of the investment could also operate towards the mitigation of the aversion
of delayed consumption. Thus, the overall effect is ambiguous.


3     Data and Empirical Strategy
This section develops the empirical strategy and describes the data used to establish the persistent
effect of agricultural productivity on contemporary variations in the rate of time preference across
individuals, regions, and countries.
    As hypothesized and established theoretically, the inherent rate of return to agricultural invest-
ment associated with crop yield, conditional on the crop growth cycle, might have had a persistent
positive effect on the rate time preference. In particular, the theory predicts that the degree of
long-term orientation had gradually increased in societies in which the ancestral population was
exposed to a higher crop yield (conditional on the crop growth cycle), as the representation of
individuals with higher long-term orientation had gradually increased in the population.
    In order to test the proposed hypothesis, this research constructs measures of historical potential
crop yield and crop growth cycles across the globe and examines their persistent effect on a range
of existing proxies for time preference, at the individual, regional, and national levels, accounting
for continental as well country fixed effects.

3.1    Identification Strategy
The analysis surmounts significant hurdles in the identification of the causal effect of historical crop
yield on long-term orientation. First, long-term orientation may affect the choice of technologies and
therefore the actual level of crop yield. In order to overcome this potential concern about reverse
causality, this research exploits variations in potential (rather than actual) crop yields. Moreover,
it focuses on potential crop yields associated with agro-climatic conditions that are orthogonal to
human intervention.
    Second, geographical attributes that had contributed to crop yield in the past are likely to be
conducive to higher crop yield in the present. In particular, the correlation between past crop yield
and contemporary time preference may therefore reflect the direct effect of invariant geographical
attributes on contemporary economic outcomes that may be correlated with the rate of time prefer-
ence. In order to overcome this potential concern, this research exploits the spectrum of potential
crops in the pre-1500 period (i.e., prior to the Columbian Exchange) to identify the persistent
effect of historical crop yield on long-term orientation, lending credence to the hypothesis that it
is the portable, culturally-embodied, components of potential crop yield, rather than persistent


                                                  14
geographical attributes that affect time preference.
    Third, the natural experiment associated with the Columbian Exchange and the random dif-
ferential assignment of superior crops to different regions of the world further permits to overcome
the potential concern about selection of high time preference individuals into geographical regions
characterized by higher agricultural return. While this selection process would not affect the nature
of the results, (i.e. variations in the return to agricultural investment across the globe would still be
the origin of the differences in time preferences), it reinforces the viewpoint that these geographical
conditions had a direct effect on the evolution of time preference independent of the potential initial
selection.
    Fourth, superior historical crop-yield could have affected positively past economic outcomes
(e.g., population density and urbanization), and the persistent effect of these variables may have
directly affected the observed rate of time preference. Hence, accounting for historical population
density as well as urbanization, permits the analysis to isolate the portable, culturally-embodied,
components of potential crop yield, from the potential effect of the persistence of past economic
prosperity.
    Finally, the results may be biased by omitted geographical, institutional, cultural, or human
characteristics that might have determined long-term orientation and are correlated with potential
crop yield. In order to overcome this concern, this research employs various strategies. First, the
analysis accounts for a large set of possible confounding geographical characteristics (e.g., abso-
lute latitude, elevation, roughness, distance to the sea or navigable rivers, average precipitation,
percentages of a country’s area in tropical, subtropical or temperate zones, and average suitability
for agriculture). Second, it employs continental fixed effects in order to capture unobserved time-
invariant heterogeneity at the continental level. Third, it accounts for possible confounding indi-
vidual characteristics (e.g., age, gender, education, religiosity, marital status, and income). Fourth,
the research conducts regional-level analyses of the effect of potential crop yield on long-term orien-
tation, accounting for country fixed effects and thus unobserved time-invariant country-specific fac-
tors. Fifth, the research explores the determinants of time-preference in second-generation migrants,
accounting for the host country fixed effects, and thus time-invariant country-of-birth-specific fac-
tors, (e.g., geography, institutions culture), and permitting the identification of the effect of the
portable, culturally-embodied, component of geography.

3.2     Independent Variables: Potential Crop Yield and Growth Cycle
The main independent variables in this research are potential crop yield and potential crop growth
cycle in the pre-industrial era. These historical measures are constructed using data from the
Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).13
The GAEZ project supplies global estimates of crop yield and crop growth cycle for 48 crops in
grids with cells size of 50 × 50 (i.e., approximately 100 km2 ).14 For each crop, GAEZ provides
   13
    The data can be obtained from http://http://gaez.fao.org/. Data accessed on August 14, 2013.
   14
    The crops available are alfalfa, banana, barley, buckwheat, cabbage, cacao, carrot, cassava, chickpea, citrus,
coconut, coffee, cotton, cowpea, dry pea, flax, foxtail millet, greengram, groundnuts, indigo rice, maize, oat, oilpalm,


                                                          15
estimates for crop yield based on three alternative levels of inputs – high, medium, and low - and
two possible categories of sources of water supply – rain-fed and irrigation. Additionally, for each
input-water source category, it provides two separate estimates for crop yield, based on agro-climatic
conditions, that are arguably unaffected by human intervention, and agro-ecological constraints,
that could potentially reflect human intervention.
    In order to capture the conditions that were prevalent during the pre-industrial era, while
mitigating potential endogeneity concerns, this research uses the estimates of potential crop yield
and potential crop growth cycle, under low level of inputs and rain-fed agriculture – cultivation
methods that characterized early stages of development. Moreover, the estimates of potential crop
yield are based on agro-climatic constraints that are largely orthogonal to human intervention.
Thus, these restrictions remove the potential concern that the level of agricultural inputs, the
irrigation method, and soil quality, reflect endogenous choices that could be potentially correlated
with the rate of time preference.15
    The FAO data set provides for each cell in the agro-climatic grid the potential yield for each crop
(measured in tons, per year, per hectare). These estimates account for the effect of temperature
and moisture on the growth of the crop, the impact of pests, diseases and weeds on the yield, as
well as climatic related “workability constraints”. In addition, each cell provides estimates for the
growth cycle for each crop, capturing the days elapsed from the planting to full maturity.16
    In order to better capture the nutritional differences across crops, and thus to ensure compa-
rability in the measure of crop yield, the yield of each crop in the GAEZ data (measured in tons,
per hectare, per year) is converted into caloric return (measured in tens of millions of kilo calories,
per hectare, per year). This conversion is based on the caloric content of crops, as provided by the
United States Department of Agriculture Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.17 In particu-
lar, Table A.1 shows the caloric content for each crop in the GAEZ data (measured in kilo calories
per 100g). Using these estimates, a comparable measure of crop yield (in tens of millions of kilo
calories, per hectare, per year) is constructed for each crop. Based on these estimates, the analysis
assigns to each cell the crop with the highest potential yield. Thus, this comparable measure of crop
yield, facilitates the construction of estimates for the average regional crop yield and the average
regional crop growth cycle (over grid cells in a region), that reflect the average regional levels of
these two variables among crops that maximize the caloric yield in each cell. In particular, since
sedentary populations require agricultural outputs in order to support themselves, the analysis uses
olive, onion, palm heart, pearl millet, phaseolus bean, pigeon pea, rye, sorghum, soybean, sunflower, sweet potato,
tea, tomato, wetland rice, wheat, spring wheat, winter wheat, white potato, yams, giant yams, subtropical sorghum,
tropical highland sorghum, tropical lowland, sorghum, white yams.
    15
       The choice of rain-fed conditions is further justified by the fact that, although some societies had access to
irrigation prior to the industrial revolution, GAEZ’s data only provides estimates based on irrigation infrastructure
available during the late twentieth century.
    16
       In case of hibernating crops, the growth cycle captures the days elapsed from onset of post-dormancy period to
full maturity.
    17
       This paper uses revision 25 accessed on October 29, 2013.                       Data can be accessed at
http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=23635.




                                                         16
regional level averages across cells where the maximum potential crop yield is positive.18 Based on
the crops available pre- and post-1500CE the analysis constructs measures of pre-1500 potential
yield, its change post-1500 and contemporary potential yield.
    Figure 4 depicts the distribution of potential crop yield and growth cycle across global 50 × 50
grids for crops available pre-1500CE in each continent.19 Each cell in Figure 4(a) depicts the
potential yield (measured in tens of thousands of kilo calories, per hectare, per year) generated by
the crop with the highest potential yield in that cell. Higher crop yields are marked by darker cells,
while lower ones are marked by lighter ones. Similarly, Figure 4(b) shows in each cell the potential
crop growth cycle for the crop with the highest potential yield in that cell. Longer growth cycles
are marked by darker cells and shorter ones by lighter cells. Finally, Figure 4(c) shows the ratio
of crop yield to growth cycle, which measures the yield per day. Higher yields per day of growth
cycle are marked by darker cells and lower ones by lighter cells.
    As is evident from Figure 4(a), there are large regional and cross country variations in crop
yields. The regions with the highest potential pre-1500CE crop yield (i.e., those with above 16,500
tens of millions kilo calories, per year, per hectare) are located in the frontier between Argentina,
Brazil and Uruguay, and the south east of the United States. Similarly, as is evident from Figure
4(b), there are large regional and cross country variations in potential pre-1500CE crop growth
cycles. The regions with the longest growth cycles (i.e., those that requires more than 180 days)
are concentrated in Africa and regions of India.
    Figure 5 shows the correlation between the contemporary potential crop yield and growth cycles
across countries. There is a strong positive correlation between these country level averages with a
Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.78 (p < 0.01). This figure epitomizes that “Trees that are slow
to grow, bear the best fruit” (Molière).
    Importantly, potential crop yield is positively correlated with actual crop yield (Figure 6) and
thus potential crop yield serves as a proxy for actual crop yield without subjecting the analysis to
the concern of reverse causality.20
    Figure 7 shows for each cell in the world the highest yield producing crop in the pre- and the
post-1500CE era. Additionally, figure 8 shows for the whole world the set of dominating crops and
the cells where the dominating crop changed after the Columbian Exchange. It is apparent that:
(i) few crops dominated each continent in pre-1500CE era, (ii) in the post-1500 era the number
of crops expands dramatically, and (iii) the expansion in available crops changes the highest yield
producing crop in most regions of the world.21
  18
      The analysis is robust to the inclusion of cells with no potential yield as shown in table B.6 in the appendix.
  19
      Table A.2 in the appendix shows the global distribution of crops pre-1500CE.
   20
      The GAEZ data has actual crop yields for only a few crops, which precludes a meaningful two-stage least-squares
analysis.
   21
      Figure A.1 in the appendix shows the cells that changed crop for each continent. Additionally, figure B.2 shows
that selecting the highest yielding or highest return crop generates essentially the same crop selection.




                                                         17
                        (a) Potential Crop Yield (50 × 50 Grid)




                    (b) Potential Crop Growth Cycle (50 × 50 Grid)




                       (c) Potential Crop Return (50 × 50 Grid)

Figure 4: Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Returns with pre-1500CE Crops




                                          18
                 Figure 5: Potential Crop Yield and Potential Crop Growth Cycle




                            (a) Wheat                       (b) Wetland Rice




                            (c) Sorghum                         (d) Maize

                 Figure 6: Correlation between Potential and Actual Crop Yields.



3.3   Additional Controls
The analysis of the effect of crop yield on the rate of time preference highlights its central role in
the cross-cultural variation of these preferences. Clearly, crop yield might be only one of many
geographical determinants, which might also affect the reward of a longer planning horizon and
hence the formation of time preferences. Since crop yield is correlated with these other geographical
characteristics of a region, it is important to control for these confounders. In particular, absolute
latitude, average elevation, terrain roughness, distance to sea or navigable rivers, as well as islands


                                                  19
(a) Europe pre-1500CE Crops                 (b) Europe post-1500CE Crops




    (c) Africa pre-1500CE Crops          (d) Africa post-1500CE Crops




 (e) Asia pre-1500CE Crops                   (f) Asia post-1500CE Crops




(g) America pre-1500CE Crops                (h) America post-1500CE Crops

            Figure 7: Potential Crop by Region and Period.




                                  20
          (a) World pre-1500CE Crops




          (b) World post-1500CE Crops




       (c) Same Crop pre- and post1500CE

Figure 8: Potential Crop pre- and post-1500CE.




                      21
and landlocked regions may capture the effect of climatic variability, fluctuations in food supply,
and feasibility of trade on the planing horizon.
     Furthermore, unobserved continent-specific geographical and historical characteristics may have
codetermined the global distributions of time preference. For this reason, the analysis accounts for
these characteristics by the inclusion of a complete set of continental fixed effects.
     Moreover, the empirical analysis considers the confounding effect of the advent of sedentary
agriculture, as captured by the years elapsed since the onset of the Neolithic Revolution, on the
evolution of the rate of time preference. The onset of agriculture generated various conflicting
effects on the evolution of time preference. The rise of institutionalized statehood in the aftermath
of the transition to agriculture was associated with the taxation of crop yield. However, the effect
of the Neolithic Revolution on technological advancements and public investment in agricultural
infrastructure may have countered this adverse effect on the net crop yield. Thus, for a given crop
yield, an earlier onset of the agricultural revolution could be associated with either a lower or higher
rate of time preference.
     It should be noted that since the proposed theory suggests that higher crop yield had gradually
reduced the rate of time preference, the effect of crop yield, conditional on crop growth cycle,
would be stronger in regions that experienced the transition to agriculture earlier, provided that
this evolutionary process had not matured. However, all countries in the analysis experienced the
Neolithic Revolution at least 400 years ago, and the vast majority more than 3000 thousand years
ago, this effect is unlikely to be present in a rapid, culturally driven, evolutionary process.


4         Potential Crop Yield and Long-Term Orientation
          (Cross-Country Analysis)
4.1        Baseline Analysis
This section analyzes the empirical relation between crop yield, crop growth cycle, and a country
level measure of long-term orientation. In particular, it examines the effect of crop yield on the rate
of time preference, where the dependent variable is the cultural dimension identified by Hofstede
(1991) as Long-Term Orientation.22
     Hofstede (1991) is a major source of cultural dimensions and values, which have been widely
used in cross-cultural studies, management, and economics, among others. In the latest version
of these cultural dimensions dataset, Hofstede et al. (2010) define Long-Term Orientation as the
cultural value that “stands for the fostering of virtues oriented toward future rewards, in particular,
perseverance and thrift” (Hofstede et al., 2010, p.239-251). Hofstede and his collaborators have
shown that this measure is positively correlated with the importance ascribed to receiving profits in
the future, marginal savings rates, investment in real estate, math and science scores, etc. (Hofstede
et al., 2010, p.245, 266). Indeed, Figure 9 confirms the positive relation between this measure of
    22
         The most current version of the data is available at http://www.geerthofstede.nl/dimension-data-matrix.



                                                         22
          (a) GDP per capita in 2010 and LTO                (b) Schooling in 2010 and LTO




                              (c) GDP per capita growth between 1980 and
                                            2010 and LTO

                  Figure 9: Hofstede’s Long-Term Orientation and Development



Long-Term Orientation and income per capita, education, and growth.
   The Long-Term Orientation (LTO) measure varies between 0 (short-term orientation) and 100
(long-term orientation). The geographical distribution of Long-Term Orientation and crop yield for
Europe and Africa, continents that did not experience large migration and population replacements
in the last 500 years, is depicted in Figure 10. Darker tones denote high levels of Long-Term
Orientation and of crop yield, while lighter tones denote lower levels of both variables.
   Table 1 shows preliminary supporting evidence at the continental level in the Old World of
the positive relation between Long-Term Orientation, crop yield and crop daily return in the pre-
1500CE period. The table establishes that Europe and Asia have higher crop yields and shorter
growth cycles in comparison to North and Subsaharan Africa. Moreover, Europe has the highest
caloric return per day and the largest LTO, followed by Asia, North and Subsaharan Africa.
   Furthermore, for the sample of countries in the Old World, the correlation between potential
crop yield and Long-Term Orientation is 0.6 (p < 0.01), and the partial correlation between LTO
and potential crop yield and growth cycle is 0.7 (p < 0.01) and -0.5 (p < 0.01) respectively.


                                                 23
                      (a) Potential Crop Yield                      (b) Long-Term Orientation




                          (c) Potential Crop Yield              (d) Long-Term Orientation

                    Figure 10: Potential Crop Yield and Long-Term Orientation


    Table 1: Pre-1500CE Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation - Old World

                                          Top Crop                                 All Crops               LTO
        Continent          Crop        Yield      Cycle     Return         Yield    Cycle      Return
        Europe            Barley      8371.1      124.8        67.5       6116.6    111.9        52.3       65.7
        Asia               Rice       8708.5      139.3        62.5       5972.6    127.1        46.3       63.9
        North Africa      Wheat       5957.7      139.5        42.7       4645.7    133.0        34.3       13.0
        SSA                Pea        4495.3      190.2        23.4       4180.3    189.4        21.7       20.3
        Notes: Yield measured in tens of thousands of kilo calories per hectare per year, cycle in days, and
        return in tens of thousands of kilo calories per hectare per day.



   In order to explore the relation between both variables more systematically variations of the
following empirical specification are estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS):
                                                                    X                             X
  LT Oi = β0 + β1 crop yieldi + β2 crop growth cyclei +                   γ0j Xij + γ1 YSTi +           γ c δc + i ,   (29)
                                                                      j                             c




                                                          24
where LT Oi is the level of Long-Term Orientation in country i as identified by Hofstede et al.
(2010), crop yield and crop growth cycle of country i are the two measures constructed in the
previous section, Xij are additional geographical characteristics of country i, YSTi are the number
of years since country i transitioned to agriculture, δc are a complete set of continental fixed effects,
and i is the error term. The theory proposed in this paper implies that β1 > 0. In order to increase
comparability across specifications and variables, all independent variables have been normalized
by subtracting their mean and dividing them by their standard deviation, and the sample is chosen
to include all countries for which all information was available across specifications.
   The results of these OLS regressions using the potential crop yield and growth cycle measures
based on the full set of available crops in the contemporary era are shown in Table 2. Column
(1) shows the effect of crop yield on Long-Term Orientation after controlling for continental fixed
effects, that capture the effect of any unobserved time-invariant omitted variable at the continental
level. The estimated coefficient is statistically significant at the 1% and implies an economically
significant effect of crop yield. In particular, an increase of one standard deviation in crop yield
(approximately 2758 tens of millions of kilo calories per hectare per year) increases Long-Term
Orientation by 0.3 standard deviations, i.e. 7.4 percentage points. Thus, crop yield has a positive
effect on Long-Term Orientation as suggested by the theory.
   Column (2) controls for other confounding geographical characteristics of the country. In par-
ticular, a country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, its terrain roughness, its
mean distance to the sea or a navigable river, and dummies for being landlocked or an island. The
statistical and economic significance of crop yield remains, and the point estimate is higher by 2.4
units. This implies that after controlling for the effects of geography and unobserved continental
heterogeneity, one additional standard deviation in crop yield increases Long-Term Orientation by
9.8 percentage points or equivalently 0.4 standard deviations. This is the largest effect of any of
the variables included in the analysis. Furthermore, most geographical characteristics of a country
have an effect on Long-Term Orientation that is not statistically different from zero at traditional
significance levels.
   Column (3) adds years since a country experienced the Neolithic Revolution to the previous
controls. The coefficient on crop yield remains statistically significant at the 1% level and implies
that an additional standard deviation in crop yield increases Long-Term Orientation by 9.1 per-
centage points. The effect of other geographical characteristics remains smaller than the effect
of crop yield. Additionally, the effect of the timing of transition to the Neolithic is negative and
statistically significant at the 5%. Thus, one additional standard deviation in the number of years
since the transition to the Neolithic (approximately 2348 years) lowers Long-Term Orientation by
6.5 percentage points.
   Column (4) adds crop growth cycle to the set of controls. As suggested by the theory the
coefficient on crop yield remains positive and statistically significant at the 1%, while crop growth
cycle’s coefficient is negative, though not statistically different from zero. The estimated coefficient
on crop yield implies that a one standard deviation increase on crop yield increases Long-Term


                                                   25
         Table 2: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (Hofstede)

                                                                         Long-Term Orientation
                                                                   Whole World                               Old World
                                             (1)      (2)          (3)     (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)             (8)

Crop Yield                                 7.43*** 9.84*** 9.06*** 9.46***                          13.26*** 15.23***
                                           (2.48) (2.88) (2.62) (3.41)                              (2.55)   (3.58)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                  -0.70                                     -3.18
                                                                   (3.96)                                    (4.03)
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                      11.58*** 13.31***
                                                                            (2.15)   (2.94)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                        -3.15
                                                                                     (3.52)
Absolute latitude                                   2.85    1.88    1.68    4.72     3.99           4.76        3.87
                                                    (4.05) (3.85) (4.33) (3.29)      (3.63)         (4.15)      (4.71)
Mean elevation                                      4.98*   5.97** 6.09** 5.56**     5.96**         4.58        4.87
                                                    (2.87) (2.96) (3.03) (2.48)      (2.46)         (2.99)      (3.03)
Terrain Roughness                                   -6.24** -5.72** -5.72** -6.74*** -6.72***       -6.40**     -6.29**
                                                    (2.51) (2.75) (2.75) (2.53)      (2.49)         (2.83)      (2.82)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                 -6.46** -6.31**                         -4.75*      -4.08
                                                            (2.87) (3.06)                           (2.60)      (2.66)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                     -4.77** -4.31*
                                                                            (2.24)   (2.30)

Continent FE                               Yes      Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes
Additional Geographical Controls           No       Yes          Yes     Yes     Yes      Yes       Yes         Yes
Old World Sample                           No       No           No      No      No       No        Yes         Yes
Adjusted-R2                                0.54     0.60         0.62    0.61    0.66     0.66      0.61        0.61
Observations                               87       87           87      87      87       87        72          72
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop
yield, measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0 to
100, by Hofstede et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics.
Additionally, it shows that a country’s crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant effect on its
Long-Term Orientation. In particular, columns (1)-(3) show the effect of potential crop yield after controlling for the
country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of it being
landlocked or an island, and the time since it transitioned to agriculture. Columns (4)-(6) show that the effect remains
after controlling for potential crop growth cycle and the effects of migration. Columns (7)-(8) show that restraining the
analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller role, does not alter the results. Additional
geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables
have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


Orientation by 9.5 percentage points. Although the point estimates in columns (1)-(4) vary a little,
their values are not statistically different and imply an economically significant effect of crop yield
on Long-Term Orientation.
   While these results are reassuring, the proposed hypothesis suggests that it is a population’s
historical exposure to higher crop yields which generates higher Long-Term Orientation. In this



                                                            26
case, as this trait is intergenerationally transmitted, the yields experienced by individual’s ancestors
in their place of origin should affect the individual’s Long-Term Orientation, making the effect of
crop yield “portable” across space. But, this implies that migration and population replacement
introduce measurement error in the measure of crop yield. Furthermore, the theory suggests that
crop yields experienced during the pre-industrial era should determine Long-Term Orientation,
independently of any modern effect of geography or the effect of crop yields on pre-industrial
development.
   To analyze the effect that migration and population replacement might have had, columns (5)
and (6) repeat the analysis of columns (3) and (4), but ancestry adjust the crop yield, the crop
growth cycle, and the timing of transition to agriculture measures using the population migration
matrix constructed by Putterman and Weil (2010). So, for example, for each country the adjusted
crop yield is given by the weighted average of crop yield in the countries from which the ancestors
of the current population migrated from, where the weights are given by the share of population
coming from each ancestor country. This correction should mitigate the measurement error created
by cross country migrations and population replacements that have occurred in the past 500 years.
Additionally, by construction, the share of the ancestry adjusted measure determined by non-native
ancestors captures the effect of crop yield that is not determined by the country’s geographical
characteristics, but is culturally embodied.
   As can be seen in the table, the results after ancestry adjustment are similar to the previous
ones, although the point estimates are larger, suggesting the presence of measurement error in the
previous estimates. In particular, the result shown in column (6) implies that after controlling
for continental fixed effects, other geographical characteristics, the ancestry adjusted timing of
transition to the Neolithic, and the ancestry adjusted crop growth cycle, an additional standard
deviation in the crop yield experienced by the ancestors of current countries increased current levels
of Long-Term Orientation by 0.53 standard deviations, i.e. 13.3 percentage points. Figure 11(a)
shows the partial correlation plot for the specification in column (6).
   Additionally, columns (7) and (8) show the results for the sample of countries in the Old World,
where intercontinental migration and population replacement were less prevalent. Reassuringly,
the estimated effect of crop yield on Long-Term Orientation is even larger in these cases, with
each additional standard deviation in crop yield increasing Long-Term Orientation by 13.3 and
15.2 percentage points in columns (7) and (8) respectively, which are equivalent to 0.52 and 0.60
standard deviations respectively. Figure 11(b) shows the partial correlation between crop yield and
Long-Term Orientation for the specification in column (8).
   These results mitigate concerns that the positive effect of crop yield on Long-Term Orientation
is generated by measurement error, or simply captures a country’s geographical characteristics,
and suggest that as proposed by the theory, the effect of crop yield is culturally embodied. Thus,
descendants of migrant populations, who came from countries that have higher crop yields also
have higher Long-Term Orientation.




                                                  27
                (a) Ancestry Adjusted                                 (b) Old World

                   Figure 11: Long-Term Orientation and Potential Crop Yield



4.2    Natural Experiment
The geographical attributes that had contributed to crop yield in the past are likely to be con-
ducive to higher crop yield in the present. In particular, the correlation between past crop yield
and contemporary time preference may therefore reflect the direct effect of invariant geographical
attributes on contemporary economic outcomes that may be correlated with the rate of time pref-
erence. In order to overcome this potential concern, this research exploits a natural experiment
associated with the Columbian Exchange. In particular, it exploits the changes in the spectrum
of potential crops in the post-1500 period to identify the persistent effect of historical crop yield
on long-term orientation, lending credence to the hypothesis that it is the portable, culturally-
embodied, components of potential crop yield, rather than persistent geographical attributes that
affect time preference.
   The natural experiment associated with the Columbian Exchange and the random differential
assignment of superior crops to different regions of the world further permits to overcome the
potential concern about selection of high time preference individuals into geographical regions
characterized by higher agricultural return. While this selection process would not affect the
nature of the results, i.e. that variations in the return to agricultural investment across the globe is
the origin of the differences in time preferences, it reinforces the viewpoint that these geographical
conditions had a direct effect on the evolution of time preference independent of the potential initial
selection.
   In order to implement this natural experiment, for each country the analysis constructs potential
crop yield and growth cycle measures based on crops available before and after 1500CE, i.e. before
and after the Columbian Exchange. Table 3 shows the effect of pre-Columbian crop yields and
growth cycles and of the change in yields and cycles caused by the introduction of new crops
on Long-Term Orientation. Column (1) shows that conditional on the effect of continent-specific


                                                  28
Table 3: Natural Experiment: Pre-1500CE Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term
                                   Orientation (Hofstede)

                                                                                 Long-Term Orientation
                                                                          Whole World                                  Old World
                                                      (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)
Crop Yield (pre-1500)                               5.67** 5.98*** 7.28***        8.82***                       12.23***    15.21***
                                                    (2.40) (2.09) (2.29)          (3.13)                        (2.84)      (3.51)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                              7.88** 8.77***         9.83***                       7.95***     10.53***
                                                           (3.08) (2.69)          (3.11)                        (2.56)      (3.30)
Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                      -3.77                                     -7.65
                                                                                  (4.17)                                    (4.80)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                              0.16                                      0.31
                                                                                  (1.90)                                    (1.73)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                            8.62*** 10.56***
                                                                                            (2.01)  (2.35)
Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                         8.03*** 9.86***
                                                                                            (2.03)  (2.28)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                             -7.31**
                                                                                                    (3.59)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                          0.77
                                                                                                    (1.60)
Absolute latitude                                                      1.87       0.62      4.51    2.37        4.51        1.37
                                                                       (3.67)     (3.88)    (3.27) (3.03)       (4.09)      (4.26)
Mean elevation                                                         5.83**     5.42*     5.71** 4.46*        4.62        3.19
                                                                       (2.75)     (2.99)    (2.41) (2.32)       (2.97)      (3.12)
Terrain Roughness                                                      -5.61**    -5.36*    -6.55** -5.48**     -6.28**     -5.44*
                                                                       (2.74)     (2.76)    (2.53) (2.39)       (2.90)      (2.86)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                            -7.05**    -6.15**                       -5.06*      -3.46
                                                                       (2.90)     (2.96)                        (2.73)      (2.77)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                                     -5.23** -4.27*
                                                                                            (2.25) (2.23)
Continent FE                                        Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
Additional Geographical Controls                    No       No        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
Old World Sample                                    No       No        No         No        No        No        Yes         Yes
Adjusted-R2                                         0.50     0.55      0.63       0.63      0.66      0.68      0.61        0.62
Observations                                        87       87        87         87        87        87        72          72
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop yield,
measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede
et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that
a country’s potential crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant effect on its Long-Term Orientation. In
particular, columns (1)-(3) show the effect of crop yield after controlling for the country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above
sea level, terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of it being landlocked or an island, and the time since it transitioned
to agriculture. Columns (4)-(6) show that the effect remains after controlling for potential crop growth cycle and the effects of
migration. Columns (7)-(8) show that restraining the analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller
role, does not alter the results. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island
dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term
Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.



unobserved heterogeneity, an additional standard deviation in the crop yield of crops available pre-
1500CE resulted in a 5.7 percentage points increase in Long-Term Orientation in the XXth century.



                                                              29
Column (2) shows that the introduction of new crops, which allowed the attainment of higher
yields, also increased Long-Term Orientation. In particular, the effect of a one standard deviation
increase in pre-1500 crop yield is to increase Long-Term Orientation by 6 percentage points, while
the change in crop yield increases it by 7.9 percentage points. Column (3) additionally controls for
the confounding effects of a country’s other geographical characteristics and its timing of transition
to agriculture, which causes both point estimates to increase.
    Column (4) additionally controls for the effect of growth cycle for crops available pre-1500 and
its change caused by the Columbian Exchange. Reassuringly, the effect of pre-1500CE crop yield
and its change are higher than before and thus remain statistically and economically significant.
Columns (5) and (6) repeat the analysis by adjusting for the ancestry of current populations, while
columns (7) and (8) constrain the sample to the countries in the Old World. These corrections,
which lower measurement errors caused by intercontinental migration and population replacement,
raise the coefficient on both pre-1500CE yield and its change. In particular, column (8) implies that
an increase in one standard deviation in pre-1500CE crop yield increased Long-Term Orientation
by 15.2 percentage points, while an increase in one standard deviation in the change in yield caused
by the introduction of new crops increased Long-Term Orientation by 10.5 percentage points.
    The results in table 3 are reassuring, since they show that both the crop yield before 1500 and
its change post-1500 have a positive effect on Long-Term Orientation as posited by the theory. In
particular, since the coefficients on crop yield pre-1500 and its change are statistically equivalent,
it suggests that there is no selection of high time preference individuals into high return regions.
Furthermore, the historical experience with high yields remains in effect even after migration,
suggesting again that this trait is culturally-embodied and does not capture other geographical
characteristics of a country.23
    The results of this section support the theory proposed in this paper. The coefficient on poten-
tial crop yield, for crops available pre-1500CE and for the crops introduced during the post-1500
exploration period, is positive, statistically and economically significant. It suggests that increasing
crop yield by one standard deviation increases Long-Term Orientation by 0.5 standard deviations.
Furthermore, neither other geographical characteristics of a country nor its timing of the transition
to the Neolithic have a similar impact on Long-Term Orientation. Additionally, the effect of crop
yield on Long-Term Orientation is based on both its pre-1500 level and its post-1500 change as
suggested by the theory. Correction for migration suggests that crop yield’s effect is based on the
portable, culturally-embodied, components of potential crop yield.
    A possible concern of the previous results is that superior historical crop-yield could have affected
positively past economic outcomes (e.g., population density and urbanization), which persisted over
time and may have directly affected the observed rate of time preference. Moreover, the effect of
changes in crops might be associated with changes in productivity and therefore in population
density and urbanization (Nunn and Qian, 2011). Hence, accounting for historical population
  23
     Section B.1 in the appendix constrains the analysis to include only the crop data for cells in each country where
the crop used before and after 1500 changed. Reassuringly, the results remain qualitatively unchanged.



                                                         30
  Table 4: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Pre-Industrial Development

                                                                       Long-Term Orientation
                                                                      1500CE                                   1800CE
                                               Population Density       Urbanization          Both        Urbanization
                                                  (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)        11.05***          11.52***    10.01***   11.08***    9.85***   11.54***   11.54***
                                        (2.53)            (2.33)      (3.68)     (3.68)      (3.63)    (3.18)     (3.22)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)           10.76***          10.40***    8.77**     9.96***     6.54*     10.05***   10.22***
                                        (2.89)            (2.78)      (3.35)     (3.35)      (3.60)    (3.23)     (3.37)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500) -8.06*            -10.43***   -5.06      -7.30       -5.63     -8.60*     -8.75*
                                        (4.06)            (3.63)      (5.28)     (5.37)      (5.39)    (4.68)     (4.84)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500) -0.46                -1.06       1.06       0.55        1.35      0.07       0.03
                                        (1.72)            (1.84)      (2.91)     (2.95)      (2.60)    (2.37)     (2.41)
Population density in 1500 CE                             3.76**                             5.84
                                                          (1.86)                             (3.62)
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                     1.90        -1.06
                                                                                 (2.24)      (2.67)
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                      -0.57
                                                                                                                  (1.22)

                                                                                Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)               0.23***    0.25***     0.11***    0.12***     0.11***   0.20***    0.20***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                  0.16***    0.16***     0.08**     0.09***     0.04*     0.12***    0.12***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)             0.06*      0.09***     0.02       0.03        0.02      0.06*      0.06*
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)              0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00        0.00      0.00       0.00
Population density in 1500 CE                             0.05**                             0.06
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                     0.01        0.00
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                      0.00

                                                                             Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)               0.08***    0.09***     0.04***    0.04***     0.03***   0.07***    0.07***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                  0.05***    0.05***     0.03**     0.03***     0.01*     0.04***    0.04***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)             0.02*      0.03***     0.00       0.01        0.00      0.02*      0.02*
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)              0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00        0.00      0.00       0.00
Population density in 1500 CE                             0.01**                             0.02
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                     0.00        0.00
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                      0.00
Continental FE                                 Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Geography & Neolithic                          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                    0.65       0.67        0.60       0.60        0.63      0.63       0.62
Observations                                   87         87          65         65          64        79         79
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500
CE potential crop yield and potential crop growth cycle on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for
continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s level of pre-
industrial development as measured by its population density or urbanization rates in 1500 CE have economically
smaller and not always statistically significant effects. In particular, columns (1)-(2) compare the effects of potential
crop yields and population densities in 1500CE, while columns (3)-(4) use urbanization rates in 1500 CE instead.
Column (5) controls for both urbanization rates and population densities in 1500CE. Finally, columns (6)-(7) compare
the effects of crop yield pre-1500CE and its change and urbanization in 1800CE. In all columns crop yield and its
change remain positive, statistically and economically significant, and have a higher explanatory power than any of the
alternative channels. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness,
distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, mean temperature, precipitation, and shares of land in
tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting
their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of
a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and
* at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
                                                           31
density as well as urbanization, permits the analysis to isolate the portable, culturally-embodied,
components of potential crop yield, from the potential effect of the persistence of past economic
prosperity.
    In order to test for this possibility, Table 4 controls for population density and urbanization.
Column (1) shows the effect of ancestry adjusted crop yields and growth cycles pre-1500 and their
changes on Long-Term Orientation after controlling for geographical characteristics, years since
transition to agriculture, and continental fixed effects. Column (2) includes population density
in 1500 CE. The results are similar and show that pre-1500 crop yield and its change have an
economically and statistically significant effect on Long-Term Orientation, while population density
has an economically smaller and less statistically significant effect. The semi-partial R2 shows that
population density’s adds 1% to the explanatory power of the other variables, while crop yield and
its change add a joint 14%.
    Columns (3)-(4) repeat the analysis using urbanization rates in 1500 CE, while column (5)
includes both urbanization rates and population densities in 1500. The results are qualitatively
identical, although urbanization is not found to have an effect statistically different from zero, either
individually, nor when controlling for population densities. The semi-partial R2 suggests that in
this smaller sample, crop yield and its change add up to 5% to the explanatory power of the other
variables, while urbanization rates and population density have no added explanatory power.
    Finally, columns (6) and (7) compare the effect of crop yield pre-1500CE and its change while
accounting for urbanization rates in 1800CE. This controls for the possible effect of changes in
yields generated by the introduction of new crops on urbanization. Reassuringly, crop yield and its
change remain positive, statistically and economically significant, and have a higher explanatory
power as shown by the partial and semi-partial R2 . These results provide support to the theory
presented in this paper against an alternative one where higher agricultural productivity fostered
urbanization rates and population densities in the past, which themselves generated higher levels
of Long-Term Orientation, without any direct effect of crop yield.24
    Finally, the effective crop yield might be affected by climatic risks, spatial diversification, and
trade. In particular, the extent of pre-industrial trade and land might allow individuals to smooth
consumption without requiring them to delay gratification. Similarly, if agricultural investment is
risky the actual return to agricultural investment is lower. Thus, accounting for the existence of
pre-industrial media of exchange or transportation technologies, the location of pre-industrial trade
routes, land area, and climatic risk factors does not affect the results as shown in Appendix B.25
    Having established the positive, robust, and statistically and economically significant effect of
crop yield on Long-Term Orientation, it is important to note that crop yields are also positively
correlated with economic outcomes that ought to be positively affected by Long-Term Orientation.
Table 5 shows the effect of pre-1500 crop yield and its change on a country’s average years of
   24
      As established in Table B.12, the qualitative results are unchanged, if the analysis uses only grids that experienced
a change in the crop used post-1500CE.
   25
      Appendix B establishes the robustness of the results to other agricultural, cultural, and trade channels, as well
as to spatial autocorrelation, selection on unobservables, religious composition, among others.



                                                            32
                        Table 5: Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Education

                                                                          Years of Schooling in 2005
                                                        (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)             (6)
    Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 0.93***    0.90***     0.90***    0.90***     0.84***    0.88***
                                                     (0.24)     (0.30)      (0.24)     (0.29)      (0.23)     (0.28)
    Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)          -0.08      -0.05       -0.04      -0.04       0.03       0.03
                                                     (0.20)     (0.23)      (0.19)     (0.23)      (0.24)     (0.32)
    Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                               -0.05                  0.02                   0.09
                                                                (0.27)                 (0.26)                 (0.34)
    Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                        0.00                   0.02                   0.08
                                                                (0.16)                 (0.16)                 (0.17)
    Geographical Controls                            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
    Timing of Neolithic                              No         No          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
    Continental FE                                   No         No          No         No          Yes        Yes
    Adjusted-R2                                      0.52       0.51        0.53       0.52        0.59       0.58
    Observations                                     129        129         129        129         129        129
    Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE
    potential crop yield and potential crop growth cycle on its average number of years of schooling as measured by Barro and
    Lee (2013), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical controls
    include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and
    island dummies, mean temperature, precipitation, shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones,
    average precipitation, average suitability for agriculture. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting
    their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported
    in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
    two-sided hypothesis tests.



schooling, as measured by Barro and Lee (2013), after controlling for a country’s geographical
characteristics, the number of years since the Neolithic transition, pre-1500 crop growth cycle and
its change, and time-invariant continental heterogeneity. The results show that increasing the crop
yield experienced by a country’s ancestors before 1500CE by one standard deviation increases a
country’s education level in 2005 by almost one year. This implies that if the ancestors of the
country with lowest pre-1500 crop yield had instead experienced the crop yield of the country with
the highest pre-1500 yield, its population would have about 5 more years of schooling on average.26


5        Potential Crop Yield and Long-Term Orientation
         (Second-Generation Migrant Analysis)
This section analyses the effect of crop yield and crop growth cycle on the Long-Term Orientation
of second-generation migrants as reported in the European Social Survey.27 The analysis of second-
    26
      Table B.22 in the appendix shows that similar results hold if one only considers the pre-1500 crop yield over cells
that experienced a change in crop. Table B.23 in the appendix shows that a country’s income per capita and its gross
domestic savings rate are positively correlated with the pre-1500 crop yield measure. The expected positive relation
between crop yield in the past and current economic outcomes is confounded by the direct negative correlation that
current agriculture has with development. Since a more complete analysis of this relation is outside the scope of this
paper it will not be investigated further at this time.
   27
      The Long-Term Orientation measure used in this section is based on the answer to the question “Do you generally
plan for your future or do you just take each day as it comes?” taken from the “Timing of Life” module in the third



                                                               33
generation migrants accounts for time invariant unobserved heterogeneity in the host country (e.g.,
geographical and institutional characteristics). Moreover, since crop yield in the parental country
of origin is distinct from the crop yield in the country of residence, the estimated effect of crop yield
in the country of origin captures the culturally embodied, intergenerationally transmitted effect of
crop yield on long-term orientation, rather than the direct effect of geography.
    The sample of second-generation migrants is composed by all respondents who were born in
the country where the interview was conducted, and whose parents were not born in that country.
Tables B.32 and B.33 in the appendix show the correlation between this measure and the respon-
dent’s completed number of years of schooling and total household income in wave 3 of the survey.
Reassuringly, both income and education are strongly positively correlated with this measure of
Long-Term Orientation, which suggests it is indeed capturing elements of time preference.
    The following empirical specification is estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS),

                     LT Oic =β0 + β1 crop yieldip + β2 crop growth cycleip
                                                                                                                (30)
                                X                          X            X
                             +     γ0j Xipj + γ1 YSTip +      γ2j Yij +    γ c δc + i ,
                                     j                            j              c


where LT Oic is the Long-Term Orientation measure of second-generation migrant i in country
c, crop yieldip and crop growth cycleip are the measures in the country of origin of parent p of
individual i, Xipj are other geographical characteristics of the country of origin of parent p of
individual i, YSTip are the years since the country of origin of parent p of individual i transitioned
to agriculture, Yij are characteristics of individual i (sex, age, education, marital status, health
status, religiosity),28 δc is a complete set of host country of agent i fixed effects, and i is the error
term. The theory proposed in this paper implies that the estimates of the coefficient on crop yield
should satisfy β1 > 0. As before, all independent variables have been normalized by subtracting
their mean and dividing them by their standard deviation, and the sample is chosen to include all
individuals for whom all information was available across specifications.
    The OLS estimates from this analysis are presented in Table 6. All columns control for an
individual’s sex and age and its squared, and include host country fixed effects. Columns (1)-(5)
use the values of crop yield, crop growth cycle, all additional geographical controls, and the timing
of transition to agriculture of the individual’s mother’s country of origin.29 Columns (6)-(8) use
only the sample of individuals whose parents come from the same country. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors are clustered at the parent’s country of origin and shown in parenthesis.
    Column (1) shows that after controlling for an individual’s sex and age, and any time-invariant
unobservable host country factors, an additional standard deviation crop yield in the individual’s
mother’s country of origin, increases the individual’s Long-Term Orientation by 3.1 percentage
wave of the European Social Survey, and is again measured between 0 (short term-orientation) and 100 (Long-Term
Orientation). The original answers were normalized to ensure comparability with the analysis of the previous section.
   28
      Inclusion of individuals’ incomes in the regression does not alter the results, but reduces the sample size by
almost 50%.
   29
      Using the father’s country of origin generates similar results.



                                                         34
points. Column (2) shows that controlling for an individual’s level of education, marital and health
status, and religiosity, does not alter the results. The coefficient on crop yield remains statistically
significant at the 1% level and increasing crop yield by one standard deviation increases Long-Term
Orientation by 3.3 percentage points.
   Column (3) additionally controls for other geographical characteristics of the country of origin
of the mother and for its years since the transition to the Neolithic. The geographical controls
included are the country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, its terrain roughness,
its mean distance to the sea or navigable river, and dummies for being landlocked or an island.
The coefficient on crop yield doubles in size and remains statistically significant at the 1% level. As
in the analysis of the previous section, crop yield has the largest effect on Long-Term Orientation
among all geographical controls. In particular, increasing crop yield by one standard deviation
in the country of origin of the mother increases an individual’s Long-Term Orientation by 6.1
percentage points.
   Column (4) includes crop growth cycle in the specification of column (3). The effect of crop
growth cycle is again negative, but not statistically different from zero. On the other hand, crop
yield remains statistically significant at the 1% level and its point estimate increases by 1 unit.
Thus, after controlling for individual’s characteristics, host country fixed effects, other geographical
characteristics of the mother’s country of origin and its crop growth cycle, an increase in one
standard deviation in crop yield generates an increase of 7.2 percentage points on an individuals
Long-Term Orientation. Column (5) repeats the analysis of column (4), but uses the mother’s
ancestry adjusted crop return, crop growth cycle, and years since transition to agriculture. As can
be seen there, the results remain qualitatively unchanged, and the coefficient on crop yield increases
to 8 and is statistically significant at the 1% level.
   In order to avoid the difference between fathers and mothers, columns (6)-(8) focus on indi-
viduals whose parents came from the same country of origin. Column (6) repeats the analysis of
columns (4) using only this restricted sample. The coefficient on crop yield is 6 and is close to
being significant at the 1% level. On the other hand, none of the other geographical controls, the
timing of transition to the Neolithic, nor crop growth cycle are statistically significant.
   Column (7) adjusts crop yield, crop growth cycle, and the timing of the transition to the
Neolithic for the ancestry of the current inhabitants of the parents country of origin. Again,
this should correct for any mismeasurement caused by migration and population replacement that
occurred during the last 500 years. Reassuringly, the results remain qualitatively unchanged. None
of the geographical characteristics of parents’ country of origin nor its ancestry adjusted timing
of the transition to the Neolithic have an effect that is statistically different from zero. On the
other hand, the crop yield of the ancestors of the parents’ country of origin has a statistically and
economically significant effect. The results imply that increasing the ancestry adjusted crop yield of
an individual’s parents’ country of origin increases their Long-Term Orientation by 7.1 percentage
points.
   Finally, column (8) restricts the sample to the individuals whose parents came from the same


                                                   35
  Table 6: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation in
                                 Second-Generation Migrants

                                                                       Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                              Country of Origin
                                                                     Mother                                    Parents
                                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)

Crop Yield                                     3.12*** 3.27*** 6.07*** 7.16***                        5.97**             8.22***
                                               (1.17)  (1.23)  (2.10)  (2.23)                         (2.65)             (3.05)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                      -3.26                          -2.05              -2.23
                                                                       (2.12)                         (2.21)             (2.56)
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                                     7.95***             7.12**
                                                                                           (2.24)              (2.72)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                              -3.50               -2.39
                                                                                           (2.20)              (2.38)
Absolute latitude                                                    3.46**     2.77*      3.03*      3.70     4.13*     3.84*
                                                                     (1.57)     (1.63)     (1.60)     (2.23)   (2.20)    (2.22)
Mean elevation                                                       -0.07      -0.55      -0.47      -0.06    0.17      0.95
                                                                     (1.40)     (1.29)     (1.32)     (1.54)   (1.54)    (1.46)
Terrain Roughness                                                    3.87**     4.16**     4.25**     2.65*    2.77*     3.60**
                                                                     (1.73)     (1.67)     (1.67)     (1.39)   (1.43)    (1.35)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                          -1.66      -1.23                 0.09               -1.74
                                                                     (1.66)     (1.57)                (1.69)             (1.78)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                                    -1.76               -0.67
                                                                                           (1.63)              (1.77)

Country FE                                     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
Sex & Age                                      Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
Other Ind. Chars.                              No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
Additional Geographical Controls               No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes
Old World Sample                               No         No         No         No         No         No       No        Yes
R2                                             0.06       0.10       0.12       0.12       0.12       0.15     0.15      0.15
Observations                                   705        705        705        705        705        566      566       557
Notes: This table establishes that the potential crop yield in the country of origin of first generation migrants in Europe
has a positive, statistically, and economically significant effect on the Long-Term Orientation of their foreign born children.
Long-term orientation is measured on a scale of 0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your
future or do you just take each day as it comes?”.The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey
(2006). The analysis is restricted to second-generation migrants, i.e. individuals who were born in the country where the
interview was done, but whose parents were born overseas and migrated to that country. All columns include fixed effects for
the country where the interview was conducted, and individual characteristics (sex, age, education, marital status, health
status, religiosity). Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies.
In columns (1)-(4) the potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and geographical characteristics of the country of
origin of the mother are used as controls. Column (5) uses the data of the father’s country of origin, while columns (6)-(7)
restricts the sample to individuals whose parents come from the same country of origin. All independent variables have
been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared
and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity
robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country of origin level; *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                              36
country in the Old World. This minimizes any measurement error generated by migration and
population replacement. Reassuringly, the coefficient on crop yield remains statistically significant
at the 5% level and implies that an increase of one standard deviation in the crop yield in the
country of origin of an individual’s parents increases her Long-Term Orientation by 8.2 percentage
points. On the other hand, as before the effect of all other geographical characteristics, the timing
of the Neolithic, and crop growth cycle remains not statistically different from zero.




               (a) Column (1)              (b) Column (2)               (c) Column (3)




               (d) Column (4)                 (e) Column (5)                (f) Column (6)




                             (g) Column (7)                (h) Column (8)

   Figure 12: Average Marginal Effects of Potential Crop Yield on Long-Term Orientation of
                                Second-Generation Migrants


   The Long-Term Orientation measure is constructed based on a survey question where individuals
answered on a scale from 0 to 100 in intervals of 10. The OLS estimates presented in table 6
assume that the distance between those intervals is meaningful and that the length of all intervals
represents the same difference in Long-Term Orientation. Since this cardinality assumption might
not be adequate, since the scale might only capture the qualitative order of preferences, table B.34
in the appendix replicates the analysis and estimates the effect of the different variables using an
ordered probit regression.
   Ordered probit estimates the probability of observing each level of Long-Term Orientation given

                                                   37
the values of the independent variables. The estimated parameters, presented in table B.34, have
the same sign and significance pattern found with OLS. Although this is reassuring, the interpre-
tation of the coefficients is not straightforward. In order to better understand the implications of
these parameters, figure 12 presents the average marginal effects of crop yield for each level of the
Long-Term Orientation for all the specifications in table B.34. Each figure measures Long-Term
Orientation on the horizontal axis and the average marginal effect of crop yield with its 95% confi-
dence interval on the vertical axis. As can be seen there, the average marginal effect of crop yield
is negative for low values of Long-Term Orientation and increases monotonically until it becomes
positive for high values of Long-Term Orientation. This implies that increasing crop yield decreases
the probability of observing low values of Long-Term Orientation and increases the probability of
observing high values of Long-Term Orientation. Thus, as crop yield increases, the probability
distribution of Long-Term Orientation shifts rightwards. This is equivalent to saying that the
probability distribution of Long-Term Orientation with crop yield r is first order stochastically
dominated by the probability distribution of Long-Term Orientation with crop yield r + 1.
     Following the methodology of section 4, tables B.35 and B.36 in the appendix show the effect of
crop yield pre-1500 and its post-1500 change on Long-Term Orientation. As can be seen there, the
coefficient of crop yield pre-1500 is highly statistically and economically significant. Furthermore,
it is the only geographical characteristic of the parents’ country of origin that has an effect that is
statistically significantly different from zero. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in the
pre-1500 crop yield experienced by ancestors of the mother’s country of origin increases a second-
generation migrant’s Long-Term Orientation by about 7.3 percentage points. This highlights the
fact that as suggested by the theory, the effect of crop yield is the culturally embodied and rooted
in the historical experience during the pre-1500CE period that matters for Long-Term Orientation.
Additionally, table B.37 shows that using the survey design weights in the analysis does not alter
the results. Furthermore, as can be seen in that table, weighing the regression to ensure that
each country of origin is equally represented, increases the coefficients on crop yield, increasing the
economic significance of the result.


6        Potential Crop Yield and Long-Term Orientation
         (Individual-Level Analysis)
This section uses the World Values Survey (WVS) to analyze the effect of crop yield and crop
growth cycle on (i) individuals’ Long-Term Orientation, and (ii) on the share of individuals in a
region who are long-term oriented.30 Given that the dependent variable in the individual analysis
is binary, the empirical analysis estimates the effect of crop yield and crop growth cycle using both
    30
     The measure of Long-Term Orientation is based on the following question of the WVS: “Here is a list of qualities
that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you consider to be especially important?” An
individual is considered to have Long-Term Orientation if she answered “Thrift, saving money and things” as an
especially important quality children should learn at home.




                                                         38
the linear probability and probit models. In particular, the general empirical specification is

             LT Oircw =β0 + β1 crop yieldrc + β2 crop growth cyclerc
                                                                                                  (31)
                          X                         X                X
                       +     γ0j Xrc + γ1 YSTrc +       γ2j Yircwj +   γcw δcw + ircw ,
                             j                        j              cw


where LT Oircw ∈ {0, 1} denotes the Long-Term Orientation of individual i of region r in country
c during wave w of the WVS; crop yieldrc and crop growth cyclerc are the measures in region r of
country c; Xrc are other geographical characteristics of region r in country c; YSTrc are the years
since the region r in country c transitioned to agriculture; Yircwj are characteristics of individual
i (sex, age, education, income) in region r of country c during wave w; δcw is a complete set of
continent or country, and wave fixed effects; and ircw is the error term. The theory proposed in this
paper implies that the estimate of the coefficient on crop yield should satisfy β1 > 0. As before, all
independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing them by their
standard deviation, and the sample is chosen to include all individuals for which all information was
available across specifications. Additionally, heteroskedasticity robust standard errors clustered by
wave-region and individual characteristics are employed.
   The results of estimating equation (31) using OLS at the country level is shown in Table 7.
That is, every variable for region r in country c is given the country level value of the variable.
Thus, no country-subregional level differences are exploited in the identification of the effect. All
columns include fixed effects for the WVS wave in which the interview was conducted.
   Column (1) shows that after controlling for wave fixed effects, increasing the country’s crop
yield by one standard deviation increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by
3.6 percentage points. Column (2) shows that controlling for any unobserved continental level
heterogeneity does not alter the result. Even more, it increases the estimate of the effect of crop
yield so that one standard deviation increase in crop yield increases the probability of having
Long-Term Orientation to 4.1 percentage points.
   Accounting for a country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness,
distance to the sea or navigable river, and it being landlocked or an island, column (3), and its
years since transition to agriculture, column (4), increases further the coefficient on crop yield,
which remains statistically and economically significant. In particular, increasing crop yield by
one standard deviation increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by 5.5 and 5.1
percentage points in columns (3) and (4) respectively.
   Column (5) additionally controls for the individual’s gender, age, income, and education levels.
Reassuringly, the result is robust to controlling for individual characteristics. Thus, after control-
ling for wave and continental fixed effects, country’s geographical characteristics, and individual’s
characteristics, increasing crop yield by one standard deviation increases the probability of having
Long-Term Orientation by 4.8 percentage points.
   The inclusion of crop growth cycle as a control, column (6), lowers the effect of crop yield on
the probability of having Long-Term Orientation to 2.7 percentage points per additional standard


                                                 39
                         Table 7: Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis)

                                                                                                 Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                       Whole World                                           Old World
                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)                     (8)

     Crop Yield                                   0.036***    0.041***     0.055***     0.051***      0.048***     0.027***                  0.055***
                                                  (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)                   (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                                                                             0.030***                  0.024***
                                                                                                                   (0.003)                   (0.003)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                                                                     0.048***
                                                                                                                                (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                                                              0.017***
                                                                                                                                (0.003)
     Absolute latitude                                                     -0.014***    -0.021***     -0.024***    -0.013***    -0.004*      0.003
                                                                           (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
     Mean elevation                                                        0.003        0.012***      0.008***     0.002        0.007***     0.002
                                                                           (0.002)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.003)
     Terrain Roughness                                                     -0.021***    -0.021***     -0.016***    -0.017***    -0.024***    -0.028***
                                                                           (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)




40
     Neolithic Transition Timing                                                        -0.032***     -0.039***    -0.041***                 -0.029***
                                                                                        (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)                   (0.002)
     Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                                                                    -0.035***
                                                                                                                                (0.002)

     Wave FE                                      Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     Continent FE                                 No          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     Additional Geographical Controls             No          No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     Individual Characteristics                   No          No           No           No            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
     Old World Subsample                          No          No           No           No            No           No           No           Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                  0.01        0.02         0.03         0.03          0.04         0.04         0.04         0.05
     Observations                                 217953      217953       217953       217953        217953       217953       217953       176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term
     Orientation. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns
     include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the
     country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. Individual
     Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole world sample, while column (8) shows the results for the
     Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
     be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard
     error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
deviation in return. At the same time, the estimated effect of crop growth cycle is positive, and
statistically and economically significant. In particular, it implies that a one standard deviation
increase in crop growth cycle increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by 3
percentage points. As explained before, the counterintuitive positive effect of crop growth cycle on
individual’s long-term orientation could be generated by the positive correlation between potential
yields and growth cycles or by the mitigating effect of growth cycles on long-term orientation.
    Clearly, the migration and population replacements that occurred in the last 500 years cause
measurement error. Columns (7) and (8) deal with this possibility by using ancestry adjustments for
crop yield, crop growth cycle, and years since transition, column (7); and constraining the sample
to include only individuals interviewed in the countries in the Old World, column (8). The results
show a higher effect of crop yield, namely every additional standard deviation in crop yield increases
the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by 4.8 and 5.5 percentage points respectively in
columns (7) and (8). At the same time, the coefficient on crop growth cycle falls, to 0.017 and 0.24
respectively, but remains statistically significant at the 1% level. These results as well as the ones
based on second-generation migrants suggest that the effect of crop yield is culturally-embodied
and that the crop yield faced by individuals ancestors plays a crucial role in the determination of
an individuals preferences.31
    These same empirical specifications, estimated using a probit model, are shown in Table B.38
in the appendix. The table shows the average marginal effects of all controls. The results remain
unchanged and suggest that after controlling for wave and continental fixed effects, individual’s
characteristics, country’s geographical characteristics, and ancestry adjusted crop growth cycle and
years since transition to the Neolithic, an increase of one standard deviation in the crop yield faced
by their ancestors increases the probability of an individual having Long-Term Orientation by 4.8
percentage points.
    Following the methodology of section 4, tables 8 and B.39 show that using the pre-1500 crop
yield and its change does not affect the results. As can be seen there, the effect of the yield of
crops available pre-1500 and its change is positive , statistically and economically significant. In
particular, after controlling for continent specific unobservables, country’s geographical character-
istics and timing of the transition to the Neolithic, and individual characteristics, an increase of one
standard deviation in ancient crop yield increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation
between 3 and 7 percentage points, while one additional standard deviation in the change in crop
yield raises it between 3 and 6 percentage points. Additionally, table B.40 in the appendix also
shows that the results are robust to the weighting scheme used.
    The rest of this section analyzes Long-Term Orientation at the sub-regional level. It is im-
portant to highlight some issues present in this analysis due to missing data and the possibility
of measurement error. First, not all regions in all countries can be identified with the data in
the WVS. This implies that within country variation might be small for some countries, so that
  31
    Clearly, this type of measurement error biases the coefficient on crop yield downwards and lowers its size by
almost 50%. See also appendix B.12.



                                                       41
                  Table 8: Pre-1500 Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis)

                                                                                                   Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                                 Whole World                                               Old World
                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)               (8)

     Crop Yield (pre-1500)                               0.025***      0.040***      0.036***      0.032***      0.032***      0.031***                    0.066***
                                                         (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.002)                     (0.003)
     Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                                                               0.053***      0.054***                    0.055***
                                                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)                     (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                                                              -0.007**                    -0.018***
                                                                                                                               (0.003)                     (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                                                                      0.025***                    0.026***
                                                                                                                               (0.002)                     (0.002)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                                                                        0.043***
                                                                                                                                             (0.002)
     Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                                                                     0.041***
                                                                                                                                             (0.002)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                                                                 -0.005*




42
                                                                                                                                             (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                                                              0.018***
                                                                                                                                             (0.002)

     Wave FE                                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Continent FE                                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Geographical Controls & Neolithic                   No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Individual Characteristics                          No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
     Old World Subsample                                 No            No            No            No            No            No            No            Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                         0.02          0.02          0.02          0.04          0.04          0.04          0.05          0.05
     Observations                                        217953        217953        217953        217953        217953        217953        217953        176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term
     Orientation. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns
     include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the
     country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. Individual
     Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole world sample, while column (8) shows the results for the
     Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
     be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard
     error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
the inclusion of country fixed effects might not leave any unexplained variation. Second, for the
identified regions, not all variables can be constructed for that level of aggregation. In particular,
there is no regional measure of the years since a region transitioned to agriculture. Third, given
that the population migration matrix of Putterman and Weil (2010) is constructed at the country
level, ancestry adjusting the regional measures of crop yield and crop growth cycle cannot be done
at the regional level or can be done only imperfectly. Namely, it would have to be assumed that
all immigrants from overseas are allocated to all regions in a country uniformly. Furthermore, all
emigrants from a specific country would need to be assumed to come uniformly from the regions in
that country. Thus, the ancestry adjusted measures in regions within a country would differ only
by the fraction of the population that is native and the difference in the regions’ measures. Fourth,
besides overseas migration, one cannot account for internal migration within a country. Thus,
individuals born in a different region, who migrated to the region of interview will be erroneously
assigned the measure for the region of interview. As shown in appendix B.12 the measurement
error generated by internal migration biases the estimated coefficient towards zero and increases
its standard error. This issue is present even at low internal migration rates. Fifth, the size of
regions varies a lot within and across countries. Since crop yields and growth cycles do not vary
across too small areas, within country variation might again be small. These issues suggest that
once country fixed effects are included in the analysis, the coefficient might be downward biased
and its statistical significance might be small.
   Taking these caveats into account, table 9 shows the results of using regional level data to
perform the same analysis of table 7. In particular, columns (1)-(4) control for wave and continental
time invariant unobservable characteristics, region’s geographical characteristics, and individual
characteristics. The results imply that increasing regional crop yield by one standard deviation
increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by around 4 percentage points. This
is similar to the results in tables 7 and B.41 when country level measures are used. Column (5)
additionally controls for crop growth cycles in the specification of column (4). The results remain
qualitatively unchanged with the coefficient on crop yield remaining statistically significant at the
1% level.
   Column (6) shows that after controlling for time invariant country specific unobservable factors,
wave fixed effects, regional geographical characteristics, and individual characteristics the effect of
crop yield and crop growth cycle remain statistically significant. In particular, the coefficient on
crop growth cycle becomes negative and statistically significant at the 1% level, while the coeffi-
cient on crop yield remains positive and statistically significant at the 5% level. Still, the size of
the coefficient on crop yield falls by about 80%, which was expected given the various sources of
measurement error highlighted above. The estimated coefficient implies that an additional standard
deviation in the region’s crop yield would increase the probability of having Long-Term Orientation
by 0.7 percentage points. This small effect can be considered a lower bound generated by measure-
ment error. If the changes in the size of the coefficient caused by ancestry adjustments and the
Monte Carlo simulation in appendix B.12 are any guide, one can expect the true effect to be many


                                                   43
                         Table 9: Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Regional Analysis)

                                                                                            Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                              Whole World                                                        Old World
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)                    (8)

     Crop Yield                             0.036***      0.040***      0.041***       0.039***      0.036***       0.007**        0.060***      0.008**
                                            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                                                               0.006**        -0.008**       0.001         -0.007
                                                                                                     (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.004)
     Absolute Latitude                                                  0.007***       0.006**       0.008***       0.031***       0.013***      0.036***
                                                                        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.006)        (0.003)       (0.008)
     Mean Elevation                                                     -0.013***      -0.012***     -0.012***      0.003          -0.002        0.011***
                                                                        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.004)
     Terrain Roughness                                                  0.011***       0.012***      0.010***       -0.009***      -0.020***     -0.017***
                                                                        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)




44
     Wave FE                                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Continent FE                           No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            No             Yes           No
     Additional Geographical Controls       No            No            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Individual Characteristics             No            No            No             Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Country FE                             No            No            No             No            No             Yes            No            Yes
     Old World Subsample                    No            No            No             No            No             No             Yes           Yes
     Adjusted-R2                            0.01          0.02          0.03           0.04          0.04           0.08           0.05          0.08
     Observations                           185659        185659        185659         185659        185659         185659         151299        151299
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term
     Orientation across regions, accounting of country fixed effects. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child
     quality in the World Values Survey. All columns include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle,
     and all other geographical controls refer to the region where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include percentage of land within
     100 kms. of sea, landlocked dummy, and area suitable for agriculture. Individual Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(6) show
     the results for the whole world sample, while columns (7)-(8) show the results for the Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by
     subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the
     independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region
     of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
     hypothesis tests.
times larger.
   Column (7) repeats the analysis of column (5), but constrains the sample to include only regions
in the Old World in order to decrease the measurement error caused by intercontinental migration
and population replacement. Doing so increases the size of the coefficient on crop yield by almost
100%, while the coefficient on crop growth cycle becomes zero. Thus, increasing a region’s crop
yield by one standard deviation increases the probability of having Long-Term Orientation by 5.9
percentage points.
   Column (8) presents the results of the same exercise as column (6) constrained to the Old World.
The results show that the point estimates for both crop yield and crop growth cycle increase. This
might again be driven by the fact that by constraining the set, some the measurement error is
lowered. Still, the coefficient on crop yield in columns (7) is about 7 times the size of the one in
column (8), which suggests that most of the measurement error is still present, or that there is not
enough within country variation to identify the effect. In effect, since internal migration has been
experienced by countries all over the world, it is not surprising to find that the estimated coefficient
and the fall in its size is similar for the Old World and full samples.
   The results are robust to the estimation method, since using a probit model for the same
specifications of table 9 does not alter the results. Table B.43 presents the average marginal
effects of crop yield, crop growth cycle, and the regional geographical characteristics. As can be
seen, the results remain qualitatively unchanged. The average marginal effect of crop yield is
positive, statistically significant at the 1% level, and economically significant after controlling for
other geographical characteristics, individual characteristics, crop growth cycle, and continental
and wave fixed effects. In particular, the results for the Old World sample presented in column
(7) imply that an additional standard deviation of crop yield increases the probability of having
Long-Term Orientation by 5.9 percentage points. Also, once country fixed effect are included, the
estimated effect of crop yield remains positive and statistically significant at the 5% level, although
its size falls to about 1/7 of its size without country fixed effects. As before, this could be caused
by measurement error caused by internal migration.
   In addition to the previous analysis of the effect of crop yield on individual’s preferences, this
section also analyzes its effect on the regional level of Long-Term Orientation. In particular, using
the answers for each individual, a regional level of Long-Term Orientation is created, by assigning
to each region the share of respondents that have Long-Term Orientation. This overcomes possible
concerns that the previous results are driven by omitted individual characteristics or idiosyncratic
shocks.
   The results of this analysis are shown in Table 10. Column (1) shows that after controlling
for continental fixed effects, increasing a regions crop yield by one standard deviation increases its
share of population with Long-Term Orientation by 4.9 percentage points. Additionally controlling
for the effect of a region’s other geographical characteristics, column (2), does not alter the results,
and the coefficient on crop yield remains statistically significant at the 1% level. Column (3)
adds a region’s crop growth cycle as a control. Doing so increases the estimated effect of crop


                                                  45
                          Table 10: Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation in WVS Regions

                                                                     Share of Individuals in WVS Region with Long-Term Orientation
                                                                                      Whole World                                                        Old World
                                                     Unweighted                               Weighted: Area                 Weighted: Area Share      Area       Share
                                            (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)        (11)        (12)

     Crop Yield                           0.049*** 0.046*** 0.053***              0.097***                0.032**             0.031**                0.039***     0.032**
                                           (0.012) (0.013) (0.017)                 (0.033)                (0.012)             (0.013)                 (0.015)     (0.013)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                        -0.010              -0.047**               -0.024**            -0.036***               -0.027***   -0.036***
                                                             (0.012)               (0.021)                (0.010)             (0.009)                 (0.009)     (0.008)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                            0.077***              0.133***                0.043**              0.041**
                                                                        (0.020)               (0.032)                (0.017)              (0.017)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                       -0.012              -0.050***              -0.027***            -0.037***
                                                                        (0.013)               (0.018)                (0.009)              (0.009)




46
     Absolute Latitude                              -0.015    -0.018     -0.003    -0.017       0.010     -0.047      -0.047  -0.005       -0.006      -0.047      -0.055
                                                   (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.020)   (0.043)     (0.043)    (0.057)     (0.056) (0.037)      (0.036)     (0.063)     (0.036)
     Mean Elevation                                 -0.012    -0.012     -0.013    -0.002      -0.014      0.014       0.015  -0.007       -0.006      0.019       -0.008
                                                   (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.013)   (0.026)     (0.027)    (0.024)     (0.024) (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.032)     (0.008)
     Terrain Roughness                               0.016   0.018*       0.006     0.019       0.010     -0.020      -0.021   0.001        0.000      -0.023       0.006
                                                   (0.010)   (0.011)    (0.011)   (0.023)     (0.025)    (0.031)     (0.031) (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.039)     (0.015)

     Continental FE                        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes         No          No       No          No          No          No
     Country FE                             No       No        No        No         No          No        Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Additional Geographical Controls       No      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Old World Sample                       No       No        No        No         No          No         No          No       No          No         Yes         Yes
     Weighted by Region Area                No       No        No        No        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       No          No         Yes          No
     Weighted by Region’s Share of Area     No       No        No        No         No          No         No          No      Yes         Yes          No         Yes
     Adjusted-R2                           0.22     0.25      0.25      0.28       0.28        0.37       0.72        0.72     0.86        0.86        0.72        0.86
     Observations                          1356     1356      1356      1356       1356        1356       1356        1356     1356        1356        1143        1143
yield implying that a one standard deviation increase in a region’s crop yield increases its share of
population with Long-Term Orientation by 5.3 percentage points. Additionally, the coefficient on
crop growth cycle is negative, but not statistically different from zero. Similarly, no other regional
geographical characteristic has an effect on a region’s Long-Term Orientation that is statistically
different from zero.
   Column (4) corrects the crop yield and crop growth cycle measures for intercontinental migration
and population replacements. As explained above, this is done by assuming that all immigrants into
a country are uniformly distributed across regions in the receiving country, and come uniformly from
the regions of the country of origin. As before, this ancestry adjustment increases the absolute size
of both coefficients, although the coefficient on crop growth cycle remains not statistically different
from zero. The ancestry adjusted effect of crop yield implies that an increase of one standard
deviation in the crop yield experienced by the ancestors of the population of a region increases its
share of population that has Long-Term Orientation by 7.7 percentage points.
   Columns (5) and (6) repeat the analysis of columns (3) and (4), but weigh regions importance in
the regression according to their area. Thus, larger regions are given more weight in the regression
than smaller ones. This helps to take into account that larger regions are easier to identify and thus
their crop measures might be more accurate. Also, since migration out of a larger region is more
difficult than from smaller ones, it might lower the measurement error caused by internal migration.
As can be seen there, by assigning more importance to regions with larger areas, the size of the
coefficient on crop yield doubles in size and the coefficient on crop growth cycle increases almost
five-fold. In particular, the results in column (6) imply that an additional standard deviation in crop
yield increases a region’s share of population with Long-Term Orientation by 13.3 percentage points,
while an additional standard deviation in crop growth cycle decreases it by 5 percentage points.
Interestingly, the effect of all other geographical characteristics remains statistically insignificant
at traditional significance levels.
   Columns (7) and (8) control for time invariant country level unobservable heterogeneity in the
specifications of columns (5) and (6). As before, the coefficients fall by more then 50% on both crop
yield and crop growth cycle. Still, the effect of both variables remains statistically and economically
significant, with the share of population with Long-Term Orientation in column (8) changing by
4.3 and -2.7 percentage points for each additional standard deviation in crop yield and crop growth
cycle respectively.
   Columns (9) and (10) repeat the analysis of columns (7) and (8), but weigh regions according
to the share of their area within the country. As can be seen there, the results are qualitatively
unchanged by this different weighting scheme. Finally, columns (11) and (12) show the results for
both weighting schemes when the sample is constrained to countries in the Old World. Again, the
effect of both crop yield and crop growth cycle have the expected signs, are statistically significant
at the 5% level, and also economically significant with effects similar to the ones found previously.




                                                  47
7      Concluding Remarks
This research explores the origins of the distribution of time preference across regions. It advances
the hypothesis and establishes empirically, that geographical variations in natural land productiv-
ity and their impact on the return to agricultural investment have had a persistent effect on the
distribution of long-term orientation across societies. In particular, exploiting a natural experiment
associated with the expansion of suitable crops for cultivation in the course of the Columbian Ex-
change, the research establishes that agro-climatic characteristics in the pre-industrial era that were
conducive to higher return to agricultural investment, triggered selection and learning processes
that had a persistent positive effect on the prevalence of long-term orientation in the contemporary
era.
    The empirical analysis exploits an exogenous source of variation in potential crop yield and
potential crop growth cycle across the globe to establish a positive, statistically and economically
significant effect of higher pre-industrial crop yields on various measures of long-term orientation
at the country, region, and individual levels. Moreover, it exploits the changes in the spectrum of
potential crops in the post-1500 period to identify the persistent historical effect of crop yield on
long-term orientation.
    Consistent with the predictions of the theory, the empirical analysis establishes that indeed
higher potential crop yields in the pre-industrial era increased the long-term orientation of individ-
uals in the modern period. The analysis establishes this result in four layers: (i) a cross-country
analysis of variations in time preference, that accounts for the confounding effects of a large number
of geographical controls, the onset of the Neolithic Revolution, as well as continental fixed effects;
(ii) within-country analysis across second-generation migrants, that accounts for the host country
fixed effects, the sending country’s geographical characteristics as well as migrants’ individual char-
acteristics, such as gender, age, and education, (iii) a cross-country individual level analysis that
accounts for the country’s geographical characteristics as well as individuals’ characteristics, such
as income and education; (iv) cross-regional individual level analysis that accounts for the region’s
geographical characteristics, individuals’ characteristics, such as income and education, and coun-
try fixed-effects; and (v) cross-regional analysis that accounts for the confounding effects of a large
number of geographical controls, as well as country fixed-effects.




                                                  48
A   Supporting Material

                Table A.1: Caloric content of 48 crops (and their variants)

           Crop         Energy†                  Crop                            Energy†
       Alfalfa              0.23    Palm Heart                                             1.15
       Banana               0.89    Pearl Millet                                           3.78
       Barley               3.52    Phaseolus Bean                                         3.41
       Buckwheat            3.43    Pigeon Pea                                             3.43
       Cabbage              0.25    Rye                                                    3.38
       Cacao                5.98    Sorghum                                                3.39
       Carrot               0.41    Soybean                                                4.46
       Cassava               1.6    Sunflower                                              5.84
       Chick Pea            3.64    Sweet Potato                                           0.86
       Citrus               0.47    Tea                                                    0.01
       Coconut              3.54    Tomato                                                 0.18
       Coffee               0.01    Wetland Rice                                            3.7
       Cotton               5.06    Wheat                                                  3.42
       Cowpea               1.17    Wheat Hard Red Spring                                  3.29
       Dry Pea              0.81    Wheat Hard Red Winter                                  3.27
       Flax                 5.34    Wheat Hard White                                       3.42
       Foxtail Millet       3.78    Wheat Soft Red Winter                                  3.31
       Greengram            3.47    Wheat Soft White                                        3.4
       Groundnuts           5.67    White Potato                                           0.77
       Indigo Rice           3.7    Yams                                                   1.18
       Maize                3.65    Giant Yams                                             1.18
       Oat                  2.46    Sorghum (Subtropical)                                  3.39
       Oilpalm              8.84    Sorghum (Tropical Highland)                            3.39
       Olive                1.45    Sorghum (Tropical Lowland)                             3.39
       Onion                 0.4    White Yams                                             1.18
                                                                      †
       Source: USDA Nutrient Database for Standard Reference (R25).       kilo calories per 100g.




                                               49
        Table A.2: Continental Distribution of 48 crops (and their variants) pre-1500CE

    Crop                  Continent                       Crop                      Continent
Alfalfa          Asia, Europe                     Palm Heart               North Africa, Subsahara
Banana           Asia, Oceania, North Africa      Pearl Millet             Asia, North Africa, Subsahara
Barley           Asia, Europe, North Africa       Phaseolus Bean           America
Buckwheat        Asia                             Pigeon Pea               Asia, Subsahara
Cabbage          Europe                           Rye                      Europe
Cacao            America                          Sorghum                  North Africa, Subsahara
Carrot           Asia, Europe                     Soybean                  Asia
Cassava          America                          Sunflower                America
Chick Pea        Europe                           Sweet Potato             America
Citrus           Asia, Europe                     Tea                      Asia
Coconut          America, Oceania                 Tomato                   America
Coffee           North Africa                     Wetland Rice             Asia, Subsahara
Cotton           America, Asia, Europe, North     Wheat                    Asia, Europe, North Africa
                 Africa, Subsahara
Cowpea           Asia, North Africa, Subsahara    Wheat Hard Red Spring    Asia, Europe, North Africa
Dry Pea          Europe, North Africa             Wheat Hard Red Win-      Asia, Europe, North Africa
                                                  ter
Flax             Asia, Europe, North Africa       Wheat Hard White         Asia, Europe, North Africa
Foxtail Millet   Asia, Europe, North Africa       Wheat Soft Red Winter    Asia, Europe, North Africa
Greengram        Asia, Subsahara                  Wheat Soft White         Asia, Europe, North Africa
Groundnuts       America                          White Potato             America
Indigo Rice      Asia, Subsahara                  Yams                     Asia, Subsahara
Maize            America                          Giant Yams               Asia, Subsahara
Oat              Europe, North Africa             Sorghum (Subtropical)    North Africa, Subsahara
Oilpalm          North Africa, Subsahara          Sorghum      (Tropical   North Africa, Subsahara
                                                  Highland)
Olive            Europe, North Africa             Sorghum      (Tropical   North Africa, Subsahara
                                                  Lowland)
Onion            America, Asia, Europe, North     White Yams               North Africa, Subsahara
                 Africa, Subsahara, Oceania




                                                 50
                          (a) Europe                             (b) Africa




                        (c) Asia                                (d) America

                Figure A.1: Change in Potential Crop after Columbian Exchange.




B     Additional Results
This section presents additional results that were omitted in the main body of the paper. Some of
them are referenced there and are presented here in order to avoid unnecessary repetition and due
to space limitations.

B.1    Natural Experiment: Country-Level Results on Grids that Experienced a
       Change in Crops
This section replicates the analysis of the natural experiment associated with the Columbian Ex-
change using only crops available pre-1500CE and grids that experienced changes in the best crop
post-1500CE. Thus, taking into account only locations where the treatment by this natural ex-
periment caused a strictly positive increase in yields. Reassuringly, the results of the main body
of the paper remain unaltered qualitatively. In particular, there is a positive, statistically and
economically significant effect of pre-1500CE crop yield and its change on Long-Term Orientation.


                                               51
   In particular, a possible concern with the approach in the main body of the paper is that by
construction at least some part of the effect is generated by locations within a country for which the
best crop did not change, potentially confounding the difference between the pre- and post-1500
experience. The analysis in table 3 should not be affected by this concern since it accounts for the
pre-1500CE conditions, ensuring that the change in yield and growth cycle capture only the effect
of the treatment in the natural experiment. Still, in order to show robustness to this potential
concern, table B.3 constrains the analysis to include only the crop data for cells in each country
where the crop used before and after 1500 changed. In particular, for each cell in each country the
best crop in use before and after 1500 are compared. If a new crop is used, then the crop yield
pre-1500 and the change in crop yield due to the change in crop in that cell should capture better
the pre-1500 and post-1500 effects. The new crop yield measure is the average across all cells for
which crop use changed in a country.
   Additionally, table B.3 expands the set of geographical controls by including precipitation and
the shares of land in tropical, subtropical, and temperate climate zones. By controlling for this
larger set of geographical controls and using only data for locations that changed crop use, the
analysis increases the confidence that the effect of crop yield pre-1500 and its change post-1500 on
Long-Term Orientation is in fact capturing the effects proposed by the theory, and is not generated
by selection of high time preference individuals into regions with high yields, by unchanging or
contemporary geographical characteristics or by some omitted variable that correlates with these.
   Reassuringly, the estimates on crop yield pre-1500 and crop yield change post-1500 in all columns
of table B.3 are positive, and statistically and economically significant. The estimates imply that
conditional on a country’s geographical characteristics, its timing of transition to the Neolithic,
and its crop growth cycle pre-1500 and its change post-1500, an increase of one standard deviation
in crop yield pre-1500 increased Long-Term Orientation by 7.9 percentage points. Similarly, an
increase of one standard deviation in crop yield change post-1500 increased Long-Term Orientation
by 7.3 percentage points.




                                                 52
     Table B.3: Natural Experiment: Pre-1500CE Potential Crop Yield, Growth Cycle, and
        Long-Term Orientation, for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500.

                                                                              Long-Term Orientation
                                                                       Whole World                                  Old World
                                                    (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)            (8)
Crop Yield (pre-1500)                             4.97** 8.52*** 7.40***      6.65**                        7.75***   7.97**
                                                  (2.28) (2.46) (2.58)        (2.98)                        (2.81)    (3.66)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                    4.36*        5.81**                        5.58*     7.59**
                                                                 (2.46)       (2.55)                        (2.83)    (2.93)
Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                  0.06                                    -1.55
                                                                              (2.58)                                  (3.97)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                          -4.50**                                 -4.87**
                                                                              (2.18)                                  (2.36)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                        8.21***   7.85**
                                                                                        (2.34)    (3.26)
Crop Yield Change (Ancestors, post-1500)                                                6.09***   7.31***
                                                                                        (2.13)    (2.25)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                           -0.95
                                                                                                  (3.16)
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (Anc., post-1500)                                                           -3.44
                                                                                                  (2.27)
Continent FE                                      Yes     Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
All Geographical Controls & Neolithic             No      Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Old World Sample                                  No      No          No      No        No        No        Yes       Yes
Adjusted-R2                                       0.51    0.64        0.64    0.66      0.67      0.69      0.58      0.61
Observations                                      87      87          87      87        87        87        72        72
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop yield,
measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede
et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows
that a country’s crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant effect on its Long-Term Orientation. In
particular, columns (1)-(3) show the effect of potential crop yield after controlling for the country’s absolute latitude, mean
elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of it being landlocked or an island, the time since
it transitioned to agriculture, percentage of land in temperate, tropical and subtropical climate, and average precipitation.
Columns (4)-(6) show that the effect remains after controlling for potential crop growth cycle and the effects of migration.
Columns (7)-(8) show that restraining the analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller
role, does not alter the results. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain
roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, mean temperature, precipitation, and shares of land
in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their
mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard
deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are
reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all
for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                 53
B.2    Robustness
This subsection shows that the results in the main body of the paper are robust to spatial au-
tocorrelation, selection by unobservables or omitted variables, inclusion of cells with zero yields,
exclusion of individual continents, controlling for religion, or division of the sample into Muslim
and non-Muslim countries.
   Table B.4 shows that the main results of the paper are not affected by spatial correlation. In
particular, it presents two versions of the standard errors corrected for spatial autocorrelation. In
square brackets it presents the correction for autocorrelation suggested by Conley (1999) and in
curly brackets the maximum likelihood estimates suggested by Cliff and Ord (1973, 1981). As
can be seen, the results remain unchanged when the standard errors are corrected for spatial
autocorrelation, and crop yield remains statistically and economically significant.
   Additionally, this table shows that it is very improbable that omitted variables generate the
results. In particular, it presents the statistics for selection on unobservables suggested by Altonji
et al. (2005), Bellows and Miguel (2009) and Oster (2014). To compute these, columns (1), (3),
and (5) are taken as the baseline specifications for various measures and samples. In these columns,
the main specification controls for potential crop yield and growth cycle, and includes continental
fixed effects. The expanded specification includes a full set of geographical controls (absolute
latitude, roughness, mean elevation above sea level, distance to navigable water, landlocked and
island dummies, precipitation, shares of land in tropical, subtropical and temperate climates) and
the years since transition to agriculture. Both the AET (Altonji et al., 2005; Bellows and Miguel,
2009) and δ (Oster, 2014) measure how strongly correlated any unobservables would have to be in
order to account for the full size of the coefficient on crop yield. As can be seen, in all columns
these statistics are different from the critical value of 1. Furthermore, Oster’s β ∗ statistic, which
gives the estimated value of the coefficient on crop yield, if unobservables where as correlated
as the observables. Oster (2014) shows that one can reject the hypothesis that the value of the
coefficient is driven exclusively by unobservables, if zero does not belong to the interval created by
the estimated value on crop yield and her β ∗ statistic. This is precisely the case in all columns in
this table. Table B.5 shows similar results hold if instead the pre-1500CE crops yields and their
changes are used. Thus, these results suggest that the results in the main body of the paper are
not driven by unobservables.
   Table B.6 replicates the analysis of table 2, but includes all cells in the analysis, including those
that are not suitable for producing any calories. Reassuringly, as can be seen there, the effect is a
little weaker economically, but still statistically significant at the 1% level. This lower estimate is
to be expected, since ancestral populations most likely did not inhabit locations where crop yields
were zero. Thus, inclusion of cells with zero caloric yield should generate measurement error and
bias the estimate towards zero.
   Finally, table B.7 shows the robustness of the results to the inclusion of the share of population
of each religious denomination in a country, to splitting the sample between Muslim and Non-
Muslim countries, and to the exclusion of Africa or Sub-Saharan Africa. Reassuringly, the results


                                                  54
  Table B.4: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle and Long-Term Orientation

                                                                 Long-Term Orientation
                                          (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)             (6)
Crop Yield                             9.67*** 10.14***                            13.58*** 16.57***
                                       (2.60) (3.02)                               (3.01) (3.37)
                                       [3.03] [3.38]                               [3.01]   [2.57]
                                       {2.46} {2.65}                               {2.88} {2.95}
Crop Growth Cycle                      -3.78 -2.92                                 -5.26** -4.07
                                       (2.47) (2.95)                               (2.61) (2.90)
                                       [2.39] [2.67]                               [2.38]   [2.45]
                                       {2.34} {2.59}                               {2.50} {2.54}
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                         11.35*** 14.50***
                                                               (2.56) (2.75)
                                                               [2.60]   [2.46]
                                                               {2.43} {2.41}
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                  -5.05** -4.65*
                                                               (2.41) (2.59)
                                                               [2.15]   [2.24]
                                                               {2.28} {2.27}
Continent FE                           Yes       Yes           Yes     Yes         Yes       Yes
All Geography & Neolithic              No        Yes           No      Yes         No        Yes
Old World Subsample                    No        No            No      No          Yes       Yes
AET                                              -21.58                -3.00                 -5.53
δ                                                -4.72                 -0.35                 -0.66
β∗                                               11.38                 22.02                 21.67
R2                                     0.59      0.70          0.61    0.75        0.56      0.72
Adjusted-R2                            0.55      0.62          0.57    0.68        0.52      0.64
Observations                           87        87            87      87          72        72
This table shows the robustness of the results to selection by unobservables. It presents the Altonji et al. (2005)
AET ratio as extended by Bellows and Miguel (2009). Additionally, it presents the δ and β ∗ (1, 1) statistics sug-
gested by Oster (2014). All statistics suggest that the results are not driven by unobservables. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard errors in round parenthesis. Spatial auto-correlation corrected standard errors (Conley, 1999) in
squared parenthesis and Cliff-Ord ML in curly brackets. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, **
at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                          55
              Table B.5: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle and Long-Term Orientation

                                                                                  Long-Term Orientation
                                                               (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)             (6)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           7.84*** 9.28*** 9.21*** 11.93*** 9.73*** 13.26***
                                                (2.20) (2.63) (2.14) (2.53) (2.26) (2.78)
                                                [2.42] [2.30] [1.69]     [2.01]  [1.74]   [1.87]
                                                {2.09} {2.31} {2.00} {2.18} {2.13} {2.39}
     Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                        10.20*** 9.91*** 11.25*** 9.99***
                                                                (2.50) (2.40) (2.72) (2.87)
                                                                [2.78]   [2.00]  [2.98]   [2.27]
                                                                {2.33} {2.07} {2.56} {2.46}
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)    -4.40** -1.48 -8.33*** -6.61** -8.82*** -6.31**
                                                (2.18) (2.56) (2.32) (2.62) (2.43) (2.97)
                                                [2.16] [2.69] [2.35]     [2.05]  [2.31]   [2.46]
                                                {2.07} {2.25} {2.17} {2.27} {2.29} {2.55}
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500)                 0.79     -0.37   0.16     -0.90




56
                                                                (1.75) (1.84) (1.87) (1.98)
                                                                [1.56]   [1.13]  [1.47]   [1.26]
                                                                {1.64} {1.59} {1.76} {1.70}
     Continent FE                                           Yes      Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     All Geography & Neolithic                              No       Yes       No         Yes        No         Yes
     Old World Subsample                                    No       No        No         No         Yes        Yes
     AET                                                             -6.47                -4.38                 -3.76
     δ                                                               -1.45                -0.44                 -0.34
     β∗                                                              12.79                18.65                 21.32
     R2                                                     0.58     0.70      0.67       0.76       0.62       0.74
     Adjusted-R2                                            0.53     0.61      0.62       0.69       0.58       0.65
     Observations                                           87       87        87         87         72         72
     This table shows the robustness of the results to selection by unobservables. It presents the Altonji et al. (2005) AET ratio
     as extended by Bellows and Miguel (2009). Additionally, it presents the δ and β ∗ (1, 1) statistics suggested by Oster (2014).
     All statistics suggest that the results are not driven by unobservables. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors in round
     parenthesis. Spatial auto-correlation corrected standard errors (Conley, 1999) in squared parenthesis and Cliff-Ord ML in curly
     brackets. *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
     hypothesis tests.
  Table B.6: Potential Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (Hofstede)
                          Including Grids Not-Suitable for Production

                                                                             Long-Term Orientation
                                                             Whole World                                    Old World
                                            (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)     (6)       (7)               (8)

Crop Yield                                5.26** 9.01*** 8.21*** 7.11**                           11.59*** 10.79***
                                          (2.43) (2.86) (2.61) (3.06)                             (2.84)   (3.51)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                2.18                                      1.47
                                                                 (4.00)                                    (4.25)
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                          9.38*** 8.62***
                                                                                (2.43) (3.11)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                           1.52
                                                                                        (4.23)
Absolute Latitude                                 3.56      2.46      3.01      3.66    4.05      4.98      5.37
                                                  (4.21)    (3.94)    (4.35)    (3.79) (4.16)     (4.62)    (5.14)
Mean Elevation                                    6.20*     7.14**    6.63*     6.73** 6.44*      5.86      5.64
                                                  (3.26)    (3.41)    (3.44)    (3.35) (3.25)     (3.92)    (3.84)
Terrain Roughness                                 -6.76**   -6.16**   -6.09**   -7.29** -7.24**   -6.55**   -6.59**
                                                  (2.68)    (2.95)    (2.98)    (3.00) (3.00)     (3.25)    (3.28)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                 -6.81**   -7.21**                     -5.58*    -5.84*
                                                            (3.05)    (3.20)                      (2.84)    (2.94)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                         -5.20** -5.41**
                                                                                (2.53) (2.63)

Continent FE                              Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
Additional Geographical Controls          No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes
Old World Sample                          No      No        No        No        No      No        Yes       Yes
Adjusted-R2                               0.50    0.57      0.60      0.59      0.60    0.60      0.56      0.56
Observations                              87      87        87        87        87      87        72        72
Notes: This table replicates the results of table 2 when using the country’s average crop measures on all cells, including
those which do not produce any calories. It establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a
country’s potential crop yield, measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured,
on a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical
characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant
effect on its Long-Term Orientation. In particular, columns (1)-(3) show the effect of potential crop yield after controlling
for the country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of
it being landlocked or an island, and the time since it transitioned to agriculture. Columns (4)-(6) show that the
effect remains after controlling for potential crop growth cycle and the effects of migration. Columns (7)-(8) show
that restraining the analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller role, does not alter
the results. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies.
All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on
Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


remain qualitatively unchanged. The coefficient on crop yield is statistically the same across speci-
fications and is economically significant in all specifications. Additionally, the estimated coefficient
is statistically significant at the 1% in all but columns (3) and (4). In these two columns the statis-
tical significance falls, but this is due to the much smaller sample size, which increases the standard


                                                            57
error, though the estimated coefficient is not statistically different from the ones estimated in other
columns.
                  Table B.7: Potential Crop yield, Growth Cycle and Time Preference

                                                                       Long-Term Orientation
                                              Religion Shares           Muslim - Non-Muslim              Excluding Africa
                                             (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)

  Crop Yield (Ancestors)                  13.31***       10.76***       9.29**      12.09*            14.62***       14.70***
                                          (2.94)         (3.11)         (3.77)      (6.60)            (3.74)         (3.67)
  Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)           -3.15          -2.58          -1.39       -6.33             -4.00          -4.71
                                          (3.52)         (3.43)         (3.26)      (6.79)            (5.15)         (4.86)

  Continent FE                            Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes               Yes            Yes
  Geography & Neolithic                   Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes               Yes            Yes
  Religious Shares                        No             Yes            Yes         Yes               No             No
  Only Sub-Saharan Excluded               No             No             No          No                No             Yes
  Adjusted-R2                             0.66           0.67           0.67        0.64              0.60           0.63
  Observations                            87             87             49          38                74             77
  Notes: This table shows the robustness to religious composition and exclusion of Africa of the positive, statistically,
  and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop return, measured in calories per hectare per day, on its
  level of Long-Term Orientation measured. All columns control for geographical characteristics, year since transitioning to
  agriculture, and continental fixed effects. In particular, columns (1)-(2) compare results with and without accounting for
  the shares of major religions. Columns (3)-(4) split the sample into Muslim and Non-Muslim countries. Columns (5)-(6)
  show the results of excluding Africa or the Sub-Saharan region. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, average
  elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. All independent
  variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients
  can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
  Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the
  1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                             58
B.3    Crop Return and Long-Term Orientation
The analysis of section 4 used crop yield as the main independent variable. This captured the
insight from the model and directly identified the effect of yield on preferences. But individuals’
preferences might have instead reacted to the crop return per day, where the return is given by the
ratio of crop yield to crop growth cycle. Figure B.2 shows the cells where the same potential crop
generates the highest total yield or highest return. Additionally, table B.8 presents the results of
using crop return as the main independent variable. As can be seen, the results are very similar
and tell the same story, namely higher yield, which conditional on the growth cycle are reflected in
higher returns, generate a higher Long-Term Orientation.




                                                59
 (a) Europe pre-1500CE Crops               (b) Europe post-1500CE Crops




     (c) Africa pre-1500CE Crops        (d) Africa post-1500CE Crops




  (e) Asia pre-1500CE Crops                 (f) Asia post-1500CE Crops




(g) America pre-1500CE Crops              (h) America post-1500CE Crops

Figure B.2: Same Crop Selection under Daily Return and Total Yield .




                                   60
    Table B.8: Potential Daily Crop Return, Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation
                                          (Hofstede)

                                                                               Long-Term Orientation
                                                                       Whole World                                     Old World
                                                  (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)
Daily Crop Return                               5.71** 9.40*** 8.39*** 7.00***                                  10.83*** 9.28***
                                                (2.39) (2.57)  (2.44)  (2.59)                                   (2.69)   (2.82)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                      4.04                                              4.57
                                                                       (3.58)                                            (3.85)
Daily Crop Return (Ancestors)                                                             9.00*** 7.57***
                                                                                          (2.41)  (2.63)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                                     4.23
                                                                                                  (3.79)
Absolute latitude                                        3.07        2.07      3.32       2.58    4.08          3.40        5.22
                                                         (4.10)      (3.82)    (4.32)     (3.78)  (4.24)        (4.59)      (5.31)
Mean elevation                                           6.44*       7.19**    6.39*      6.78*   6.07*         5.98        5.32
                                                         (3.38)      (3.47)    (3.42)     (3.42)  (3.26)        (4.11)      (3.84)
Terrain Roughness                                        -6.66**     -6.09**   -6.10**    -7.05** -7.08**       -6.15*      -6.46*
                                                         (2.67)      (2.94)    (2.95)     (3.01)  (3.01)        (3.31)      (3.26)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                          -6.13*    -6.83**                          -5.14*      -5.78*
                                                                     (3.11)    (3.18)                           (2.93)      (2.94)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                                   -4.87*     -5.41**
                                                                                          (2.62)     (2.66)
Continent FE                                    Yes      Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Additional Geographical Controls                No       Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Old World Sample                                No       No          No        No         No         No         Yes         Yes
Adjusted-R2                                     0.51     0.58        0.59      0.60       0.59       0.60       0.55        0.56
Observations                                    87       87          87        87         87         87         72          72
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop return,
measured in calories per hectare per day, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede et al.
(2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s
potential crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant effect on its Long-Term Orientation. In particular,
columns (1)-(3) show the effect of crop yield after controlling for the country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level,
terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of it being landlocked or an island, and the time since it transitioned to agriculture.
Columns (4)-(6) show that the effect remains after controlling for crop growth cycle and the effects of migration. Columns (7)-(8)
show that restraining the analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller role, does not alter the
results. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. All independent
variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be
compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                61
B.4      Long-Term Orientation and Geography
This section shows the results when only one geographical control is included in the analysis of
section 4. The results of these horse race regressions are similar to the ones presented in tables
2-B.3.
            Table B.9: Geographical Characteristics and Long-term Orientation (Hofstede)

                                                                      Long-Term Orientation
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)
      Crop Yield                         8.14***    7.74***     7.48***     9.36***    7.32***     7.41***        6.97***
                                          (2.62)     (2.45)      (2.57)      (2.52)     (2.49)      (2.50)         (2.29)
      Absolute latitude                    6.26
                                          (3.81)
      Mean elevation                                  2.40
                                                     (1.91)
      Terrain Roughness                                           -2.09
                                                                 (2.02)
      Distance to Coast or River                                            5.79***
                                                                             (1.19)
      Landlocked                                                                        2.68**
                                                                                        (1.33)
      Island                                                                                         -1.35
                                                                                                    (2.59)
      Neolithic Transition Timing                                                                                 -5.84**
                                                                                                                   (2.83)
      Continent FE                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes            Yes
      Adjusted-R2                         0.56        0.54        0.54        0.58       0.55        0.54           0.56
      Observations                         87          87          87          87         87          87             87
      Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential
      crop yield, measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0
      to 100, by Hofstede et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects in a horse race regression with other
      geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s potential crop growth cycle has a negative and
      not-statistically significant effect on its Long-Term Orientation. All independent variables have been normalized by
      subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show
      the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity
      robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, **
      at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                62
     Table B.10: Geographical Characteristics and Long-Term Orientation (Hofstede)

                                                                  Long-Term Orientation
                                     (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)               (7)
Crop Yield (pre-1500)              6.34**     6.02**    5.70**     7.62***     5.45**    5.70**            4.96**
                                   (2.60)     (2.30)    (2.56)      (2.56)     (2.38)    (2.42)            (2.30)
Absolute latitude                   5.68
                                   (3.68)
Mean elevation                                 2.29
                                              (1.99)
Terrain Roughness                                         -2.03
                                                         (1.95)
Distance to Coast or River                                         5.28***
                                                                    (1.27)
Landlocked                                                                     2.60**
                                                                               (1.29)
Island                                                                                     -1.60
                                                                                          (2.70)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                                                                -5.88*
                                                                                                           (3.14)
Continent FE                        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes              Yes
Adjusted-R2                         0.52       0.51       0.50       0.53       0.51       0.50             0.52
Observations                         87         87         87         87         87         87               87
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500CE
potential crop yield, measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on
a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects in a horse race regression
with other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s potential crop growth cycle has
a negative and not-statistically significant effect on its Long-Term Orientation. All independent variables have
been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be
compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                           63
     Table B.11: Geographical Characteristics and Long-Term Orientation (Hofstede),
                  for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                 Long-Term Orientation
                                    (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)              (7)
Crop Yield (pre-1500)              6.06**    4.83**    6.21***      5.48**     4.52*     4.90**           5.27**
                                   (2.68)    (2.36)     (2.33)      (2.37)     (2.38)    (2.29)           (2.09)
Absolute latitude                   6.91
                                   (4.48)
Mean elevation                                0.94
                                             (2.20)
Terrain Roughness                                       -3.85*
                                                        (2.11)
Distance to Coast or River                                         3.80***
                                                                    (1.27)
Landlocked                                                                      1.89
                                                                               (1.33)
Island                                                                                    -1.11
                                                                                         (2.80)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                                                              -7.25**
                                                                                                          (3.25)
Continent FE                        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes              Yes
Adjusted-R2                         0.52      0.50       0.52        0.52       0.51      0.50             0.54
Observations                         87        87         87          87         87        87               87
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500CE
potential crop yield on grids that experienced a change in the potential crop post-1500, measured in calories per
hectare per year, on its level of Long-Term Orientation measured, on a scale of 0 to 100, by Hofstede et al. (2010),
while controlling for continental fixed effects in a horse race regression with other geographical characteristics.
Additionally, it shows that a country’s potential crop growth cycle has a negative and not-statistically significant
effect on its Long-Term Orientation. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and
dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard
deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates
are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the
10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                          64
B.5    Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation and Other Pre-Industrial
       Channels
This section presents further evidence that rejects the existence of alternative pre-industrial chan-
nels. This complements the findings of table 4. Table B.12 reproduces the analysis of table 4, but
considers only the cells for which the crop in use changed post-1500CE. As can be seen the results
are qualitatively unchanged. Potential crop yield and its change remain economically and statisti-
cally significant. Furthermore, none of the additional variables provides any additional explanatory
power, while crop yield, growth rate, and their change retain their explanatory power.
   Additionally, tables B.13-B.15 analyze the possible effect of other agricultural channels. In
particular, it controls for average agricultural suitability (Ramankutty et al., 2002) and the use of
the plow (Alesina et al., 2013). Reassuringly, in all columns potential crop yield and its change
remain economically and statistically significant. Furthermore, neither one of the other agricultural
measures provides any additional explanatory power, while crop yield, growth rate, and their change
retain their explanatory power. This reinforces the results in the main body of the paper, that the
alternative pre-industrial or agricultural channel do not explain the findings of this paper.
   Additionally, table B.13 shows that the results are robust to a country’s language’s future
time reference (FTR), which Chen (2013) shows correlates with individual’s savings behavior.
Reassuringly, inclusion of the level of strong FTR does not alter the results.
   Tables B.16-B.17 analyze the effect of pre-industrial trade on the effect of potential crop yield on
Long-Term Orientation. These tables address the potential concern that having trading possibilities
might affect the mechanism highlighted in this paper. In particular, one might worry that if agents
can trade amongst themselves, then the forces that allowed higher yields to cause higher levels of
patience might be undermined and as such also the theoretical and empirical results. However, the
theory is based on frictions to intertemporal trade, not to trade in general. Thus, the fact that
agents can trade amongst themselves does not necessarily undermine the mechanism. Furthermore,
intertemporal trade can affect the results only if patient individuals are not liquidity constrained
and can thus lend resources to impatient ones. But the situation in the theory is precisely the
opposite, as can be expected in reality also. As shown in tables B.16-B.17 the inclusion of additional
controls for trade potential does not affect the empirical results. In particular, accounting for
the effect of variation in agricultural suitability, the existence of a means of exchange, the levels
of transportation technologies, or the pre-industrial distance to trade routes does not affect the
qualitative results of the paper. After accounting for these measures of trade potential there exists
a positive, statistically and economically significant effect of potential crop yield pre-1500 and its
change post-1500 on Long-Term Orientation.
   Finally, table B.18 analyzes the robustness of the results to the possibility of diversification by
including scale and risk factors in the analysis. In particular, if larger countries could diversify
the timing of planting and harvesting across space, the mechanism highlighted in this paper might
be hindered from working. Reassuringly, inclusion of a country’s area does not alter the results.
Similarly, climatic risks can prevent people adopting the investment mode and thus prevent our


                                                 65
mechanism from being operative. Reassuringly, inclusion of the average standard deviation across
months of precipitation or temperature does not alter the results. Also, controlling for the spatial
autocorrelation with climatic conditions in adjacent cells does not alter the results. After accounting
for these measures of climatic risk and scale the positive, statistically and economically significant
effect of potential crop yield pre-1500 and its change post-1500 on Long-Term Orientation remains.




                                                  66
Table B.12: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Pre-Industrial Development,
                  for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                     Long-Term Orientation
                                                                  1500CE                                    1800CE
                                           Population Density        Urbanization            Both      Urbanization
                                              (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)   6.63**             6.29**      5.45*        6.14*      6.93**     6.88**     6.86**
                                   (2.64)             (2.57)      (3.16)       (3.46)     (3.23)     (2.78)     (2.82)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)      5.90**             4.63        5.71*        5.61       4.86       5.63*      5.67*
                                   (2.80)             (3.02)      (3.32)       (3.35)     (4.15)     (3.32)     (3.36)
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500) 1.26               2.29        2.02         1.07       0.69       1.04       1.00
                                   (2.74)             (2.88)      (3.01)       (3.39)     (3.18)     (3.07)     (3.10)
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500) -5.26***            -4.91**     -6.92***     -7.03***   -5.93***   -5.50***   -5.54**
                                   (1.96)             (2.11)      (2.00)       (2.01)     (2.10)     (2.04)     (2.11)
Population density in 1500 CE                         1.89                                2.40
                                                      (2.23)                              (3.95)
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                   -1.56      -2.46
                                                                               (2.06)     (2.86)
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                    -0.26
                                                                                                                (1.21)

                                                                             Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           0.11**     0.10**      0.08*        0.08*      0.11**     0.12**     0.12**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)              0.07**     0.03        0.06*        0.06       0.03       0.05*      0.05*
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)         0.00       0.01        0.01         0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)          0.11***    0.09**      0.21***      0.21***    0.16***    0.12***    0.12**
Population density in 1500 CE                         0.01                                0.01
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                   0.01       0.02
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                    0.00

                                                                           Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           0.03**     0.03**      0.02*        0.02*      0.03**     0.04**     0.04**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)              0.02**     0.01        0.02*        0.02       0.01       0.02*      0.02*
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)         0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)          0.03***    0.03**      0.07***      0.07***    0.04***    0.04***    0.04**
Population density in 1500 CE                         0.00                                0.00
Urbanization rate in 1500 CE                                                   0.00       0.00
Urbanization rate in 1800 CE                                                                                    0.00
Continental FE                             Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
Geography & Neolithic                      Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                0.68       0.68        0.67         0.66       0.68       0.66       0.65
Observations                               87         87          65           65         64         79         79
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE
potential crop yield and potential crop growth cycle and their change on grids that experienced change in crop on its
level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics.
Additionally, it shows that a country’s level of pre-industrial development as measured by its population density or
urbanization rates in 1500 CE have economically smaller and not always statistically significant effects. In particular,
columns (1)-(2) compare the effects of potential crop yields and population densities in 1500CE, while columns (3)-(4)
use urbanization rates in 1500 CE instead. Column (5) controls for both urbanization rates and population densities
in 1500CE. Finally, columns (6)-(7) compare the effects of crop yield pre-1500CE and its change and urbanization in
1800CE. In all columns crop yield and its change remain positive, statistically and economically significant, and have a
higher explanatory power than any of the alternative channels. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean
elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent
variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients
can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at
the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
                                                          67
       Table B.13: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, Agriculture and Language

                                                                                                    Long-Term Orientation
                                                          Agricultural Suitability                           Plow                             Future Time Reference
                                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   12.02***      11.46***      10.36***      12.85***      12.80***      12.72***      13.05***      14.10***     13.95***
                                                   (2.69)        (2.91)        (3.32)        (2.65)        (2.67)        (2.70)        (2.75)        (2.77)       (2.80)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      10.70***      10.50***      10.03***      10.93***      10.93***      11.17***      10.30***      9.89***      10.13***
                                                   (2.71)        (2.70)        (2.73)        (2.77)        (2.78)        (2.76)        (3.16)        (2.88)       (3.02)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)            -7.63*        -7.71*        -8.04*        -10.02**      -10.13**      -10.50***     -10.87**      -10.05**     -10.21**
                                                   (3.85)        (3.94)        (4.09)        (3.94)        (3.92)        (3.94)        (4.14)        (3.80)       (3.97)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)               -0.90         -0.96         -1.16         -1.30         -1.40         -1.63         -1.09         -0.86        -0.97
                                                   (1.62)        (1.68)        (1.76)        (1.69)        (1.66)        (1.61)        (1.62)        (1.72)       (1.70)
Land Suitability                                                 0.83
                                                                 (2.07)
Land Suitability (Ancestors)                                                   2.34
                                                                               (3.20)
Plow                                                                                                       1.62
                                                                                                           (3.17)
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                         3.35
                                                                                                                         (3.92)
Strong FTR                                                                                                                                           -3.68**
                                                                                                                                                     (1.68)
Strong FTR (Ancestors)                                                                                                                                             -2.59
                                                                                                                                                                   (1.76)

                                                                                                          Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   0.23***       0.16***       0.11***       0.25***       0.25***       0.25***       0.28***       0.32***      0.31***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      0.17***       0.16***       0.14***       0.17***       0.17***       0.18***       0.15***       0.15***      0.15***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                 0.05*         0.06*         0.06*         0.10**        0.10**        0.10***       0.11**        0.10**       0.10**
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                  0.00          0.00          0.01          0.01          0.01          0.01          0.01          0.00         0.01
Land Suitability                                                 0.00
Land Suitability (Anc.)                                                        0.01
Plow                                                                                                       0.00
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                         0.01
Strong FTR                                                                                                                                           0.08**
Strong FTR (Anc.)                                                                                                                                                  0.04
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                        Semi-Partial R
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   0.07***       0.05***       0.03***       0.08***       0.08***       0.08***       0.08***       0.09***      0.09***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      0.05***       0.05***       0.04***       0.05***       0.05***       0.05***       0.04***       0.03***      0.04***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                 0.01*         0.01*         0.02*         0.03**        0.03**        0.03***       0.03**        0.02**       0.02**
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                  0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00
Land Suitability                                                 0.00
Land Suitability (Anc.)                                                        0.00
Plow                                                                                                       0.00
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                         0.00
Strong FTR                                                                                                                                           0.02**
Strong FTR (Anc.)                                                                                                                                                  0.01

Continental FE                                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Geography & Neolithic                              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Adjusted-R2                                        0.68          0.67          0.68          0.67          0.66          0.67          0.70          0.72          0.70
Observations                                       85            85            85            87            87            87            71            71            71
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential crop yield and potential crop growth
cycle on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s
level of agricultural suitability and suitability for the use of plows have economically smaller and not always statistically significant effects. In particular, columns
(1)-(3) compare the effects of potential crop yields and agricultural suitability. Columns (4)-(6) compare the effects to the use of plow. Geographical controls include
absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, precipitation and percentage of land
in tropical, subtropical and temperate climates. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity
robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                            68
         Table B.14: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Agriculture,
                   for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                                Long-Term Orientation
                                                        Agricultural Suitability                               Plow
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                    7.50***      7.60***      7.65**       6.63**       6.53**        6.37**
                                                    (2.55)       (2.81)       (3.02)       (2.64)       (2.67)        (2.73)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                       6.81***      6.87***      6.92***      5.90**       5.89**        5.69**
                                                    (2.45)       (2.42)       (2.49)       (2.80)       (2.77)        (2.71)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)             1.12         1.18         1.20         1.26         0.93          0.98
                                                    (2.74)       (2.78)       (2.79)       (2.74)       (2.82)        (2.80)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                -4.43**      -4.49**      -4.51**      -5.26***     -5.30***      -5.34***
                                                    (1.89)       (1.88)       (1.93)       (1.96)       (1.99)        (2.00)
Land Suitability                                                 -0.26
                                                                 (1.80)
Land Suitability (Ancestors)                                                  -0.36
                                                                              (2.90)
Plow                                                                                                    2.57
                                                                                                        (2.52)
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                      3.42
                                                                                                                      (2.89)

                                                                                        Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                    0.15***      0.14***      0.12**       0.11**       0.11**        0.10**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                       0.10***      0.09***      0.09***      0.07**       0.07**        0.06**
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)             0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00          0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                0.09**       0.08**       0.08**       0.11***      0.11***       0.11***
Land Suitability                                                 0.00
Land Suitability (Ancestors)                                                  0.00
Plow                                                                                                    0.01
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                      0.02

                                                                                     Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                    0.04***      0.04***      0.03**       0.03**       0.03**        0.03**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                       0.02***      0.02***      0.02***      0.02**       0.02**        0.02**
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)             0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00         0.00          0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                0.02**       0.02**       0.02**       0.03***      0.03***       0.03***
Land Suitability                                                 0.00
Land Suitability (Ancestors)                                                  0.00
Plow                                                                                                    0.00
Plow (Ancestors)                                                                                                      0.00
Continental FE                                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Geography & Neolithic                               Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
Adjusted-R2                                         0.71         0.71         0.71         0.68         0.68          0.68
Observations                                        85           85           85           87           87            87
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential
crop yield and potential crop growth cycle and their change for grids that experienced change in crops on its level of Long-Term
Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a
country’s level of agricultural suitability and suitability for the use of plows have economically smaller and not always statistically
significant effects. In particular, columns (1)-(3) compare the effects of potential crop yields and agricultural suitability. Columns
(4)-(6) compare the effects to the use of plow. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level,
terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized
by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect
of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                 69
         Table B.15: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Agriculture

                                                                            Long-Term Orientation
                                                        Agricultural Suitability                           Plow
                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 10.31***      8.34**       9.15**        11.05***     10.86***      10.68***
                                                 (2.51)        (3.41)       (3.72)        (2.53)       (2.61)        (2.61)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    10.41***      10.42***     10.47***      10.76***     10.75***      10.93***
                                                 (2.69)        (2.80)       (2.76)        (2.89)       (2.90)        (2.90)
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)               -5.73         -6.42        -6.39         -8.06*       -8.19**       -8.74**
                                                 (3.80)        (3.92)       (4.08)        (4.06)       (4.09)        (4.15)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             -0.06         -0.14        -0.17         -0.46        -0.58         -0.88
                                                 (1.59)        (1.69)       (1.69)        (1.72)       (1.72)        (1.69)
Land Suitability (Climate)                                     3.15
                                                               (3.24)
Land Suitability (Climate, Anc.)                                            1.75
                                                                            (3.92)
Plow                                                                                                   1.76
                                                                                                       (3.30)
Plow (Anc.)                                                                                                          3.89
                                                                                                                     (3.72)

                                                                                     Partial R2
Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                      0.21***       0.09**       0.08**        0.23***      0.22***       0.21***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    0.16***       0.17***      0.17***       0.16***      0.16***       0.17***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)               0.03          0.04         0.03          0.06*        0.06**        0.07**
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00
Land Suitability                                               0.01
Land Suitability (Anc.)                                                     0.00
Plow                                                                                                   0.00
Plow (Anc.)                                                                                                          0.02

                                                                                   Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                      0.07***       0.02**       0.02**        0.08***      0.08***       0.07***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    0.05***       0.05***      0.05***       0.05***      0.05***       0.06***
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)               0.01          0.01         0.01          0.02*        0.02**        0.02**
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00
Land Suitability                                               0.00
Land Suitability (Anc.)                                                     0.00
Plow                                                                                                   0.00
Plow (Anc.)                                                                                                          0.00
Continental FE                                   Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Geography & Neolithic                            Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
Adjusted-R2                                      0.67          0.67         0.67          0.65         0.65          0.65
Observations                                     85            85           85            87           87            87
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential
crop yield, crop growth cycle and their change post-1500CE on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for
continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s level of agricultural
suitability and suitability for the use of plows have economically smaller and not always statistically significant effects. In
particular, columns (1)-(3) compare the effects of potential crop yields and climatic agricultural suitability. Columns (4)-(6)
compare the effects to the use of plow. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain
roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by
subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect
of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                70
                             Table B.16: Long-Term Orientation and Pre-Industrial Trade

                                                                                                   Long-Term Orientation
                                                          Suitability                        Money                                Transportation                  Routes
                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   9.00***       9.84***      11.48***      12.03***      11.27***     11.61***      12.37***      11.17***      11.73***
                                                   (2.85)        (2.45)       (2.73)        (3.33)        (2.61)       (2.67)        (3.35)        (2.66)        (2.76)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      10.03***      10.84***     11.08***      11.48***      11.11***     10.98***      11.32***      11.13***      11.81***
                                                   (2.97)        (2.72)       (3.16)        (3.42)        (3.09)       (3.16)        (3.17)        (3.14)        (3.42)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)            -5.35         -7.71*       -8.36*        -8.96*        -8.79**      -8.33*        -9.28**       -8.56*        -9.73**
                                                   (4.23)        (4.29)       (4.28)        (4.66)        (4.38)       (4.30)        (4.61)        (4.42)        (4.51)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)               -0.12         0.27         -0.07         -0.02         -0.10        0.02          0.10          -0.34         0.02
                                                   (1.70)        (1.52)       (1.82)        (1.79)        (1.76)       (1.85)        (1.77)        (1.75)        (1.83)
Land Suitability (Gini)                            -2.11
                                                   (2.02)
Land Suitability (Range)                                         2.46
                                                                 (1.65)
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                       0.05
                                                                              (2.43)
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                         1.15
                                                                                            (3.12)
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                                    4.60
                                                                                                          (4.32)
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                          0.84
                                                                                                                       (3.18)
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                            2.40
                                                                                                                                     (4.36)
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                                       1.50
                                                                                                                                                   (4.39)
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                                           0.16
                                                                                                                                                                 (5.98)

                                                                                                         Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   0.13***       0.20***      0.23***       0.22***       0.23***      0.24***       0.22***       0.22***       0.24***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      0.15***       0.17***      0.17***       0.17***       0.16***      0.17***       0.18***       0.16***       0.18***
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)            0.03          0.05*        0.07*         0.07*         0.07**       0.07*         0.07**        0.07*         0.09**
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)               0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00
Land Suitability (Gini)                            0.01
Land Suitability (Range)                                         0.02
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                       0.00
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                         0.00
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                                    0.01
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                          0.00
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                            0.01
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                                       0.00
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                                           0.00
                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                      Semi-Partial R
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   0.04***       0.06***      0.08***       0.08***       0.09***      0.09***       0.08***       0.08***       0.10***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                      0.05***       0.05***      0.06***       0.06***       0.06***      0.06***       0.06***       0.06***       0.07***
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)            0.01          0.01*        0.02*         0.02*         0.02**       0.02*         0.02**        0.02*         0.03**
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)               0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00         0.00          0.00          0.00          0.00
Land Suitability (Gini)                            0.00
Land Suitability (Range)                                         0.01
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                       0.00
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                         0.00
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                                    0.00
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                          0.00
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                            0.00
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                                       0.00
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                                           0.00
Continental FE                                     Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Geography & Neolithic                              Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Adjusted-R2                                        0.66          0.67         0.63          0.64          0.63         0.63          0.64          0.62          0.61
Observations                                       84            84           81            81            81           81            81            81            71
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential crop yield, crop growth cycle and their
change post-1500 on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows
that a country’s opportunities and technologies for trade, as captured by the Gini and range of agricultural suitability, existence of means of exchange, means of
transportation, and distance to trade (Özak, 2012) routes have an economically smaller and not statistically significant effect. Geographical controls include absolute
latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized
by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the
independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance
at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.

                                                                                71
                       Table B.17: Long-Term Orientation and Pre-Industrial Trade,
                          for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                                         Long-Term Orientation
                                                      Suitability                     Money                            Transportation             Routes
                                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 7.39***      7.38***     8.22**     7.56***      7.53***     7.81***     7.52***     7.54***     6.50**
                                                 (2.70)       (2.69)      (3.20)     (2.74)       (2.77)      (2.94)      (2.81)      (2.77)      (2.85)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    6.72***      6.72***     6.04**     6.01**       5.63**      5.97**      6.08**      5.61**      7.12**
                                                 (2.51)       (2.51)      (2.85)     (2.90)       (2.80)      (2.86)      (2.84)      (2.80)      (3.34)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)          1.05         1.17        0.90       0.77         1.97        1.17        1.03        1.63        0.12
                                                 (2.77)       (2.76)      (2.90)     (3.23)       (3.03)      (2.93)      (3.25)      (3.04)      (3.20)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             -4.20**      -4.42**     -5.02**    -5.05**      -5.27**     -5.05**     -5.13**     -5.21**     -5.67**
                                                 (2.06)       (1.94)      (2.16)     (2.13)       (2.10)      (2.15)      (2.11)      (2.11)      (2.17)
Land Suitability (Gini)                          -0.50
                                                 (2.02)
Land Suitability (Range)                                      0.37
                                                              (1.35)
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                   1.31
                                                                          (2.51)
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                  -0.93
                                                                                     (2.73)
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                            6.07
                                                                                                  (4.08)
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                 0.88
                                                                                                              (3.23)
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                 -0.71
                                                                                                                          (4.07)
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                          3.09
                                                                                                                                      (4.07)
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                            4.40
                                                                                                                                                  (5.78)

                                                                                                Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 0.14***      0.14***     0.14**     0.14***      0.14***     0.14***     0.14***     0.14***     0.11**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    0.09***      0.09***     0.07**     0.07**       0.06**      0.07**      0.07**      0.06**      0.09**
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)          0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00         0.01        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             0.06**       0.08**      0.10**     0.10**       0.11**      0.10**      0.11**      0.11**      0.12**
Land Suitability (Gini)                          0.00
Land Suitability (Range)                                      0.00
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                   0.01
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                  0.00
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                            0.02
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                 0.00
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                 0.00
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                          0.01
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                            0.01

                                                                                              Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 0.04***      0.04***     0.04**     0.04***      0.04***     0.04***     0.04***     0.04***     0.04**
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    0.02***      0.02***     0.02**     0.02**       0.02**      0.02**      0.02**      0.02**      0.03**
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)          0.00         0.00        0.00       0.00         0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00        0.00
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)             0.02**       0.02**      0.03**     0.03**       0.03**      0.03**      0.03**      0.03**      0.04**
Land Suitability (Gini)                          0.00
Land Suitability (Range)                                      0.00
Exchange Medium 1000BCE                                                   0.00
Exchange Medium 1CE                                                                  0.00
Exchange Medium 1000CE                                                                            0.01
Transportation Medium 1000BCE                                                                                 0.00
Transportation Medium 1CE                                                                                                 0.00
Transportation Medium 1000CE                                                                                                          0.00
Pre-Industrial Distance to Trade Route                                                                                                            0.00
Continental FE                                   Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Geography & Neolithic                            Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Adjusted-R2                                      0.70         0.70        0.67       0.66         0.66        0.66        0.66        0.66        0.63
Observations                                     84           84          81         81           81          81          81          81          71
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential crop yield, crop growth
cycle and their change post-1500 in grids that experienced a change in crop on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed
effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally, it shows that a country’s opportunities and technologies for trade, as captured by the Gini
and range of agricultural suitability, existence of means of exchange, means of transportation, and distance to trade routes have an economically smaller
and not statistically significant effect. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to
coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard
deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level,
and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


                                                                           72
                                         Table B.18: Long-Term Orientation and Risk

                                                                                                           Long-Term Orientation
                                                                         Scale                                                   Risk
                                                                   (1)           (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)           (7)     (8)        (9)        (10)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                10.62***    9.28***    10.88***   11.56***   10.19***   9.58***   11.06***    11.08***   10.98***   11.04***
                                                                (2.62)      (2.49)     (2.68)     (2.70)     (2.97)     (2.81)    (2.58)      (2.62)     (2.58)     (2.64)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                   10.23***    8.85***    10.75***   10.72***   10.23***   9.85***   10.77***    10.84***   10.74***   10.74***
                                                                (2.95)      (2.93)     (2.92)     (2.88)     (3.00)     (2.93)    (2.92)      (3.14)     (2.92)     (3.12)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                         -7.45*      -3.79      -8.14*     -7.22*     -6.31      -4.59     -8.07*      -8.16*     -8.02*     -8.05*
                                                                (4.30)      (4.10)     (4.18)     (4.32)     (4.83)     (4.71)    (4.09)      (4.33)     (4.11)     (4.33)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                            -0.60       0.15       -0.47      -0.31      -0.12      0.19      -0.46       -0.48      -0.44      -0.45
                                                                (1.68)      (1.65)     (1.73)     (1.75)     (1.87)     (1.82)    (1.75)      (1.78)     (1.74)     (1.77)
Total land area                                                 3.04
                                                                (2.17)
Total land area (Ancestry Adjusted)                                         7.31***
                                                                            (2.08)
Precipitation Volatility (mean)                                                        0.69
                                                                                       (3.05)
Precipitation Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                               -2.26
                                                                                                  (3.02)
Temperature Volatility (mean)                                                                                4.37
                                                                                                             (6.44)
Temperature Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                       6.70
                                                                                                                        (5.07)
Precipitation Diversification (mean)                                                                                              -0.22
                                                                                                                                  (2.95)
Precipitation Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                      -0.28
                                                                                                                                              (2.85)
Temperature Diversification (mean)                                                                                                                       0.78
                                                                                                                                                         (3.05)
Temperature Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                                    (2.97)
                                                                                                                Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                0.21***     0.18***    0.21***    0.23***    0.18***    0.16***   0.22***     0.22***    0.22***    0.22***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                   0.15***     0.13***    0.16***    0.16***    0.15***    0.14***   0.16***     0.16***    0.16***    0.16***
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                         0.05*       0.01       0.06*      0.05*      0.03       0.02      0.06*       0.06*      0.06*      0.06*
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                            0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00
Total land area                                                 0.02
Total land area (Ancestry Adjusted)                                         0.14***
Precipitation Volatility (mean)                                                        0.00
Precipitation Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                               0.01
Temperature Volatility (mean)                                                                                0.01
Temperature Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                       0.03
Precipitation Diversification (mean)                                                                                              0.00
Precipitation Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                      0.00
Temperature Diversification (mean)                                                                                                                       0.00
Temperature Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                                              0.00
                                                                                                              Semi-Partial R2
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                0.07***     0.05***    0.07***    0.08***    0.06***    0.05***   0.08***     0.08***    0.08***    0.08***
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                   0.05***     0.04***    0.05***    0.05***    0.05***    0.04***   0.05***     0.05***    0.05***    0.05***
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                         0.02*       0.00       0.02*      0.01*      0.01       0.00      0.02*       0.02*      0.02*      0.02*
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                            0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00
Total land area                                                 0.01
Total land area (Ancestry Adjusted)                                         0.04***
Precipitation Volatility (mean)                                                        0.00
Precipitation Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                               0.00
Temperature Volatility (mean)                                                                                0.00
Temperature Volatility (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                       0.01
Precipitation Diversification (mean)                                                                                              0.00
Precipitation Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                      0.00
Temperature Diversification (mean)                                                                                                                       0.00
Temperature Diversification (mean) (Ancestry Adjusted)                                                                                                              0.00
Continental FE                                                  Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Geography & Neolithic                                           Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                                     0.65        0.70       0.65       0.65       0.65       0.66      0.65        0.65       0.65       0.65
Observations                                                    87          87         87         87         87         87        87          87         87         87
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE potential crop yield, crop growth cycle and
their change post-1500 on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Additionally,
it shows that a country’s size and climatic volatility, as captured by its area, the volatility of precipitation and temperatures, and the spatial correlation of
precipitation and temperatures across cells have do not have a statistically nor economically significant effect. Geographical controls include absolute latitude,
mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized
by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation
in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical
significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                                   73
B.6     Long-Term Orientation and Age Structure of Population
Tables B.19-B.21 analyze the robustness of the results in the main body of the paper with respect
to the country’s age dependency ratio, life-expectancy, and income. These variables can affect
Long-Term Orientation if individuals level of patience is affected by their age or life expectancy.
Furthermore, if countries are sufficiently developed, they might have institutions like social security,
unemployment insurance, etc. which should affect its level of Long-Term Orientation. Reassuringly,
the results in these tables show that the results of the main body of the paper are not affected by the
inclusion of these variables. The effect of crop yield remains statistically and economically significant
and one additional standard deviation in crop yield increases Long-Term Orientation between 0.5
and 1 standard deviations depending on the specification and measure used. Additionally, as can be
seen the inclusion of these variables does not change the coefficient on crop yield in a statistically
significant manner. Furthermore, the age dependency ratio has a negative, though not always
statistically significant effect on Long-Term Orientation. Similarly, the life-expectancy at birth has
a positive, though not always statistically significant effect on LTO. Similarly, income levels are
positively correlated with LTO, although the result is not statistically significant.

          Table B.19: Potential Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Modern Development

                                                                         Long-Term Orientation
                                            (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
   Crop Yield                           11.67*** 10.87*** 13.23*** 12.96***
                                         (3.80)   (3.58)   (3.95)   (3.90)
   Crop Growth Cycle                      -4.53    -4.73    -4.90    -4.61
                                         (4.20)   (3.95)   (4.00)   (4.07)
   Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                           15.52***   14.42***   16.39*** 16.31***
                                                                                     (2.94)     (3.02)     (3.04)   (3.06)
   Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                     -6.30*     -6.27*     -6.62*   -6.33*
                                                                                     (3.54)     (3.41)     (3.50)   (3.49)
   Age Dependency Ratio                             -6.51**                                      -4.37
                                                     (2.95)                                     (2.84)
   Life Expectancy at Birth                                     7.24*                                       5.77
                                                                (4.32)                                     (3.80)
   Ln[GPD per capita]                                                       3.67                                         3.04
                                                                           (3.00)                                       (2.57)
   Continental FE                          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
   All Geography & Neolithic               Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes
   Adjusted-R2                             0.62       0.64       0.63       0.62       0.68       0.69      0.68         0.68
   Observations                             87         87         87         87         87         87        87           87
   Notes: This table shows the robustness of the main findings to the inclusion of a country’s age dependency ratio, its
   life-expectancy at birth, and log-income per capita in 2005. It establishes the positive, statistically, and economically
   significant effect of a country’s potential crop yield on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental
   fixed effects, geographical characteristics, and the timing of transition to agriculture. Additionally, it shows that
   a country’s age dependency ratio, life-expectancy, and log-income per capita n 2005 do not have a robust effect.
   Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast
   or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean
   and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard
   deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates
   are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10%
   level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                74
          Table B.20: Potential Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Modern Development

                                                                               Long-Term Orientation
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
Crop Yield (pre-1500)                           11.08***   10.19***   12.73***   12.09***
                                                 (3.72)      (3.60)     (3.78)    (3.84)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                   10.32***    9.70***   11.28***   10.78***
                                                 (2.85)      (2.77)     (2.57)    (2.81)
Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                     -7.72*       -6.95    -8.28**    -7.49*
                                                 (4.36)      (4.45)     (4.13)    (4.34)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)              -0.69       -1.38      -0.73     -0.89
                                                 (1.81)      (1.59)     (1.69)    (1.69)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                            12.83***   12.12***   13.59***   13.40***
                                                                                              (2.50)     (2.71)    (2.58)      (2.64)
Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                          9.91***   9.35***    10.35***    9.96***
                                                                                              (2.12)     (2.24)    (1.88)      (2.08)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                     -9.19***    -8.65**   -9.51***   -8.96***
                                                                                              (3.34)     (3.55)    (3.13)      (3.36)
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (Anc., post-1500)                                                        -0.37      -0.74     -0.48       -0.51
                                                                                              (1.48)     (1.37)    (1.45)      (1.44)
Age Dependency Ratio                                        -5.83*                                        -3.18
                                                            (3.01)                                       (2.76)
Life Expectancy at Birth                                               7.69*                                        5.82
                                                                       (4.22)                                      (3.67)
Ln[GPD per capita]                                                                 3.07                                        2.15
                                                                                  (2.88)                                      (2.52)
Continental FE                                     Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
All Geography & Neolithic                          Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                        0.63      0.65       0.64       0.63       0.69       0.69       0.69       0.69
Observations                                        87        87         87         87         87         87         87         87
Notes: This table shows the robustness of the main findings to the inclusion of a country’s age dependency ratio, its
life-expectancy at birth, and log-income per capita in 2005. It establishes the positive, statistically, and economically
significant effect of a country’s pre-1500CE potential crop yield and its change on its level of Long-Term Orientation,
while controlling for continental fixed effects, geographical characteristics, and the timing of transition to agriculture.
Additionally, it shows that a country’s age dependency ratio, life-expectancy, and log-income per capita n 2005 do not
have a robust effect. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness,
distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting
their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one
standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at
the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                               75
Table B.21: Potential Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Modern Development, for Grids that
                           Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                              Long-Term Orientation
                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)     (8)
  Crop Yield (pre-1500)                            6.37**    5.54*     6.60**     6.24*
                                                   (3.18)   (3.19)     (3.26)    (3.25)
  Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                    5.71**   5.67**     6.01**    5.88**
                                                   (2.66)   (2.45)     (2.37)    (2.54)
  Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                      -0.37    -0.52      0.60      0.45
                                                   (2.60)   (2.73)     (2.45)    (2.65)
  Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)            -4.75**   -4.66*    -5.42**   -5.14**
                                                   (2.25)   (2.36)     (2.30)    (2.39)
  Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                         7.85**    7.21**    7.48** 7.63**
                                                                                           (3.26)    (3.37)    (3.36)  (3.34)
  Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                     7.31***   6.93***   7.47*** 7.31***
                                                                                           (2.25)    (2.12)    (1.98)  (2.14)
  Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                                                        -0.95     -1.27     0.52    -0.01
                                                                                           (3.16)    (3.24)    (3.17)  (3.34)
  Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (Anc., post-1500)                                                   -3.44     -3.48    -4.06*   -3.80
                                                                                           (2.27)    (2.37)    (2.27)  (2.33)
  Age Dependency Ratio                                      -5.84**                                   -4.12
                                                             (2.88)                                  (2.62)
  Life Expectancy at Birth                                            7.14*                                    6.31
                                                                      (4.19)                                  (3.90)
  Ln[GPD per capita]                                                             2.42                                   2.35
                                                                                (3.08)                                 (2.71)
  Continental FE                                    Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes
  All Geography & Neolithic                         Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes
  Adjusted-R2                                       0.65     0.66      0.65      0.64      0.69      0.69      0.69    0.68
  Observations                                       87       87        87        87        87        87        87      87
  Notes: This table shows the robustness of the main findings to the inclusion of a country’s age dependency ratio, its
  life-expectancy at birth, and log-income per capita in 2005. It establishes the positive, statistically, and economically
  significant effect of a country’s pre-1500CE potential crop yield and its change (on grids that experienced a change in
  its potential crop) on its level of Long-Term Orientation, while controlling for continental fixed effects, geographical
  characteristics, and the timing of transition to agriculture. Additionally, it shows that a country’s age dependency ratio,
  life-expectancy, and log-income per capita n 2005 do not have a robust effect. Geographical controls include absolute
  latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies.
  All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation.
  Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on
  Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
  statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                              76
B.7      Long-Term Orientation, Education, and Other Economic Outcomes
This action presents additional results that show the effect of crop yield on economic development.
In particular, Table B.22 shows that the effects of crop yield on education presented in the main
body of the paper are robust to the use of crops available pre-1500CE on grids that experienced a
change in crop post-1500CE.

               Table B.22: Potential Crop Yield, Long-Term Orientation, and Education,
                        for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                                 Years of Schooling
                                                           (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)
      Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                   0.57**    0.57**     0.54**    0.55**     0.59**    0.59**
                                                         (0.25)    (0.26)     (0.26)    (0.27)     (0.26)    (0.27)
      Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)            0.25      0.29       0.20      0.22       0.19      0.20
                                                         (0.28)    (0.32)     (0.28)    (0.33)     (0.29)    (0.34)
      Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                -0.34                -0.31                -0.30
                                                                   (0.25)               (0.24)               (0.30)
      Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                         -0.00                0.03                 0.13
                                                                   (0.18)               (0.19)               (0.20)
      Geographical Controls                              Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
      Timing of Neolithic                                No        No         Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes
      Continental FE                                     No        No         No        No         Yes       Yes
      Adjusted-R2                                        0.50      0.50       0.50      0.50       0.57      0.57
      Observations                                       129       129        129       129        129       129
      Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE
      potential crop yield and potential crop growth cycle on its average number of years of schooling as measured by Barro
      and Lee (2013), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics. Geographical
      controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river,
      landlocked and island dummies, mean temperature, precipitation, shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in
      temperate climate zones, average precipitation, average suitability for agriculture. All independent variables have
      been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Heteroskedasticity robust
      standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the
      5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


   Table B.23 shows the effect of pre-1500 crop yield experienced by a country’s ancestors on
its level of log-income per capita, gross domestic savings rate, and years of schooling, when one
additionally controls for a country’s institutional level as measured by its level of democracy as
measured by the Polity IV project. As established, all three measures are positively correlated with
the crop yield experienced by the ancestors of country’s current inhabitants both when averaging
across all cells in a country or only on cells that experienced a change in crop use. Although
the statistical significance varies between both crop measures, the estimated coefficients suggest a
statistically and economically significant effect of crop yield on these variables.




                                                                  77
                    Table B.23: Potential Crop Yield and other Economic Outcomes

                                                             All Cells                         Cells Changing Crops
                                               Ln(GDPpc) Savings Schooling Ln(GDPpc) Savings                      Schooling
                                                      (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)
Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)          0.10                      5.71**    0.90***      0.18**         4.09*      0.58**
                                     (0.11)                    (2.52)    (0.28)       (0.08)         (2.16)     (0.27)
Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)   0.07                      -0.98     -0.02        -0.01          2.26       0.23
                                     (0.08)                    (1.86)    (0.28)       (0.10)         (2.09)     (0.34)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)        0.04                      3.81*     -0.03        -0.01          0.70       -0.45
                                     (0.10)                    (2.14)    (0.34)       (0.09)         (1.91)     (0.30)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500) 0.07                      1.86**    0.15         0.01           -0.95      0.13
Continental FE                                 Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
OPEC FE                                        Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
Geographical Controls & Neolithic              Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
Institutions                                   Yes             Yes       Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                    0.76            0.42      0.61         0.76           0.41       0.59
Observations                                   144             141       127          144            141        127
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s pre-1500 CE
potential crop yield on its level of log-income per capita in 2005, as measured by Alan Heston and Aten (2011); its gross
domestic saving rate in 2005, as measured by the World Development Indicators; and its average number of years of
schooling in 2005, as measured by Barro and Lee (2013), while controlling for continental fixed effects, a dummy for being a
member of OPEC, geographical characteristics, and institutions measured by the democracy index of the Polity IV project.
Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, distance to coast or river, landlocked and
island dummies, precipitation, shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones, average precipitation,
and average suitability for agriculture. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and
dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation
in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in
parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
hypothesis tests.




                                                              78
B.8    Restraint vs Indulgence
Hofstede (1991) presents a second measure that could capture some elements of time preference.
This measure, which he calls Restraint vs. Indulgence, “is characterized by a perception that one
can act as one pleases, spend money, and indulge in leisurely and fun-related activities with friends
or alone. All this predicts relatively high happiness. At the opposite pole we find a perception that
one’s actions are restrained by various social norms and prohibitions and a feeling that enjoyment of
leisurely activities, spending, and other similar types of indulgence are somewhat wrong.” (Hofstede
et al., 2010, p.281) Although this seems to capture some elements of long-term orientation, it is
also closely related to institutional and religious restraints on behavior, which are not related to
the type of restraint caused by having higher levels of patience. For this reason, the analysis in
this paper focuses on the Long-Term Orientation of Hofstede et al. (2010) instead of the Restraint
vs. Indulgence (RIV) one. Still, as the analysis below shows, the main results would remain
qualitatively unchanged with this other measure.
   The partial correlation between RIV and potential crop yield, after controlling for time invarying
continental heterogeneity, is 0.32 (p < 0.01). Table B.24 replicates the analysis of table 2, which
used Hofstede’s Long-Term Orientation, using the Restraint vs. Indulgence measure. As can be
seen there the results are fairly similar, although a little weaker in this case. This supports the
interpretation that RIV is a noisy measure of Long-Term Orientation and captures additional
elements unrelated to patience. Figure B.3 shows the partial correlation between both variables for
the specifications in columns (6) and (8). The next section analyzes further the relation between
crop yield, Long-Term Orientation and other societal cultural measures.




                  (a) Ancestry adjusted                          (b) Old World

                  Figure B.3: Restraint vs. Indulgence and Potential Crop Yield




                                                 79
 Table B.24: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Restraints vs. Indulgence
                                          (Hofstede)

                                                                          Restraints vs. Indulgence
                                                                 Whole World                                Old World
                                             (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)     (5)     (6)       (7)            (8)

Crop Yield                                 6.16*** 7.95*** 8.26*** 7.66**                         9.28*** 8.90***
                                           (1.78) (1.80) (1.77) (2.90)                            (1.86) (3.22)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                  1.05                                   0.60
                                                                   (4.07)                                 (4.46)
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                           7.38*** 7.21**
                                                                                 (1.71) (2.76)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                            0.30
                                                                                         (4.22)
Absolute latitude                                   0.83         1.40     1.67   3.00    3.06     0.97      1.12
                                                    (3.16)       (3.19)   (3.13) (3.40) (3.30)    (3.60)    (3.49)
Mean elevation                                      0.37         -0.18    -0.39 -0.60    -0.64    -2.39     -2.46
                                                    (2.96)       (3.13)   (3.18) (3.12) (3.16)    (2.87)    (2.90)
Terrain Roughness                                   -2.35        -2.55    -2.54 -2.53    -2.53    -2.49     -2.50
                                                    (2.15)       (2.18)   (2.18) (2.26) (2.27)    (2.25)    (2.26)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                      2.89     2.72                    3.79      3.69
                                                                 (3.38)   (3.29)                  (3.39)    (3.34)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                          2.58    2.54
                                                                                 (2.70) (2.66)

Continent FE                               Yes      Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes       Yes
Additional Geographical Controls           No       Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes     Yes     Yes       Yes
Old World Sample                           No       No           No       No      No      No      Yes       Yes
Adjusted-R2                                0.37     0.42         0.41     0.41    0.39    0.38    0.23      0.22
Observations                               86       86           86       86      86      86      71        71
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of a country’s potential crop
yield, measured in calories per hectare per year, on its level of restraint as opposed to indulgence measured, on a scale of
0 to 100, by Hofstede et al. (2010), while controlling for continental fixed effects and other geographical characteristics.
Additionally, it shows that a country’s potential crop growth cycle does not have a statistically significant effect on its
restraint vs. indulgence measure. In particular, columns (1)-(3) show the effect of crop yield after controlling for the
country’s absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to a coast or river, of it being
landlocked or an island, and the time since it transitioned to agriculture. Columns (4)-(6) show that the effect remains
after controlling for potential crop growth cycle and the effects of migration. Columns (7)-(8) show that restraining the
analysis to the Old World, where intercontinental migration played a smaller role, does not alter the results. Additional
geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables
have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on a country’s restraint
vs. indulgence measure. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes
statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.


B.9    Potential Crop Yield and Other Societal Preferences and Cultural Char-
       acteristics
This section analyzes the relation between potential crop yield, Long-Term Orientation and other
cultural characteristics of countries. Hofstede et al. (2010) present various additional measures of


                                                            80
societal preferences. In particular, they measure Uncertainty Avoidance, which measures the level
of tolerance and rigidness of society; Power distance, which measures the level of hierarchy and
inequality of power; Individualism, which measures how individualistic as opposed to collectivistic
a society is; and Masculinity, which measures a society’s level of internal cooperation or competition.
In order to complement this set of country-level cultural characteristics, this analysis also considers
the level of generalized trust.

                  Table B.25: Long-Term Orientation and Other Societal Preferences

                                                               Correlation Among Cultural Indices
                                          (LTO)       (RVI)      (Trust)     (Ind)       (PDI)      (Coop)      (UAI)
 Long-Term Orientation (LTO)              1.00
 Restraint vs. Indulgence (RIV)           0.53∗∗∗     1.00
 Trust                                    0.19        -0.07      1.00
 Individualism (Ind)                      0.12        -0.18      0.45∗∗∗     1.00
 Power Distance (PDI)                     0.05        0.34∗∗     -0.50∗∗∗    -0.66∗∗∗    1.00
 Cooperation                              0.01        -0.09      -0.21       0.05        0.16       1.00
 Uncertainty Avoidance (UAI)              -0.04       0.07       -0.50∗∗∗    -0.23       0.27∗      -0.00       1.00
 Notes: This table shows the correlations between Long-Term Orientation and various measures of societal preferences
 and culture. In particular, it includes all other measures presented by Hofstede et al. (2010) and the conventional
 measure of interpersonal trust based on the World Values Survey. As can be seen, the only measure that correlates with
 Long-Term Orientation is Restraint vs. Individualism (RIV). This is expected, since RIV seems to capture some elements
 of the ability to delay gratification, although it is mostly correlated with institutional level constraints on behavior. ***
 denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis
 tests.


    Table B.25 shows the Pearson correlations between these cultural characteristics. As expected,32
Long-Term Orientation is significantly statistically correlated with the measure of Restraint vs.
Indulgence. On the other hand, it is not correlated with any of the other cultural characteristics
measured by Hofstede et al. (2010), nor with levels of generalized trust.
    Table B.26 shows the effect of crop yield on each of these measures after controlling for continen-
tal fixed effects. As can be seen there, crop yield is only economically and statistically significant
in columns (1) and (2), i.e. for Long-Term Orientation and Restraint vs. Indulgence. On the other
hand, it is not economically nor statistically significant in the regression of any of the other cultural
measures.
    Tables B.27-B.29 show the relation between ancestry adjusted potential crop yield and its change
for crops available pre-1500CE on the various cultural measures after controlling for continental
fixed effects, geography, agricultural suitability and years since transition to agriculture. As can be
seen there, the effect of crop yield is economically and statistically significant only on Long-Term
Orientation.33
    Finally, tables B.30 and B.31 show the relation between ancestry adjusted crop yields and their
  32
    See previous subsection.
  33
    In some specifications crop yield or agricultural suitability are negatively correlated with levels of trust and
cooperation. This result supports similar findings by Litina (2013).


                                                          81
             Table B.26: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                      Cultural Indices
                        Long-Term        Restraint        Trust             Individua- Power        Coopera- Uncertainty
                        Orientation      vs                                 lism       Distance     tion     Avoidance
                                         Indulgence
                               (1)            (2)                 (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)

 Crop Yield        9.67***               6.76**           -4.24             -1.32        4.04       -2.16        4.37
                   (2.86)                (2.82)           (2.98)            (3.33)       (4.29)     (3.65)       (5.02)
 Crop Growth Cycle -3.78                 -1.81            -2.65             -1.52        2.35       10.07***     2.87
                   (2.29)                (3.14)           (2.86)            (3.10)       (3.81)     (3.10)       (5.27)

 Continental FE         Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
 Adjusted-R2            0.55             0.37             0.32              0.53         0.14       0.10         0.16
 Observations           87               85               85                62           62         62           62
 Notes: This table analyzes the relation between various societal preferences and cultural indices and potential crop
 yield and growth cycle. All columns account for continental fixed effects. It establishes that potential crop yield has
 a positive, statistically, and economically significant effect only on measures of a country’s level of time preference, i.e.
 Long-Term Orientation and Restraint vs Indulgence. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported
 in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
 two-sided hypothesis tests.



change for crops available pre-1500CE and Long-Term Orientation, after controlling for the effect
of geography, agricultural suitability, years since the transition to agriculture, and continental fixed
effects. Additionally it shows the effect of including each of the other cultural measures. As can be
seen there, the effect of crop yield is not affected by the inclusion of this large set of geographical
controls, nor of the cultural measures. Furthermore, except for Restraint vs. Indulgence, none of
the other cultural measures has an effect on Long-Term Orientation that is statistically significantly
different from zero.
   These results suggest that crop yield’s effect on a country’s culture is mainly on its level of time
preference. Furthermore, and reassuringly, there does not seem to exist a significant correlation
among the time preference measures and other measures of culture at the country level, which
might have biased the results.




                                                                 82
                             Table B.27: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                                               Cultural Indices
                                                    Long-Term        Restraint       Trust            Individua- Power         Coopera- Uncertainty
                                                    Orientation      vs                               lism       Distance      tion     Avoidance
                                                                     Indulgence
                                                           (1)            (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)             (7)

     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)        7.29**                  1.99            -10.60***        -8.90*      7.71*        -0.62        5.83
                                             (2.89)                  (3.51)          (2.97)           (4.47)      (4.46)       (5.02)       (4.10)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500) -1.10                   -1.95           -1.38            2.45        -1.47        3.13         4.33
                                             (3.01)                  (3.44)          (2.68)           (3.42)      (3.69)       (4.11)       (3.95)
     Land Suitability                        3.03                    6.51*           0.02             3.48        6.81*        7.47*        3.33
                                             (2.70)                  (3.28)          (3.33)           (3.41)      (3.43)       (3.84)       (2.72)




83
     Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors) -7.92**                 -1.30           -1.00            0.73        -0.44        3.89         -7.51*
                                             (3.75)                  (4.60)          (3.97)           (3.62)      (4.11)       (5.28)       (3.79)

     Continental FE                                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     All Geographical Controls                      Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                    0.62             0.38            0.46             0.66        0.41         0.43         0.61
     Observations                                   85               83              83               60          60           60           60
     Notes: This table analyzes the relation between various societal preferences and cultural indices and pre-1500CE potential crop yield and
     growth cycle experienced by a country’s ancestors. All columns account for continental fixed effects, geographical controls, land suitability,
     and the ancestry adjusted timing of transition to agriculture. It establishes that potential crop yield has a positive, statistically, and
     economically significant effect only on a country’s level of Long-Term Orientation. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean
     elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, precipitation, and shares of land in
     tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; ***
     denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
                                Table B.28: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                                                     Cultural Indices
                                                          Long-Term       Restraint        Trust            Individua- Power          Coopera- Uncertainty
                                                          Orientation     vs                                lism       Distance       tion     Avoidance
                                                                          Indulgence
                                                                 (1)           (2)                 (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)

     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           11.02***                  4.61             -11.23***        -7.70        8.80*        -1.80       5.94
                                                (2.63)                    (3.20)           (3.36)           (5.09)       (5.00)       (5.79)      (4.99)
     Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)        9.39***                   7.49***          -1.77            -1.98        3.66*        0.42        0.55
                                                (2.11)                    (2.69)           (3.15)           (2.66)       (2.07)       (2.33)      (2.39)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)    -5.75**                   -5.03            -0.43            2.27         -2.82        3.63        4.15
                                                (2.66)                    (3.41)           (3.43)           (3.81)       (4.14)       (4.44)      (4.35)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500) -0.58                     1.61             1.07             -3.73        -1.05        2.99        -0.04
                                                (1.55)                    (2.27)           (1.98)           (3.41)       (2.87)       (2.63)      (3.16)




84
     Land Suitability                           0.92                      4.39             0.05             3.99         6.70**       7.13*       3.30
                                                (2.14)                    (3.10)           (3.48)           (3.29)       (3.21)       (3.78)      (2.77)
     Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)    -7.18**                   -0.63            -0.98            0.87         -0.78        3.89        -7.56*
                                                (2.97)                    (4.49)           (4.03)           (3.39)       (4.09)       (5.54)      (3.89)

     Continental FE                                       Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     All Geographical Controls                            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                          0.68            0.42             0.44             0.67         0.40         0.41        0.59
     Observations                                         85              83               83               60           60           60          60
     Notes: This table analyzes the relation between various societal preferences and cultural indices and pre-1500CE potential crop yield
     and growth cycle and their change post-1500CE experienced by a country’s ancestors. All columns account for continental fixed effects,
     geographical controls, land suitability, and the ancestry adjusted timing of transition to agriculture. It establishes that potential crop yield
     has a positive, statistically, and economically significant effect only on a country’s level of Long-Term Orientation. Geographical controls
     include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies,
     precipitation, and shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates
     are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided
     hypothesis tests.
                                Table B.29: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                                                     Cultural Indices
                                                         Long-Term        Restraint        Trust           Individua- Power          Coopera- Uncertainty
                                                         Orientation      vs                               lism       Distance       tion     Avoidance
                                                                          Indulgence
                                                                (1)            (2)                 (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)

     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           10.03***                  6.58             -7.11*          -10.88       6.69         -7.60       3.03
                                                (3.05)                    (3.99)           (3.72)          (6.59)       (5.92)       (5.98)      (5.55)
     Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)        9.03***                   7.91**           -0.53           -3.05        2.50         -1.51       -0.39
                                                (2.16)                    (3.10)           (3.48)          (2.62)       (2.18)       (2.23)      (2.21)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)    -5.98**                   -4.59            0.35            2.20         -2.50        3.50        4.06
                                                (2.75)                    (3.57)           (3.47)          (3.82)       (4.11)       (4.15)      (4.33)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500) -0.77                     2.02             1.96            -3.72        -0.89        3.00        -0.05
                                                (1.60)                    (2.42)           (2.09)          (3.18)       (2.90)       (2.51)      (3.24)




85
     Land Suitability (Ancestors)               2.33                      0.91             -6.17           6.94         7.75*        12.54***    6.08
                                                (3.15)                    (4.86)           (5.10)          (4.99)       (4.22)       (3.91)      (3.98)
     Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)    -7.58**                   -0.19            0.56            -0.60        -2.13        1.22        -8.88**
                                                (3.04)                    (4.62)           (4.09)          (3.32)       (4.40)       (5.85)      (3.77)

     Continental FE                                      Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     All Geographical Controls                           Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                         0.68             0.41             0.46            0.68         0.39         0.46        0.60
     Observations                                        85               83               83              60           60           60          60
     Notes: This table analyzes the relation between various societal preferences and cultural indices and pre-1500CE potential crop yield
     and growth cycle and their change post-1500CE experienced by a country’s ancestors. All columns account for continental fixed effects,
     geographical controls, and the land suitability and the timing of transition to agriculture experienced by the ancestors of the country. It
     establishes that potential crop yield has a positive, statistically, and economically significant effect only on a country’s level of Long-Term
     Orientation. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river,
     landlocked and island dummies, precipitation, and shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. Heteroskedasticity
     robust standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and *
     at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
          Table B.30: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                        Long-Term Orientation
                                                   (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                 7.29**    6.76**    7.84** 11.75** 10.33** 10.74**             10.21**
                                                 (2.89)    (2.89)    (3.51) (5.19)   (5.07)  (4.68)              (4.92)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)           -1.10     -0.62     -1.90  -2.92    -2.55   -3.26               -2.91
                                                 (3.01)    (3.06)    (3.16) (5.14)   (5.20)  (5.19)              (4.96)
Restraint vs. Indulgence                                   4.44**
                                                           (2.05)
Trust                                                                  -0.09
                                                                      (3.12)
Individualism                                                                    3.01
                                                                                (4.22)
Power Distance                                                                             0.77
                                                                                          (3.55)
Cooperation                                                                                           4.39
                                                                                                     (3.57)
Uncertainty Avoidance                                                                                              1.59
                                                                                                                 (5.58)
Land Suitability                                   3.03    1.73       2.74       -2.81     -2.62      -3.93       -2.60
                                                  (2.70)  (2.80)     (2.72)     (3.55)    (3.72)     (3.87)      (3.81)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)          -7.92** -7.71**     -7.51*      -7.50     -7.39      -8.22       -6.88
                                                  (3.75)  (3.67)     (3.82)     (5.40)    (5.50)     (5.14)      (5.53)
Continental FE                                    Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
All Geographical Controls                         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
Adjusted-R2                                       0.62       0.63      0.61      0.56      0.56       0.58        0.56
Observations                                       85         83        83        60        60         60          60
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically and economically effect of pre-1500CE potential crop yield
and growth cycle experienced by a country’s ancestors on its level of Long-Term Orientation. All columns account
for continental fixed effects, geographical controls, and the land suitability and timing of transition to agriculture
experienced by the country’s ancestors. It establishes that the inclusion of other societal preferences and cultural
indices does not affect the estimated coefficient on potential crop yield. Furthermore, other cultural values do not have
a statistically significant effect different from zero. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation
above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, precipitation, and shares
of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error estimates are
reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level,
all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                           86
             Table B.31: Crop Yield, Crop Growth Cycle, and Other Societal Preferences

                                                                              Long-Term Orientation
                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)           (7)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)           10.03*** 9.38*** 10.30*** 13.54** 11.47* 12.76* 11.17*
                                             (3.05)  (3.21)   (3.41)  (6.49) (6.78) (6.78)  (6.53)
Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)         9.03*** 8.55*** 8.97*** 7.45*** 6.88** 7.11*** 6.84***
                                             (2.16)  (2.53)   (2.23)  (2.47) (2.63) (2.53)  (2.50)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)     -5.98**  -5.71*  -6.05**   -5.53  -5.14  -5.75   -5.29
                                             (2.75)  (3.08)   (2.76)  (4.88) (5.32) (5.14)  (4.89)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500)    -0.77   -0.88    -0.71    0.17  -0.61  -1.16   -0.59
                                             (1.60)  (1.71)   (1.84)  (3.11) (3.11) (3.20)  (3.03)
Restraint vs. Indulgence                               2.18
                                                     (2.22)
Trust                                                           0.63
                                                              (3.10)
Individualism                                                           4.80
                                                                      (3.96)
Power Distance                                                                -0.45
                                                                             (3.90)
Cooperation                                                                           3.95
                                                                                    (4.20)
Uncertainty Avoidance                                                                         1.18
                                                                                            (6.06)
Land Suitability (Ancestors)                   2.33   2.30      2.35   -2.71  -1.13  -3.67   -1.61
                                             (3.15)  (3.30)   (3.51)  (4.93) (4.76) (5.54)  (5.32)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)     -7.58** -7.49** -7.51**    -7.86  -8.03  -8.22   -7.53
                                             (3.04)  (3.05)   (3.14)  (5.32) (5.34) (5.07)  (5.91)
Continental FE                                          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
All Geographical Controls                               Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Adjusted-R2                                             0.68        0.68       0.67        0.59      0.58      0.59       0.58
Observations                                             85          83         83          60        60        60         60
Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically and economically effect of pre-1500CE potential crop yield,
growth cycle and their change post-1500CE experienced by a country’s ancestors on its level of Long-Term Orientation.
All columns account for continental fixed effects, geographical controls, and the land suitability and timing of transition
to agriculture experienced by the country’s ancestors. It establishes that the inclusion of other societal preferences and
cultural indices does not affect the estimated coefficient on potential crop yield. Furthermore, other cultural values
do not have a statistically significant effect different from zero. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean
elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, landlocked and island dummies, precipitation,
and shares of land in tropical, subtropical and in temperate climate zones. Heteroskedasticity robust standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at
the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                               87
B.10     Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Ori-
         entation in Second-Generation Migrants
This section presents additional supporting tables for the analysis of Long-Term Orientation in
second-generation migrants.

                             Table B.32: Long-Term Orientation and Education

                                                                     Years of Schooling
                                   Second-Generation Migrants                             All Individuals
                                    (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)     (5)        (6)        (7)             (8)
   Long-Term Orientation 0.35*** 0.37*** 0.36** 0.32** 0.79*** 0.88*** 0.70*** 0.63***
                         (0.13) (0.14) (0.14) (0.13) (0.05) (0.05) (0.05) (0.04)
   Country FE                    No         Yes        Yes      Yes       No        Yes        Yes        Yes
   Sex & Age                     No         No         Yes      Yes       No        No         Yes        Yes
   Pray & Health                 No         No         No       Yes       No        No         No         Yes
   Adjusted-R2                   0.01       0.10       0.10     0.11      0.04      0.15       0.19       0.21
   R2                            0.01       0.13       0.13     0.16      0.04      0.15       0.20       0.21
   Observations                  705        705        705      705       42016     42016      42016      42016
   Notes: This table establishes the positive correlation between Long-Term Orientation and individual education levels
   for respondents in the third wave of the European Social Survey. Long-term orientation is measured on a scale of
   0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your future or do you just take each day as it
   comes?”. The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey (2006). All independent variables
   have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
   be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
   Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country
   of origin level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
   two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                               88
                            Table B.33: Long-Term Orientation and Income

                                                             Total Household Income
                              Second-Generation Migrants                               All Individuals
                                (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)              (8)
Long-Term Orientation 0.33** 0.22* 0.22** 0.23** 0.35*** 0.45*** 0.36*** 0.32***
                      (0.14) (0.12) (0.10) (0.11) (0.08) (0.04) (0.04) (0.04)
Country FE                    No       Yes      Yes       Yes      No         Yes        Yes        Yes
Sex & Age                     No       No       Yes       Yes      No         No         Yes        Yes
Pray & Health                 No       No       No        Yes      No         No         No         Yes
Adjusted-R2                   0.01     0.40     0.40      0.41     0.01       0.50       0.52       0.53
R2                            0.01     0.43     0.43      0.47     0.01       0.50       0.52       0.53
Observations                  383      383      383       383      29323      29323      29323      29323
Notes: This table establishes the positive correlation between Long-Term Orientation and individual income levels
for respondents in the third wave of the European Social Survey. Long-term orientation is measured on a scale of
0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your future or do you just take each day as it
comes?”. The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey (2006). All independent variables
have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country
of origin level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                           89
  Table B.34: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation

                                                                 Long-Term Orientation (Ordered Probit)
                                                                               Country of Origin
                                                                 Mother                                       Parents
                                                 (1)      (2)        (3)     (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)            (8)

Crop Yield                                    0.11*** 0.11*** 0.23*** 0.27***                0.23***            0.31***
                                              (0.04) (0.04) (0.07) (0.07)                    (0.09)             (0.11)
Crop Growth Cycle                                                     -0.13*                 -0.09              -0.10
                                                                      (0.07)                 (0.07)             (0.09)
Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                          0.30***             0.27***
                                                                                (0.08)              (0.09)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                   -0.14*              -0.10
                                                                                (0.07)              (0.08)
Absolute Latitude                                                0.14*** 0.11** 0.12**       0.15** 0.16**      0.16**
                                                                 (0.05) (0.06) (0.06)        (0.07) (0.07)      (0.08)
Mean Elevation                                                   -0.00   -0.02  -0.02        0.01   0.01        0.04
                                                                 (0.05) (0.04) (0.04)        (0.05) (0.05)      (0.05)
Terrain Roughness                                                0.15** 0.16*** 0.17***      0.10** 0.11**      0.13***
                                                                 (0.06) (0.06) (0.06)        (0.04) (0.04)      (0.04)
Neolithic Transition Timing                                      -0.08   -0.06               -0.02              -0.08
                                                                 (0.06) (0.05)               (0.05)             (0.06)
Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                         -0.08               -0.04
                                                                                (0.05)              (0.06)

Country FE                                    Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
Sex & Age                                     Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
Other Ind. Chars.                             No       Yes       Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
Additional Geographical Controls              No       No        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
Old World Sample                              No       No        No        No      No        No        No       Yes
Pseudo-R2                                     0.01     0.02      0.03      0.03    0.03      0.03      0.03     0.03
Observations                                  705      705       705       705     705       566       566      557
Notes: This table establishes that the potential crop yield in the country of origin of first generation migrants in Europe
has a positive, statistically, and economically significant effect on the Long-Term Orientation of their foreign born children.
Long-term orientation is measured on a scale of 0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your future
or do you just take each day as it comes?”.The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey (2006). The
analysis is restricted to second-generation migrants, i.e. individuals who were born in the country where the interview was
done, but whose parents were born overseas and migrated to that country. All columns include fixed effects for the country
where the interview was conducted, and individual characteristics (sex, age, education, marital status, health status, religiosity).
Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. In columns (1)-(4) the
potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and geographical characteristics of the country of origin of the mother are used
as controls. Column (5) uses the data of the father’s country of origin, while columns (6)-(7) restricts the sample to individuals
whose parents come from the same country of origin. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their
mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard
deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates
are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country of origin level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at
the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                90
    Table B.35: Pre-1500 Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term
                          Orientation in Second-Generation Migrants

                                                                              Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                     Country of Origin
                                                                           Mother                                   Parents
                                                  (1)     (2)        (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)            (9)

Crop Yield (pre-1500)                           2.96** 3.40** 6.45*** 6.50*** 6.65***                   5.08**            7.62**
                                                (1.18) (1.32) (2.17) (2.16) (2.15)                      (2.48)            (2.92)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                         0.44    1.37                      1.98              2.29
                                                                      (1.20) (1.40)                     (1.63)            (1.65)
Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                  -1.60                     -2.65             -2.36
                                                                              (2.58)                    (2.37)            (2.53)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                          -1.27                     -0.07             -0.24
                                                                              (0.92)                    (1.19)            (1.29)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                              8.10***            6.54**
                                                                                              (2.03)             (2.55)
Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                           1.00               1.87
                                                                                              (1.45)             (1.66)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                       -2.42              -3.16
                                                                                              (2.53)             (2.67)
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (Anc., post-1500)                                                       -1.03              0.13
                                                                                              (0.92)             (1.17)

Country FE                                      Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Sex & Age                                       Yes     Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Other Ind. Chars.                               No      Yes     Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Geographical Controls & Neolithic               No      No      Yes          Yes      Yes     Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Old World Sample                                No      No      No           No       No      No        No       No       Yes
R2                                              0.06    0.11    0.12         0.12     0.12    0.12      0.15     0.15     0.15
Observations                                    705     705     705          705      705     705       566      566      557
Notes: This table establishes that the potential crop yield in the country of origin of first generation migrants in Europe has a
positive, statistically, and economically significant effect on the Long-Term Orientation of their foreign born children. Long-term
orientation is measured on a scale of 0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your future or do you
just take each day as it comes?”. The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey (2006). The analysis is
restricted to second-generation migrants, i.e. individuals who were born in the country where the interview was done, but whose
parents were born overseas and migrated to that country. All columns include fixed effects for the country where the interview
was conducted, and individual characteristics (sex, age, education, marital status, health status, religiosity). Geographical controls
include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island
dummies. In columns (1)-(4) the potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and geographical characteristics of the country of
origin of the mother are used as controls. Column (5) uses the data of the father’s country of origin, while columns (6)-(7) restricts
the sample to individuals whose parents come from the same country of origin. All independent variables have been normalized by
subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a
one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country of origin level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level,
** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                91
   Table B.36: Pre-1500 Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term
Orientation in Second-Generation Migrants, for Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                            Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                    Country of Origin
                                                                       Mother                                           Parents
                                                   (1)     (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)     (6)      (7)      (8)              (9)

Crop Yield (pre-1500)                           3.71*** 3.81*** 6.16*** 6.09*** 6.44***                 4.97**            4.85*
                                                (1.19) (1.30) (1.59) (1.63) (1.67)                      (2.42)            (2.46)
Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                           0.42    -0.25                   0.39              0.94
                                                                        (1.58) (1.52)                   (1.45)            (1.47)
Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                    0.14                    -0.07             0.79
                                                                                (1.88)                  (2.28)            (2.30)
Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                            1.18                    2.06              1.01
                                                                                (1.62)                  (1.63)            (1.37)
Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                              6.49***            4.50**
                                                                                              (1.70)             (2.23)
Crop Yield Change (Ancestors, post-1500)                                                      -0.86              0.41
                                                                                              (1.49)             (1.47)
Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                       0.28               0.22
                                                                                              (1.86)             (2.30)
Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (Anc., post-1500)                                                       1.88               2.24
                                                                                              (1.59)             (1.62)

Country FE                                      Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Sex & Age                                       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Other Ind. Chars.                               No       Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Geographical Controls & Neolithic               No       No       Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes
Old World Sample                                No       No       No        No       No       No        No       No       Yes
R2                                              0.06     0.11     0.12      0.12     0.12     0.12      0.15     0.15     0.15
Observations                                    705      705      705       705      705      705       566      566      557
Notes: This table establishes that the potential crop yield in the country of origin of first generation migrants in Europe has a
positive, statistically, and economically significant effect on the Long-Term Orientation of their foreign born children. Long-term
orientation is measured on a scale of 0 to 100 by the answer to the question “Do you generally plan for your future or do you
just take each day as it comes?”.The data is taken from the third wave of the European Social Survey (2006). The analysis is
restricted to second-generation migrants, i.e. individuals who were born in the country where the interview was done, but whose
parents were born overseas and migrated to that country. All columns include fixed effects for the country where the interview
was conducted, and individual characteristics (sex, age, education, marital status, health status, religiosity). Geographical controls
include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea level, terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island
dummies. In columns (1)-(4) the potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and geographical characteristics of the country of
origin of the mother are used as controls. Column (5) uses the data of the father’s country of origin, while columns (6)-(7) restricts
the sample to individuals whose parents come from the same country of origin. All independent variables have been normalized by
subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a
one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error
estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the country of origin level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level,
** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.




                                                                 92
        Table B.37: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation in Second-Generation Migrants

                                                                                           Long-Term Orientation (weighted OLS)
                                                           All crops                                  All cells                              Changing cells/crops
                                             (Survey)     (Nc )     (N )    (Nm ) (Survey)       (Nc )       (N )    (Nm ) (Survey) (Nc )         (N )          (Nm )
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                  7.10***    15.24*** 12.16*** 9.29***
                                             (2.48)     (3.25) (2.83) (3.42)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Anc.)                -4.72*     1.46     0.05     4.58
                                             (2.43)     (3.78) (3.25) (4.43)
     Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                                                    7.03***    15.24*** 12.29*** 11.88***
                                                                                    (2.39)     (2.54) (2.21) (2.86)
     Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                                  0.87       0.50     0.33     -1.75
                                                                                    (1.55)     (2.61) (2.20) (1.94)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                                             -3.28      2.98     1.61     4.23
                                                                                    (2.77)     (4.25) (3.90) (4.93)
     Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                                              -1.70*     1.11     -0.04    1.34
                                                                                    (0.98)     (1.69) (1.41) (1.39)
     Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                                                                                            6.38***   9.39*** 8.18*** 8.25***
                                                                                                                            (1.97)    (2.68) (2.25) (2.24)
     Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                                                                          -1.46     0.92    0.38    -0.73




93
                                                                                                                            (1.66)    (2.74) (2.43) (2.27)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                                                                                     -0.96     1.26    1.32    -0.45
                                                                                                                            (2.27)    (2.49) (2.31) (2.45)
     Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                                                                                      2.49      0.78    -0.70 -2.60
                                                                                                                            (1.59)    (1.97) (1.95) (1.95)
     Country FE                              Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Sex & Age                               Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Education & Marital Status              Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Pray & Health                           Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Geographical Controls & Neolithic       Yes        Yes       Yes      Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes     Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
     Adjusted-R2                             0.05       0.20      0.23     0.27     0.05       0.21       0.24      0.28    0.05      0.17      0.22     0.27
     R2                                      0.13       0.26      0.29     0.32     0.13       0.27       0.30      0.34    0.13      0.24      0.28     0.33
     Observations                            705        705       705      705      705        705        705       705     705       705       705      705
     Notes: This table shows that the results of Tables 6-B.36 are robust to the weighting scheme applied in the analysis. (Survey) uses the weights provided by the survey
     (variable dweight in the ESS), (Nc ) uses weights that ensure the same sample size of countries of origin within each interview country, (N ) uses weighs that additionally
     ensure the same sample size for each country of origin in each country of interview, (Nm ) uses weighs that ensure the same sample size for each country of origin. The
     positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on an individual’s Long-Term Orientation is robust and increasingly so as one weighs
     appropriately. All columns include continental fixed effects, geographical controls, and the ancestry adjusted timing of the Neolithic. Crop yield, crop growth cycle, and
     all other geographical controls refer to the country of origin of the mother. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation above sea-level, mean terrain
     roughness, distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by
     their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
     Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; ***
     denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
B.11    Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Ori-
        entation in the World Values Survey
Tables 7 and B.38 in section 6 included the same geographical controls and years since transition
to agriculture in the analysis as used in sections 4 and 5. Given that the same set of variables was
not available at the regional level, it could not be employed in the regional analysis of section 6.
For this reason, tables B.41 and B.42 replicate the analysis of tables 7 and B.38 using the same set
of controls used in the regional analysis in tables 9 and B.43. As can be seen the results in both
sets of tables is similar and are not driven by the particular choice of controls.




                                                  94
             Table B.38: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis)

                                                                                             Long-Term Orientation (Probit)
                                                                                      Whole World                                           Old World
                                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)                    (8)

     Crop Yield                                  0.036***     0.041***    0.054***     0.051***     0.048***     0.027***                   0.055***
                                                 (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)                    (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                                                                           0.029***                   0.024***
                                                                                                                 (0.003)                    (0.003)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                                                                    0.047***
                                                                                                                               (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                                                             0.016***
                                                                                                                               (0.003)
     Absolute Latitude                                                    -0.014***    -0.021***    -0.023***    -0.013***     -0.004*      0.003
                                                                          (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)
     Mean Elevation                                                       0.003        0.012***     0.008***     0.002         0.007***     0.002
                                                                          (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)
     Terrain Roughness                                                    -0.020***    -0.021***    -0.016***    -0.017***     -0.024***    -0.027***
                                                                          (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)




95
     Neolithic Transition Timing                                                       -0.031***    -0.038***    -0.040***                  -0.029***
                                                                                       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)                    (0.002)
     Neolithic Transition Timing (Ancestors)                                                                                   -0.035***
                                                                                                                               (0.002)

     Wave FE                                     Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
     Continent FE                                No           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
     Additional Geographical Controls            No           No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
     Individual Characteristics                  No           No          No           No           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
     Old World Subsample                         No           No          No           No           No           No            No           Yes
     Pseudo-R2                                   0.00         0.02        0.02         0.02         0.03         0.03          0.03         0.04
     Observations                                217953       217953      217953       217953       217953       217953        217953       176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term
     Orientation. Shown are the average marginal effects of probit regressions. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important
     child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth
     cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or
     river, and landlocked and island dummies. Individual Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole
     world sample, while column (8) shows the results for the Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and
     dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-
     Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual
     characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
     Table B.39: Pre-1500 Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis), for
                                             Grids that Experienced Change in Crop post-1500

                                                                                                   Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                                 Whole World                                                 Old World
                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)            (7)               (8)

     Crop Yield (pre-1500)                               0.039***      0.053***      0.052***      0.049***      0.041***      0.034***                      0.034***
                                                         (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)                       (0.002)
     Crop Yield Change (post-1500)                                                                               0.034***      0.032***                      0.036***
                                                                                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)                       (0.002)
     Crop Growth Cycle (pre-1500)                                                                                              0.013***                      0.013***
                                                                                                                               (0.002)                       (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (post-1500)                                                                                      -0.008***                     -0.011***
                                                                                                                               (0.001)                       (0.001)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                                                                         0.029***
                                                                                                                                              (0.002)
     Crop Yield Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                                                                      0.028***
                                                                                                                                              (0.002)




96
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors, pre-1500)                                                                                                  0.014***
                                                                                                                                              (0.002)
     Crop Growth Cycle Change (Anc., post-1500)                                                                                               -0.012***
                                                                                                                                              (0.001)

     Wave FE                                             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
     Continent FE                                        Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
     Geographical Controls & Neolithic                   No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
     Individual Characteristics                          No            No            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
     Old World Subsample                                 No            No            No            No            No            No             No             Yes
     Adjusted-R2                                         0.02          0.03          0.03          0.04          0.04          0.04           0.04           0.05
     Observations                                        217953        217953        217953        217953        217953        217953         217953         176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term
     Orientation. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns
     include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the
     country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. Individual
     Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole world sample, while column (8) shows the results for the
     Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can
     be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard
     error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
                         Table B.40: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (Weighted)

                                                                                             Long-Term Orientation (Weighted OLS)
                                                              All crops                                  All cells                                 Changing cells/crops
                                                (No)    (Survey) (Same N ) (Pop)           (No)    (Survey) (Same N ) (Pop)           (No)    (Survey) (Same N )            (Pop)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                   0.048*** 0.047***    0.056***    0.015**
                                               (0.003) (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.006)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)            0.017*** 0.018***    0.010***   0.046***
                                               (0.003) (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.006)
     Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                                                          0.046*** 0.044*** 0.048*** 0.021***
                                                                                           (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.004)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                                                  -0.012*** -0.010*** -0.019*** 0.006
                                                                                           (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005)
     Crop Yield Ch. (post-1500)                                                           0.052*** 0.051*** 0.062*** 0.038***
                                                                                           (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004)
     Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                                                    0.021*** 0.020*** 0.014*** 0.033***
                                                                                           (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003)
     Crop Yield (Anc., pre-1500)                                                                                                   0.033*** 0.032*** 0.028***             0.033***
                                                                                                                                    (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)                (0.004)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Anc., pre-1500)                                                                                            0.010*** 0.016*** 0.014***               -0.000




97
                                                                                                                                    (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)                (0.003)
     Crop Yield Ch. (post-1500)                                                                                                    0.032*** 0.031*** 0.041***             0.026***
                                                                                                                                    (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)                (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle Ch. (post-1500)                                                                                             -0.006*** -0.005*** -0.007***          0.007***
                                                                                                                                    (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)                (0.003)
     Wave FE                                    Yes    Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes
     Continent FE                               Yes    Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes
     Individual Chars                           Yes    Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes
     Geographical Controls & Neolithic          Yes    Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes              Yes
     R2                                         0.04   0.05          0.05       0.07       0.05      0.05       0.05       0.07      0.04       0.05        0.05            0.07
     Adjusted-R2                                0.04   0.05          0.05       0.07       0.05      0.05       0.05       0.07      0.04       0.05        0.05            0.07
     Observations                              217953 217953        217953     217953     217953    217953     217953     217953    217953     217953      217953          217953
     Notes: This table shows that the results of Tables 7-B.39 are robust to the weighting scheme applied in the analysis. (No) refers to unweighted OLS, (Survey) uses the weights
     provided by the survey (variable s017 in the WVS), (Same N ) uses weights that ensure same sample size across countries (variable s018 in WVS), (Pop) weighs by population
     (s018 ∗ P opulation/1000). The positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-Term Orientation is
     robust. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns include fixed effects
     for the wave the interview was conducted, continental fixed effect, geographical controls, and the ancestry adjusted timing of the Neolithic. Potential crop yield, potential
     crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the country where the interview was conducted. Geographical controls include absolute latitude, mean elevation
     above sea-level, mean terrain roughness, distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. Individual Characteristics include age, sex, education, and income. All
     independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect
     of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses;
     clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for
     two-sided hypothesis tests.
            Table B.41: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis)

                                                                                         Long-Term Orientation (OLS)
                                                                                       Whole World                                                 Old World
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)                 (8)

     Crop Yield                              0.036***      0.041***      0.035***       0.035***       0.032***       0.020***                     0.046***
                                             (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)                      (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                                                                                0.019***                     0.023***
                                                                                                                      (0.003)                      (0.003)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                                                                          0.041***
                                                                                                                                     (0.002)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                                                                   0.011***
                                                                                                                                     (0.003)
     Absolute Latitude                                                   -0.004*        -0.004*        -0.005*        0.003          0.010***      0.015***
                                                                         (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)
     Mean Elevation                                                      0.013***       0.013***       0.008***       0.003          0.001         -0.007***
                                                                         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.002)       (0.003)




98
     Terrain Roughness                                                   -0.020***      -0.020***      -0.016***      -0.016***      -0.017***     -0.021***
                                                                         (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)

     Wave FE                                 Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Continent FE                            No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           No
     Additional Geographical Controls        No            No            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Individual Chars                        No            No            No             No             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Old World Subsample                     No            No            No             No             No             No             No            Yes
     Adjusted-R2                             0.01          0.02          0.03           0.03           0.04           0.04           0.04          0.05
     Observations                            217953        217953        217953         217953         217953         217953         217953        176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-
     Term Orientation. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All
     columns include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls
     refer to the country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical controls include percentage of land within 100 kms. of sea, landlocked
     dummy, and suitable area. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole world sample, while column (8) shows the results for the Old World sample. All
     independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared
     and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error
     estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1%
     level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
           Table B.42: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Country Analysis)

                                                                                       Long-Term Orientation (Probit)
                                                                                     Whole World                                                 Old World
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)                  (8)

     Crop Yield                             0.036***      0.041***      0.035***      0.035***       0.032***       0.020***                     0.046***
                                            (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)                      (0.003)
     Crop Growth Cycle                                                                                              0.019***                     0.022***
                                                                                                                    (0.003)                      (0.003)
     Crop Yield (Ancestors)                                                                                                       0.041***
                                                                                                                                  (0.002)
     Crop Growth Cycle (Ancestors)                                                                                                0.011***
                                                                                                                                  (0.003)
     Absolute Latitude                                                  -0.004*       -0.004*        -0.004*        0.004         0.010***       0.014***
                                                                        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)
     Mean Elevation                                                     0.012***      0.012***       0.007***       0.003         0.001          -0.007***
                                                                        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)




99
     Terrain Roughness                                                  -0.019***     -0.019***      -0.015***      -0.015***     -0.016***      -0.020***
                                                                        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.002)

     Wave FE                                Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Continent FE                           No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            No
     Additional Geographical Controls       No            No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Individual Chars                       No            No            No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
     Old World Subsample                    No            No            No            No             No             No            No             Yes
     Pseudo-R2                              0.00          0.02          0.02          0.02           0.03           0.03          0.03           0.04
     Observations                           217953        217953        217953        217953         217953         217953        217953         176489
     Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has
     Long-Term Orientation. Shown are the average marginal effects of probit regressions. Individuals have Long-Term Orientation if they consider thrift as an
     especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns include fixed effects for the wave the interview was conducted. Potential crop
     yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the country where the interview was conducted. Additional geographical
     controls include distance to coast or river, and landlocked and island dummies. Columns (1)-(7) show the results for the whole world sample, while column
     (8) shows the results for the Old World sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard
     deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation.
     Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics
     level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
             Table B.43: Potential Crop Yield, Potential Crop Growth Cycle, and Long-Term Orientation (WVS Regional Analysis)

                                                                                             Long-Term Orientation (Probit)
                                                                                Whole World                                                         Old World
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)                    (8)

      Crop Yield                              0.036***      0.039***      0.041***       0.038***       0.035***      0.007**        0.059***       0.008**
                                              (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.004)
      Crop Growth Cycle                                                                                 0.007**       -0.011***      0.000          -0.010**
                                                                                                        (0.003)       (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.004)
      Absolute Latitude                                                   0.007***       0.006**        0.008***      0.028***       0.012***       0.034***
                                                                          (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.006)        (0.003)        (0.008)
      Mean Elevation                                                      -0.013***      -0.012***      -0.011***     0.002          -0.001         0.009**
                                                                          (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.004)
      Terrain Roughness                                                   0.010***       0.010***       0.009***      -0.009***      -0.020***      -0.015***
                                                                          (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.003)
                                                                          (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.004)




100
      Wave FE                                 Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
      Continent FE                            No            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           No             Yes            No
      Additional Geographical Controls        No            No            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
      Individual Characteristics              No            No            No             Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
      Country FE                              No            No            No             No             No            Yes            No             Yes
      Old World Subsample                     No            No            No             No             No            No             Yes            Yes
      Pseudo-R2                               0.00          0.02          0.02           0.03           0.03          0.06           0.04           0.07
      Observations                            217953        217953        185659         185659         185659        185659         151299         151299
      Notes: This table establishes the positive, statistically, and economically significant effect of potential crop yield on the probability an individual has Long-
      Term Orientation across regions, accounting of country fixed effects. Shown are the average marginal effects of probit regressions. Individuals have Long-Term
      Orientation if they consider thrift as an especially important child quality in the World Values Survey. All columns include fixed effects for the wave the interview
      was conducted. Potential crop yield, potential crop growth cycle, and all other geographical controls refer to the region where the interview was conducted.
      Additional geographical controls include percentage of land within 100 kms. of sea, landlocked dummy, and area suitable for agriculture. Individual Characteristics
      include age, sex, education, and income. Columns (1)-(6) show the results for the whole world sample, while columns (7)-(8) show the results for the Old World
      sample. All independent variables have been normalized by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviation. Thus, all coefficients can be compared
      and show the effect of a one standard deviation in the independent variable on Long-Term Orientation. Heteroskedasticity robust clustered standard error estimates
      are reported in parentheses; clustering at the region of interview and individual characteristics level; *** denotes statistical significance at the 1% level, ** at the
      5% level, and * at the 10% level, all for two-sided hypothesis tests.
B.12        The Effect of Migration on the Estimation: A Monte Carlo Study
The cross country analysis in this paper has tried to correct the measurement error caused by
large intercontinental and cross country migrations by using the population matrix developed by
Putterman and Weil (2010) or by using the Old World subsample. Since such a matrix does
not exist for migration that occurred within regions in the same country and between countries,
the regional analysis performed for the World Values Survey is prone to have measurement error
caused by within country interregional migration. In order to assess the size of the bias generated
by internal migration, this section creates artificial data on individuals in regions within countries
and studies the effect of migration on the OLS estimates.
   In particular, the outcome for individual i in region r in country c is generated by

                                                  yirc = xirc + irc ,

where irc is normally distributed with mean zero and variance equal to 1, and xirc = r · c, i.e.
each individual’s outcome is equal to the region within a country in which she resides plus some
idiosyncratic shock. Countries and regions within each country are generated in such a way that
both within and across countries the true data generating process has a slope equal to 1 and a
constant equal to zero.
   The original data represents the migration corrected data, i.e. where migration did not occur
or one correctly identifies the migrants and assigns them the correct value. In order to analyze
the measurement error generated by internal migration, it is assumed that each individual has a
probability λ ∈ (0, 1) of migrating to another region within her own country. No cross country
migrations are allowed. If she gets a migration shock, she chooses a region within the same country
at random. Thus, with probability λ(Nrc − 1)/Nrc she will move to another region and with
probability (1 − λ) + λ/Nrc she remains in the same region she was born, where Nrc is the number
of regions in her country. The migration based data represent the data one would observe if (i) no
cross country migration had occurred or if the data had been corrected for cross country migration;
and (ii) if within country migration cannot be corrected.
   For each constructed set of data, with and without internal migration, the following two relations
were estimated
                                                                                       X
                  yirc =β0 + β1 xirc + eirc                     yirc =β0 + β1 xirc +       δc γc + eirc
                                                                                       c

where γc is a complete set of country fixed effects and β1 is the coefficient of interest. By con-
struction, the real values are β0 = 0 and β1 = 1. Figure B.4(a) shows the estimated coefficient
β̂1 for various levels of the probability of migration when there are 100 countries, each with 10
regions and 10 individuals per region, and each specification is replicated 5000 times.34 As can be
seen there, the OLS estimate for the data without migration is correctly estimated to be β̂1 = 1
  34
       Similar results were obtained for other parametrizations.



                                                          101
both for the specification with and without country fixed effects. On the other hand, for the data
with migration, the specification without country fixed effects correctly estimates β̂1 = 1, but with
country fixed effects there exists a bias that increases with the probability of migration. This shows
that not correcting for migration destroys the informational content of xirc and can create a large
bias in the estimated coefficient.
   As a second exercise the individual data is aggregated at the regional level both before and
after migration. Again the data generating process implies that the correct relation between the
regional averages is
                                            ȳrc = x̄rc + rc ,

with x̄rc = rc. Figure B.4(b) shows the estimated coefficient β̂1 for the same specifications as before.
As can be seen there the results are similar to the individual level regressions. In particular, the
regressions on the data without migration or with migration without country fixed effects correctly
estimate β̂1 = 1, while there exists a bias increasing in the rate of migration in the estimation of
the data with migration and country fixed effects.
   The results show that with a migration rate of 60% the estimated coefficient falls by about 1/2,
i.e. β/β̂ = 2. Furthermore, while relation between β/β̂ is convex for λ < 1/2, the relation becomes
concave for λ > 1/2. These results suggest that as most countries have experienced large increases
in urbanization rates and within country mobility is easier than cross country mobility, one should
expect measurement error due to within country migration to be larger than due to cross country
migration.




                                                   102
                  (a) Individuals




                   (b) Regions

Figure B.4: Migration Rates and Measurement Error




                       103
References
Alan Heston, R. S. and Aten, B. (2011). Penn world table version 7.0, Technical report, Center for
  International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.

Alesina, A., Giuliano, P. and Nunn, N. (2013). On the origins of gender roles: Women and the
  plough, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(2): 469–530.

Altonji, J. G., Elder, T. E. and Taber, C. R. (2005). Selection on observed and unobserved variables:
  Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools, Journal of Political Economy 113(1): 151–184.

Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2011). Dynamics and stagnation in the malthusian epoch, The American
  Economic Review 101(5): 2003–2041.

Ashraf, Q. and Galor, O. (2013). The out of africa hypothesis, human genetic diversity, and
  comparative economic development, The American Economic Review 103(1): 1–46.

Ayduk, O., Mendoza-Denton, R., Mischel, W., Downey, G., Peake, P. K. and Rodriguez, M. (2000).
  Regulating the interpersonal self: strategic self-regulation for coping with rejection sensitivity.,
  Journal of personality and social psychology 79(5): 776.

Bandura, A. and Mischel, W. (1965). Modifications of self-imposed delay of reward through expo-
  sure to live and symbolic models., Journal of personality and social psychology 2(5): 698.

Barro, R. J. and Lee, J. W. (2013). A new data set of educational attainment in the world,
  1950–2010, Journal of development economics 104: 184–198.

Belloc, M. and Bowles, S. (2013). The persistence of inferior cultural-institutional conventions, The
  American Economic Review 103(3): 93–98.

Bellows, J. and Miguel, E. (2009). War and local collective action in sierra leone, Journal of Public
  Economics 93(11): 1144–1157.

Bisin, A. and Verdier, T. (2000). Beyond the melting pot: cultural transmission, marriage, and the
  evolution of ethnic and religious traits, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(3): 955–988.

Bowles, S. (1998). Endogenous preferences: The cultural consequences of markets and other eco-
  nomic institutions, Journal of Economic Literature 36(1): 75–111.

Chen, M. K. (2013). The effect of language on economic behavior: Evidence from savings rates,
  health behaviors, and retirement assets, The American Economic Review 103(2): 690–731.

Cliff, A. D. and Ord, J. K. (1973). Spatial autocorrelation, Vol. 5, Pion, London.

Cliff, A. D. and Ord, J. K. (1981). Spatial processes: models & applications, Pion, London.



                                                 104
Conley, T. G. (1999). GMM estimation with cross sectional dependence, Journal of econometrics
  92(1): 1–45.

Dalgaard, C.-J. and Strulik, H. (2013). The physiological foundations of the wealth of nations,
  Univ. of Copenhagen Dept. of Economics Discussion Paper (10-05).

Diamond, J. M. (1997). Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies, 1st ed edn, W.W.
  Norton & Co., New York.

Doepke, M. and Zilibotti, F. (2008). Occupational choice and the spirit of capitalism, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 123(2): 747–793.

Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D. and Sunde, U. (2010). Are risk aversion and impatience related
  to cognitive ability?, The American Economic Review 100(3): 1238–1260.

Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D. and Sunde, U. (2012). The intergenerational transmission of
  risk and trust attitudes, The Review of Economic Studies 79(2): 645–677.

Fawcett, T. W., McNamara, J. M. and Houston, A. I. (2012). When is it adaptive to be patient?
  a general framework for evaluating delayed rewards, Behavioural processes 89(2): 128–136.

Fernández, R. (2012). Does culture matter?, in J. Benhabib, A. Bisin and M. O. Jackson (eds),
  Handbook of Social Economics, Vol. 1B, Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G. and O’donoghue, T. (2002). Time discounting and time preference:
  A critical review, Journal of economic literature 40(2): 351–401.

Galor, O. and Michalopoulos, S. (2012). Evolution and the growth process: Natural selection of
  entrepreneurial traits, Journal of Economic Theory 147(2): 759–780.

Galor, O. and Moav, O. (2002). Natural selection and the origin of economic growth, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 117(4): 1133–1191.

Godoy, R., Byron, E., Reyes-Garcia, V., Leonard, W. R., Patel, K., Apaza, L., Pérez, E., Vadez,
  V. and Wilkie, D. (2004). Patience in a foraging-horticultural society: A test of competing
  hypotheses, Journal of Anthropological Research pp. 179–202.

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2006). Does culture affect economic outcomes?, Journal
  of Economic Perspectives 20(2): 23–48.

Hofstede, G. H. (1991). Cultures and organizations: software of the mind, McGraw-Hill, London.

Hofstede, G. H., Hofstede, G. J. and Minkov, M. (2010). Cultures and organizations: software of
  the mind : intercultural cooperation and its importance for survival, 3rd ed edn, McGraw-Hill,
  New York.



                                                105
Laibson, D. (1997). Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  112(2): 443–478.

Litina, A. (2013). Natural land productivity, cooperation and comparative development, University
  of Luxembourg .

Loewenstein, G. and Elster, J. (1992). Choice over time, Russell Sage Foundation.

Mayshar, J., Moav, O. and Neeman, Z. (2013). Geography, transparency and institutions, CEPR
  Discussion Papers 9625.

Mischel, W. and Ebbesen, E. B. (1970). Attention in delay of gratification., Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology 16(2): 329.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y. and Peake, P. K. (1988). The nature of adolescent competencies predicted
  by preschool delay of gratification., Journal of personality and social psychology 54(4): 687.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y. and Rodriguez, M. I. (1989). Delay of gratification in children, Science
  244(4907): 933–938.

Nunn, N. and Qian, N. (2011). The potato’s contribution to population and urbanization: Evidence
  from a historical experiment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 593–650.

Olsson, O. and Paik, C. (2013). A western reversal since the neolithic? the long-run impact of
  early agriculture.

Oster, E. (2014). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and validation.

Özak, Ö. (2012). Distance to the technological frontier and economic development, Southern
  Methodist University Working Paper Series .

Putterman, L. and Weil, D. N. (2010). Post-1500 population flows and the long-run determinants
  of economic growth and inequality*, The Quarterly journal of economics 125(4): 1627–1682.

Ramankutty, N., Foley, J. A., Norman, J. and McSweeney, K. (2002). The global distribution of
  cultivable lands: current patterns and sensitivity to possible climate change, Global Ecology and
  Biogeography 11(5): 377–392.

Rapoport, H. and Vidal, J.-P. (2007). Economic growth and endogenous intergenerational altruism,
  Journal of Public Economics 91(7): 1231–1246.

Rosati, A. G., Stevens, J. R., Hare, B. and Hauser, M. D. (2007). The evolutionary origins of
  human patience: temporal preferences in chimpanzees, bonobos, and human adults, Current
  Biology 17(19): 1663–1668.




                                                106
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W. and Peake, P. K. (1990). Predicting adolescent cognitive and self-regulatory
  competencies from preschool delay of gratification: Identifying diagnostic conditions., Develop-
  mental psychology 26(6): 978.

Spolaore, E. and Wacziarg, R. (2013). Long-term barriers to economic development, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Stevens, J. R. and Hauser, M. D. (2004). Why be nice? psychological constraints on the evolution
  of cooperation, Trends in cognitive sciences 8(2): 60–65.

Vollrath, D. (2011). The agricultural basis of comparative development, Journal of Economic
  Growth 16(4): 343–370.




                                               107
