NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THE ‘QUARTER OF BIRTH’ ENDOGENOUS? EVIDENCE FROM ONE MILLION
SIBLINGS IN TAIWAN
Elliott Fan
Jin-Tan Liu
Yen-Chien Chen
Working Paper 20444
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20444

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2014

The authors thank to the Ministries of Education and Interior Affairs of Taiwan for providing administrative
data. We are grateful for helpful discussions with Stacey Chen, Kamhon Kan, and seminar participants
at the Institute of Economics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. We acknowledge Pei-Chuan Ho and
Szu-Yu Zoe Kao for their capable research assistance. All errors are our responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2014 by Elliott Fan, Jin-Tan Liu, and Yen-Chien Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Is the ‘Quarter of Birth’ Endogenous? Evidence From One Million Siblings in Taiwan
Elliott Fan, Jin-Tan Liu, and Yen-Chien Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 20444
August 2014
JEL No. C10,J11,J13
ABSTRACT
Recent studies based on US data have provided evidence to suggest that the ‘quarter of birth’ (QOB)
may be endogenous and that the use of QOB as an instrumental variable will consequently produce
inconsistent estimates (see Buckles and Hungerman, 2013). Such potential endogeneity is addressed
in this study by estimating the effects of QOB on university attendance using a Taiwanese dataset
on approximately one million siblings. Our estimations are mainly reliant upon the strength of the
family fixed-effects model, a regression discontinuity design and a simulation procedure. Our results,
in sharp contrast to the US findings, suggest that family background characteristics can explain very
little of the relationship between QOB and the probability of university attendance at the age of 18.
The disparity between the US and Taiwanese findings may be due to high-‘socioeconomic status’
(SES) women in the US disproportionately planning births away from the winter months, as suggested
by Buckles and Hungerman (2013), whereas the seasonality of births is virtually identical for lowand high-SES mothers in Taiwan. Our findings imply that the endogeneity of QOB is of less concern
in the case of Taiwan, perhaps due to the milder winter climate.

Elliott Fan
National Taiwan University
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Road
Taipei, 106 Taiwan
elliottfan@ntu.edu.tw
Jin-Tan Liu
Department of Economics
National Taiwan University
21 Hsu-Chow Road
Taipei (100), TAIWAN
and NBER
liujt@ntu.edu.tw

Yen-Chien Chen
National Chinan University
Taiwan
Yenchien@ncnu.edu.tw

1. Introduction
The two decades that have passed since the pioneering work of Angrist and Krueger (1991,
1992) have witnessed considerable development of research into the role of ‘quarter of birth’
(QOB) and its predictive capability on the outcomes of individuals.1 The key assumption
underpinning the validity of the empirical strategies employed within the related studies is that
QOB is determined exogenously. The legitimacy of this assumption, however, has been
challenged by evidence suggesting that parents may be manipulating the timing of their
births according to their preferences for certain birth months or birth seasons.2
As the most recent, and most compelling, example of such preferences, Buckle and
Hungerman (2013) found that in the US, the characteristics of women giving birth in the
winter months differ significantly from those of women giving birth in other seasons,
ultimately leading to a strong correlation between the characteristics of the mothers and the
QOBs of their children. They also found that the use of birth season as an instrumental
variable yields biased estimates of the returns to education in terms of earnings.3 More
interestingly, they found that the seasonality of maternal characteristics was driven by high‘socioeconomic status’ (SES) mothers with the tendency to avoid winter births, highlighting
the potential role of weather in determining the endogeneity of QOB.
It may therefore be of interest to examine the extent to which the US experience can
1

One particular string of the related literature makes use of QOB as an ‘instrumental variable’ (IV) in an attempt
to eliminate potential biases when estimating the returns to education, in terms of earnings or other outcome
variables. For recent examples, refer to Lefgren and McIntyre (2006), Chernozhukov and Hansen (2006) Leigh
and Ryan (2008), Maurin and Moschion (2009), Arkes (2010), Lee and Orazem (2010) and Robertson (2011).
Another line taken in the recent studies is to investigate the ways in which QOB directly affects the outcomes of
individuals from perspectives of either educational achievement (Bedard and Dhuey, 2006; and Claire, Dearden
and Meghir, 2010) or health (Weber, Prossinger and Seidler, 1998; van Hanswijck de Jonge, Waller and Stetter,
2003; Costa and Lahey, 2005; and Lokshin and Radyakin, 2012), both of which are primary determinants of
earnings.
2
The validity of using QOB as an IV has also been challenged from two other perspectives. Firstly, significant
inconsistency may occur in the IV estimates when there is a weak correlation between QOB and educational
outcomes, an argument first put forward by Bound, Jaeger and Baker (1995) following their re-examination of
the results of Angrist and Krueger (1992). Secondly, it was recently pointed out by Barua and Lang (2012) that
the use of either QOB or legal entry age as an IV also violates the monotonicity assumption, leading to inconsistent
estimates of the ‘local average treatment effect’ (LATE). As regards the latter challenge, we present evidence
later in this study to suggest that the monotonicity assumption is indeed essentially satisfied in the case of Taiwan;
this is mainly because, although there are a number of early school starters (children entering school before
attaining the age of six), it is quite rare to find late school starters (age-eligible children delaying school entry)
due to ‘redshirting’.
3
These findings clearly point to the potential endogeneity of QOB, echoing the study of Bound and Jaeger (2000)
who found that QOB failed to satisfy the requirement of exclusion restrictions when used to instrument education
in the estimation of returns, in terms of earnings.

1

be extrapolated to other countries, and whether the endogeneity of QOB is a common threat
to the related studies in which QOB is used as a source of exogenous variations in education.
In this study, we aim to contribute valuable evidence to the extant literature by tackling these
questions based upon an exploration of the case of Taiwan, where the weather is generally
mild in the winter, and thus, the primary ‘suspect’ plaguing QOB evaluation in the US is
essentially rendered irrelevant.
We develop multiple strategies to carefully evaluate the potential endogeneity of
‘month of birth’ (MOB), using a unique administrative dataset comprising of around a
million siblings (co-residing or otherwise) in Taiwan. Our empirical work focuses on the
estimation of the MOB effects on university attendance at the age of 18, with special
attention being paid to the role of family background characteristics in determining the
magnitude of the estimated MOB effects. We then compare our results to the US-based
findings of Buckles and Hungerman (2013) and analyze the parental preferences for winter
births in both countries.
In addition to addressing the endogeneity of MOB, we also contribute to the literature
in other ways. Firstly, as pointed out by Lokshin and Radyakin (2012), the existing studies
carrying out investigations into the QOB effects have thus far been disproportionally
clustered in high-income countries. By adopting a dataset on births in Taiwan, we provide
evidence on the QOB effects, particularly the long term impacts of QOB, in the context of
developing countries.
Secondly, we also estimate the MOB effects on the likelihood of attending public
universities in Taiwan, since they are more selective than private universities. Our results
should help to advance our understanding not only of the ways in which the MOB affects
the probability of university attendance, but also of the effects on the quality of the university
attended.
Three empirical strategies are used in our attempt to determine whether the QOB
effects obtained from the OLS estimations may be biased as a result of any unobserved family
characteristics. Using the sibling data, our first strategy relies upon the application of a family
fixed-effects model.4 We then compare the fixed-effect (FE) estimates of the QOB effects to
4

Lokshin and Radyakin (2012) examined the ways in which the health of children was associated with their
MOB, based upon a fixed-effects model with a relatively small sample of siblings. Their FE estimates of the MOB
effects on the health of young children are twice the size of the corresponding OLS estimates. It should, however,

2

the corresponding OLS estimates without controlling for family background variables, in order
to assess any potential bias of the OLS estimates. To the extent that family characteristics are
invariant across siblings, the FE model suppresses the correlation between QOB and these
characteristics, thereby producing more credible estimates than the OLS alternative. If
family background characteristics do not have any relevance to the decisions made by
parents with regard to QOB, then no significant FE-OLS disparity will be observable.
Our second strategy makes use of a regression discontinuity design (RDD), which
exploits a single starting date for schools in Taiwan; that is, the first of September. Under this
setting, the cut-off point is set as the first of September along with the ‘forcing’ variable, which
is defined as the dates of birth of individuals. The RDD therefore compares the likelihood of
university attendance at the age of 18 for individuals born just before, and just after, the first of
September. The hypothesis supporting this comparison is that dates of birth occurring around
the first of September are essentially randomly determined, given that parents are unable, or had
no specific intention, to exercise precise control over the birth timing around the cut-off date.
Our third strategy involves the use of our sibling sample to carry out a simulation
which enables us to investigate whether the dates of birth of the sample are centralized
around certain months or seasons. Such centralization, if present, would indicate parental
selection of the birth seasons, or the birth months, of the children according to the
preferences of the parents. In this simulation, the actual date of birth of each individual is
replaced by a simulated date of birth, randomly drawn (without replacement) from the
empirical distribution of the dates of birth contained within the original sibling sample. We
then calibrate and compare the average gap between the dates of birth of siblings using both
the simulated and actual dates of birth. Given that the former will be free from any form of
parental selection, it should be greater than the latter if centralization exists. Therefore, such
inequality lays the foundation for the key test of our hypothesis in this study.
Our FE estimates of the MOB effect are surprisingly large: the probability of
university attendance at the age of 18 for males born in September is about 34.4 per cent
higher than the probability for males born in August, whilst the margin for females is around
25.3 per cent. Both are very close to the corresponding RDD estimates, thereby raising our
be noted that, as argued by Lokshin and Radyakin (2012), the siblings sample used in their study may be subject
to selection biases and measurement errors, which could explain the differences between the OLS and FE
estimates.

3

level of confidence in the reliability of the results. More importantly, the disparity that exists
between the FE estimation and the OLS alternative (with no controls in place for the family
background variables) is negligible for males, although the margin is somewhat larger for
females. Our simulation results also show that any clustering of the dates of birth amongst
our sample appears to be only in line with the general seasonal pattern of births, and not
indicative of any significant degree of parental selection. Our results are not consistent with
the suggestion that the OLS estimates are confounded by the influences of the family
background characteristics, thereby presenting a scenario which stands in sharp contrast to
that portrayed by Buckles and Hungerman (2013) based on the US births.
Further examination of this disparity between the US and Taiwan cases reveals that
the seasonality of births is virtually identical for both high- and low-SES mothers in Taiwan.
In the case of the US, however, Buckles and Hungerman (2013) found that high-SES women
disproportionately planned births away from the winter months, thereby leading to different
seasonal patterns of births between high-SES and low-SES women, and thus, a strong
correlation between QOB and family characteristics. Perhaps the Taiwan case is completely
different from the US case because when contemplating their birth plans, parents in Taiwan
do not need to avoid the winter months, since the winter weather in Taiwan is generally very
mild. More evidence is, however, required to shed light on this supposition before it can be
further accepted.

2. Background
2.1. Education system in Taiwan
The educational system in Taiwan is largely similar to that of many Western countries, with
students beginning their education at primary school, which requires a total of six years to
complete, and then supplementing this with three years in a junior high school. Upon
completion of junior high school, students have the option to continue studying for three
years in an academic senior high school or to enter a vocational secondary school for two to
five years. Normally, those who complete the academic senior high school program
participate in the College Entrance Test (CET) with the aim of securing their undergraduate
admissions.
In July of each year, on completion of the CET, each applicant submits an application

4

form containing their choices of department across all of the universities to which they would
like to apply. The departments listed in the application form are ranked in their order of
preference by the applicant, with a maximum number of departments to which any individual
may apply.5
The higher education system in Taiwan can be categorized into two tiers, the more
prestigious public universities and the less selective private universities, with public
universities being the primary choice for most students.6 Final admission is determined by a
student’s test score and the rankings of the schools listed in the application form. An applicant
is subsequently granted admission to only one department, and must then decide whether or
not to accept admission to that department. Regardless of the admission outcome, each student
is free to take the CET again and enter the new round of admission applications in the
following year.
The single school starting date has been fixed as the first of September in Taiwan since
the mid-twentieth century. All children are permitted to enter elementary school, provided
that they have attained the age of six years by the first of September of the relevant year. As
in the case of many other countries, not all parents in Taiwan strictly comply with the legal
requirements relating to school starting age. However, what is unique about the case of
Taiwan is that, whilst there are a number of early starters (children entering elementary
school prior to reaching the age of six), it is quite a rarity to find cases of late starters (ageeligible children delaying school entry).
According to the information collected in the Taiwan Survey of Family Income and
Expenditure (SFIE), which relates to children born between 1993 and 2000, the proportion
of early starters during that period was around 6.6 per cent, whilst late starters (including
those who never started school) accounted for only 2.8 per cent.7 Although our dataset
provides no information on the actual school starting age of each individual, in order to
5

The maximum number varied across years. It was 99 in 1994, 66 during 1995 and 2001, 80 during 2002 and
2003, 90 in 2004, and 100 afterwards.
6
Public universities receive considerably greater government financial aid, as compared to private universities,
regardless of whether this is assessed in terms of the total subsidy or the subsidy per student. As a result, tuition
fees for an academic year range between NT$26,680 and NT$35,940 for public universities, whereas for private
universities, the fee are more than twice as high, ranging from NT$67,680 to NT$93,860.
7
Due to a lack of information in the SFIE data, we are unable to observe whether these late starters are enrolled
in an elementary school at a later date. Given the possibility that some children are unable to go to school due to
illness or other causes, it is highly likely that the actual proportion of late starters will be lower than the 2.8 per
cent stated here.

5

ensure the thoroughness of the analysis in our study, we carry out an evaluation of the effects
of having these non-compliant children on our estimates of the MOB effects in Section 5.4.

2.2. Seasonality of births and maternal characteristics
In this section, we focus on documenting the seasonal pattern of births and compare this with
the seasonal pattern of the characteristics of the mothers and children observed in our sample.
Our comparison is quite intriguing, essentially because Buckles and Hungerman (2013) made
similar comparisons to identify the correlation between QOB and parental characteristics. The
maternal characteristics selected for this study correspond largely to those based upon US data
presented in Buckles and Hungerman (2013), so we are able to make a preliminary comparison
of the two countries with respect to the seasonality of maternal characteristics.
A strong seasonal pattern in the characteristics of the mothers would imply that those
with different characteristics may hold different preferences towards or against certain
seasons in which they would like to give births. It is, however, important to note that such
seasonality does not, by itself, imply that the OLS estimates of the MOB effects are plagued
by omitted variables bias (OVB) when family background factors in the estimation are not
fully controlled for. Such bias occurs when the factors driving the seasonal cycle of births
also drive the educational outcomes of the children, thereby leading to a correlation between
MOB and the errors. This is exactly the case in the US, where a strong correlation is indicated
between the seasonality of births and the seasonality of maternal characteristics.8
Indeed, as documented by Buckles and Hungerman (2013), the number of births in the
US is particularly small in January. At the same time, children born in January are
disproportionally likely to be born to women who are teenagers, unmarried and lacking a high
school degree. The two authors argued that this was likely to be caused by high-SES mothers
avoiding the timing of their births in the winter months, which is perhaps a factor leading to
the biases in the OLS estimates of the QOB effects when maternal characteristics are not
appropriately controlled for.
The scenario in the case of Taiwan is, however, markedly different. We examine the
seasonality of these variables using samples drawn primarily from the birth registry records

8

Using physics-based terminology, the seasonality pattern of births is in phase (or in anti-phase) with the patterns
of maternal characteristics.

6

in Taiwan, since these contain information on every single birth that occurred between 1978
and 1984. The results are illustrated in Figure 1, with the seasonal pattern of births being shown
in graph (A), from which we can see that like many other countries, the number of births
exhibits a substantial and persistent pattern of seasonality (Lam and Miron, 1991).9
For each of the years examined, October is the month with the highest number of births,
whilst April to be the month with the lowest number. 10 This pattern of seasonality is
inconsistent with the pattern found in the US, where the trough is located in December or
January and the peak in September. Furthermore, the two countries also differ in terms of
the magnitude of the seasonality. In Taiwan, the number of births in the peak month is around
30 per cent higher than the number in the trough month of the same year, whereas in the US,
the difference is only about 15 per cent.
The proportion of the mothers in the sample with high school or higher education is
illustrated in graph (B) of Figure 1, where a marked growth trend is discernible in the
proportion of mothers completing high school education. Nevertheless, the curve does not
exhibit any clear pattern of seasonality, and neither the peaks nor the troughs are located in
October or April, where both the peaks and troughs of the births routinely occur.
Thus, unlike the US case, where winter births are noticeably fewer and the educational
level of those mothers giving birth in the winter is markedly lower, no such correlation can
be uncovered in graphs (A) and (B). Further, the seasonal pattern of other maternal
characteristics also differs from that of births. Similar to the bumpy curve in graph (B), an
unclear pattern of seasonality is shown in graph (C) with regard to the proportion of children
born to unmarried mothers.
Finally, we add graph (D) to Figure 1 to examine whether there is any seasonality in the
proportion of low birth-weight babies.11 Indeed, the seasonality shown in graph (D) clearly
suggests that babies born in the winter months are more likely to fall into the category of
low birth-weight babies, as compared to the summer born. But, again, the locations of the
peaks and troughs do not coincide with those for the numbers of births. Thus, the graphs
presented in Figure 1 do not appear to indicate any correlation between the MOB of the child
9

The exclusion rules for our estimation samples are detailed in Section 4.
In fact, this seasonality pattern remains unchanged throughout all of the years up to the 2000s, as revealed in
more recent data.
11
A newborn baby is categorized as a low birth-weight baby if its body weight at birth is below 2,500 grams.
10

7

and the characteristics of the mother. We go on, later in this study, to verify this graphical
implication using econometric strategies.

3. Estimation strategies
It is extremely important that our investigation of the role of MOB on university attendance
does not introduce any implications of general equilibrium effects, such as the effects from
either expediting or postponing the school starting age for the entire cohort of children as a
result of policy changes. In order to shed some light on these general equilibrium effects,
there is a requirement to distinguish between the ‘absolute age effect’ and the ‘relative age
effect’ of starting school.
The absolute age effect refers to the advantage for children starting school at an older
age, whilst the relative age effect concerns the advantage for children being older than their
peers. Of these, although the relative age effect is more relevant to individual decisions, it is
only the absolute age effect which helps to deal with the question regarding the optimal
starting age for the entire population of children. As in all of the prior studies attempting to
estimate the MOB effects, we are also unable to discern the absolute and relative age effects;
thus, our findings serve only as inferences for individual decisions.

3.1. Sibling strategy

We begin with a parsimonious model describing individual educational outcomes as a linear
function of a set of determinants, with the specification being expressed as:
11

Uniij  0   ( k  SM ijk )  X ij   Z j   ij ,

(1)

k 1

where Uniij is a dummy variable which indicates university attendance in the year that
individual i of family j attains the age of 18 ( Uniij =1); and SM ijk refer to ‘school month of
birth’ k for individual i in family j. In contrast to calendar months, which of course begin
with January in each year, the school month of birth in Taiwan begins with September as the
first month of a school year; therefore, SM ij1  1 indicates individuals born in September,

SM ij2  1 indicates October-born ones, etc., with August being regarded as the omitted
dummy; X ij represents a set of individual demographic variables, including birth weight

8

and birth year; Z j is a vector indicating parental characteristics;  ij is the individual
specific error term.
One concern with regard to the estimation of equation (1) lies in the possible
correlation between SM ijk and unobserved family characteristics, all of which are potential
components of the error term. In the FE model, the error term can be decomposed into two
components, a completely idiosyncratic term, denoted by vij , and a family-specific term,
denoted by u j , with the latter capturing the genetic and family environmental factors that
are fully shared by siblings in the production function of the educational outcome. Thus,
equation (1) can be re-written as:
11

Uniij   0   ( k  SM ijk )  X ij   Z j  (u j  vij ) ,

(2)

k 1

where  ij  u j  vij . Estimations of equations (1) and (2) are executed for males and females
separately, as it is commonly acknowledged that the MOB effect may differ between
genders.12
One potential threat to the FE model lies in the possibility that parents may choose
to reallocate family resources, through compensatory or reinforcing investments, across
siblings in response to children’s endowments. 13 This type of intra-family idiosyncratic
elements cannot be eliminated by controlling for family fixed effects as in equation (2).
While the existence of these elements may lead to a bias in our FE estimates of  k , the
direction of the bias is still difficult to determine.
If the parents prefer ‘equality of outcome’ amongst their children, then they will
readily redirect resources from their higher achieving children to their lower achieving
children. In this case, if the disparity between the performance levels of siblings is at least
partially attributable to different birth months, then the FE estimates acquired from the
estimation of equation (2) will tend to understate the MOB effects. In contrast, if the parents
believe in ‘equality of opportunity’, then there will be no performance-driven reallocation
of resources amongst siblings. Thus, the FE estimates will be unbiased. Furthermore, it is

12
It has been widely recognized that in early childhood girls mature more quickly than boys. If so, we have a
strong reason to believe that younger boys may suffer from double disadvantages when they start school in a
mixed-sex class, which is the prevailing type of classes in elementary schools in Taiwan.
13
Evidence is quite mixed on how parents differentiate human capital investments across children. A recent
study done by Heckman, Yi, and Zhang (2013) suggest that both compensatory and reinforcing investments
occur simultaneously, but in different perspectives of human capital, such as education and health.

9

also feasible that parents will tend to strategically focus their resources on their higher
achieving children to achieve the maximum outcome amongst their children, as opposed to
the highest average outcome. In that case, the FE estimates will be upwardly biased.
To gauge these potential biases, we run the regressions for two-child families only,
which enables us to examine whether the MOB of the second child alters the marginal effects
of the MOB of the first child. A significant effect of the MOB of the second child would
imply intra-family resource allocation. Details of this examination are laid out in the
Appendix.
Another potential threat to the FE strategy is that, in our primary data source, the
treatment (that is, the actual school starting age) is unobservable at the individual level. Thus,
we can only use the legal age for school entry to carry out our estimations under the
assumption that, in compliance with the law, each individual is enrolled in school on the first
of September after attaining the age of 6 years. However, as noted in Section 2, it is
unrealistic to expect this assumption to hold given that there are children who start school
either earlier or later than the legal age requirement. Our estimated MOB effects should
therefore be considered more as intent-to-treat (ITT) effects. Furthermore, it would be
inappropriate for us to apply the conventional remedy of scaling up the ITT estimates by
using the proportion of compliers. This is because those who are non-compliers are not
‘neutral’ in the estimations: they migrate from the treatment group to the control group (as
early starters) or vice versa (as late starters), instead of being randomly selected and then
excluded from the estimation samples. Later in Section 5.4, we go on to evaluate how our
ITT estimate would tend to deviate from the average treatment effect (ATE) due to the
existence of these non-compliers.

3.2. Regression discontinuity design

Our second estimation strategy for the MOB effect exploits the merit of a regression
discontinuity design (RDD). Under the continuity assumption, our analysis is based on a
reduced-form regression as follows:14

Unii   0  1  Eligiblei   2  K ( SBDi )   i ,
14

(3)

The continuity assumption states that, for the RD design to be legitimate for estimating the treatment effect,
it is necessary to assume that all factors other than the treatment and outcome variables are continuous with
respect to the forcing variable.

10

where SBDi refers to the standardized date of birth for individual i, which is measured by
the date of birth minus the cutoff date along the dimension of the calendar;

15

Eligiblei  1(0  SBTi  183) is an indicator equaling to one if the individual is born
between the first of September and the third of March in the following year. Given the
discrete nature of the dates of birth of individuals, the regression approach must be able to
extrapolate the precise position of the discontinuity from the data. To achieve this, we adopt
the method proposed by Lee and Card (2007) in order to deal with the errors caused by the
discrete forcing variable. In specific terms, equation (3) can be expressed in a local linear
regression form, as follows:

Uniib   0  1  Eligibleib   2  SBDib  3  SBDib  Eligibleib   ib ,

(4)

where the subscript b denotes the date of birth. Following the strategy proposed by Lemieux
and Milligan (2008), all of the information at the individual level can be summarized in the
day-specific means of the variables, with equation (4) reducing to:

Unib   0  1  Eligibleb   2  SBDb  3  SBDb  Eligibleb   b .

(5)

Lemieux and Milligan (2008) argued that the estimates of equation (4) at the individual level
would be the same as the weighted estimates of equation (4) at the group (day) level if the
number of observations in each date of birth group are used for the estimation weighting,
although the standard errors would differ.
We applied the method proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) for our
bandwidth selection, with a rectangle kernel being used for weighting.16 Finally, multifaceted examinations were carried out as tests for the robustness of our estimates to (i) both
individual level and group level estimations; (2) various bandwidths covering almost the
entire range of the forcing variable values; and (3) various sets of covariates incorporated in
the estimation.

4. Data
The data used in this study were obtained by merging two national administrative datasets
15

It should be noted that the value of SBDi is limited to the range of (–183, 183). However, this limitation does
not have any adverse effects on our estimations, since the selected bandwidths are substantially lower than 183.
16
The choice of bandwidth in recent empirical studies is based on either cross-validation or ad hoc methods.
The conventional cross-validation is to find an optimal bandwidth for fitting a curve over the entire support of
the data, but what really matter to the RDD estimate are the boundary values at the cutoff. The algorithm
proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012) select the optimal bandwidth by minimizing the squared error
loss at the cutoff. They thus argue that it has better properties than other bandwidth selection methods.

11

at the individual level. The first was retrieved from the birth registry records of the entire
population in Taiwan, with a total of 7,053,190 births having taken place between 1978 and
1999. These records, which are compiled by the Ministry of Interior Affairs, provide detailed
information on individual ID, date of birth, birth order and birth weight of each newborn, as
well as the ID, age, education level and residential location of the parents. Thus, we can use
the parental ID codes to trace the complete history of births for any woman. Our sibling
sample is constructed by linking the birth registry records for those mothers who first gave
birth between 1978 and 1984. We then track all of the subsequent births for each mother up
to 1999, thereby covering a period of up to 21 years. 17 The resulting data comprise of
1,911,627 births, 987,678 of which were males and 923,949 females.
The second data source is provided by the College Entrance Test (CET) files,
covering the years 1996 to 2003, collated by the College and University Entrance Test Center
of the Ministry of Education. The CET dataset provides detailed information on the year that
an individual participated in the CET, the high school graduation year, the CET score and
the university admission results. The outcome variable is measured by a dummy variable
which indicates whether an individuals is admitted to a general university or a public
university in the year that he/she reaches the age of 18 years.
If we are to effectively carry out the separate estimation of males and females using
the family fixed effects, it is necessary to construct sibling samples for all brothers and sisters
in the original data. Since the CET data window only allows us to observe the university
admission results recorded on individuals between 1996 and 2003, our sibling samples can
only cover individuals born between September 1978 and August 1984, a total of 6 school
years. We then construct a ‘male sibling’ sample, comprising of males for whom there was
at least one observation of a brother in the same sample period (regardless of any sisters he
may have), and a ‘female sibling’ sample, comprising of females for whom there was at least
one observation of a sister in the same sample period (regardless of any brothers she may
have).
Both of the samples are subject to right-censoring, essentially because the later in the
sample the first child was born, the lower the likelihood of a higher order child, if any, being

17

In order to ensure that our family FE estimates can be more readily interpreted, a small number of half-siblings
and step-siblings of the firstborn child were excluded from our estimation samples.

12

born during the sample period. However, under the assumption that the censoring criterion is
randomly determined, such right-censoring should prove to be harmless. Given that the
censoring criterion in this study is determined by a specific calendar period (August 1984), we
believe that the assumption of randomness should be well satisfied. The two samples extracted
from our original dataset provide us with 452,095 male observations and 424,367 female
observations.
Although it was necessary to exclude families with only one boy or one girl from our
samples, later, in Section 5.4, we present our tests for the robustness of our estimates to this
sample exclusion rule by using these excluded individuals to estimate and compare the MOB
effects with the corresponding estimates based on the sibling samples. The results reveal that
these two sets of estimates are very similar in magnitude, although, in terms of the percentage
change, the effects on the excluded males and females are generally smaller.
Finally, to ensure that the OLS results are comparable with the FE results, our OLS
estimations are carried out using the same sibling samples, with the summary statistics for
males and females being reported in Table 1. For the 1978-1984 cohort, a higher probability
of university attendance is found for females (14 per cent) than males (13 per cent), although
the probability of public university attendance is roughly the same for both genders (around
5 per cent). Also similar are the age of the mother and father at the time of the child’s birth.
As expected, birth weight is higher for males than females and the educational level of the
fathers is generally higher than that of the mothers. Finally, females have more siblings than
males. This reflects the preferences of parents towards boys, since families with only girls are
more likely to have more births in the hope of having a boy.

5. Results
5.1. The FE and OLS results based on the sibling samples

Our ordinary least squared (OLS) and fixed-effects (FE) results based on the male and
female sibling samples are respectively presented in Tables 2A and 2B. The significant
estimate of the September dummy in the OLS results on the male sample, shown in column
(1) of Table 2A, suggests that the likelihood of university attendance at the age of 18 for
males born in September is 3.44 percentage points higher than that for males born in August.
This margin is quite striking, since it constitutes a 32 per cent increase on the probability of

13

attendance for August-born males. Moving down the column, the estimates for later months
demonstrate a clear declining pattern of the MOB effect, since it falls roughly monotonically
from a significant estimate of 3.09 percentage points for October to almost zero (and
insignificant) for July.
The corresponding FE results are reported in column (2) of Table 2A, which shows that
the estimate for September is 3.68 per cent, only slightly larger than the OLS estimate in the first
column. In line with the declining pattern of the OLS estimates, the FE estimates also decline in
the later months. In order to provide a better illustration of the FE-OLS disparities, both sets of
estimates are plotted in Figure 2.
As shown in graph (A) of Figure 2, for most of the months, the FE estimates remain
very close to the corresponding OLS estimates. To formally test the significance of the OLSFE differences, we apply the Seemingly Unrelated Regression estimation (SURE) by
running both the OLS and FE equations simultaneously, allowing for non-zero correlation
between the error terms of the two equations.18
The test results, presented in p-value terms, are reported in column (3) in Table 2A.
Throughout the entire column, no OLS-FE pairs suggest any statistically significant
difference. The result from the SURE test on the joint equivalence of all eleven OLS-FE
pairs, shown at the bottom of column (3), also fails to reject the null hypothesis.
The results on the incidences of public university attendance at the age of 18 present
a very similar scenario. As suggested by columns (4) and (5) in Table 2A, for both the OLS
and FE estimates, the MOB effect peaks in September, with statistical significance, and
declines roughly monotonically in the later months. Furthermore, the OLS-FE difference is
generally small, and the p-values from the SURE tests, reported in column (6) in Table 2A,
suggest that none of the OLS-FE difference is significantly different from zero. This OLSFE similarity is corroborated by graph (B) in Figure 2, which shows that the OLS-FE gap is
rather limited for most months, and that one may be larger than the other interchangeably.
We now turn to graph (C) in Figure 2 for the estimated MOB effects on the female

18

The approach of SURE has an advantage over methods, such as the conventional t test, that assume zero
cross-equation correlations. Using this SURE model, we can conduct a one-to-one test on the equivalence of
the FE estimate and the corresponding OLS estimate, as well as on the equivalence of a set of estimates.

14

sibling sample. Similar to the results on the male sibling sample, a declining pattern is
exhibited by both the OLS and FE estimates, although there is no decline in either the OLS
or FE estimates between September and November. However, unlike the minimal OLS-FE
differences in the results for the male siblings, it is apparent that for females, the FE estimates
are smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates for the entire range of months, with the
one exception of September. Despite the graphical OLS-FE differences, the margins are
mostly statistically insignificant. Columns (1) and (2) in Table 2B show the complete sets of
MOB estimates, with the p-values from the SURE tests being listed in column (3). The
results indicate that the OLS-FE difference is only significant at the 1 per cent level for May,
and at the 5 per cent level for November and January. The dominance of the OLS estimates
over the FE estimates is also clear for the public university attendance of females, as shown
in graph (D).

5.2. RDD results

Prior to presenting the RDD results, it is important for us to provide validity tests to back up
the RD design adopted in this study. We start with examining whether the means of the
observable characteristics are continuous through the cut-off point, since any significant
discontinuity in these characteristics indicates that parents with particular characteristics
may be able to manipulate the timing of births around the first of September.
For both the male and female sibling samples, the respective mean values of eight
observable characteristics against the forcing variable, as measured by the number of days
away from the first of September, are illustrated in Figures 3A and 3B, with these figures
showing that none of the eight variables exhibits any obvious discontinuity at the cut-off point
for either gender, although these are only ‘eyeball’ tests.19
We go on to adopt a more formal approach involving estimations of local linear
regressions based upon the method proposed by Lee and Lemieux (2010). We use each of the
observable characteristics as the dependent variable in order to test whether the mean is smooth
across the cut-off point. The regression results, as shown by the coefficient estimates of the
19

The eight variables are father’s age and years of schooling, mother’s age and years of schooling, proportion of
first-born children, birth weight, size of siblings (including self) and proportion of individuals residing in urban
areas.

15

dummy T in Table 3, confirm the smoothness as illustrated graphically in Figures 3A and
3B.20
As our second test for the validity of the RD design, we examine whether the density
of the observations exhibits any discontinuity at the cut-off point, which, in itself, would
represent direct evidence of sorting around the threshold. 21 To this end, the frequency
distributions for males and females across the cut-off date are illustrated in Figure 4, which
presents the daily number of births across the first of September (the cut-off point is at zero).
For both genders, no discontinuity is exhibited in the frequency distribution at the cut-off
point.
Graph (A) in Figure 5 reveals a sharp discontinuity in the probability of university
attendance on the first of September for males, with the jump being quite striking, from
roughly 10 per cent on the left side of the cut-off point to around 14 per cent on the right
side. Such discontinuity remains noticeable for females, as illustrated in graph (B), although
the means appear to be bumpier.
The probability of public university attendance is plotted in Figure 6, which shows that
for both the male and female sibling samples, the jumps on the first of September are still
visible, although less so than in the case of general university attendance.
The respective RDD results from the estimation of equation (5) for males and females
are presented in Panels A and B of Table 4. Column (1) in Panel A shows that when the
RDD estimation is carried out at the group (day) level, the probability of university
attendance at the age of 18 for a male born on the first of September is 3.29 percentage points
(or 32.6 per cent) higher than that for a male born one day earlier (on the thirty-first of
August). This figure is close to the FE estimate for the September dummy presented in
Section 5.1 (3.68 percentage points or 34.4 per cent), which reflects the average difference
in the probability of university attendance between males born in September and males born
in August.
As expected, the group-level estimate is identical to the individual-level estimate, as
shown in column (2) of Panel A, with a slightly reduced standard error. When controlling
20

The only exception is the coefficient estimate of T in the regression of proportion of firstborn children for
females. However, the estimate (0.88 percent) is trivial if compared to the sample mean (39.53 percent).
21
Given the discrete nature of the forcing variable, we are unable to apply the manipulation test proposed by
McCrary (2008), which was designed to examine whether the density of a continuous forcing variable exhibited
any discontinuity around the cut-off point.

16

for no covariates in columns (1) or (2), the estimate changes only slightly after the
incorporation of county of residence and year of birth as the control variables (column 3),
and after further controlling for a set of family and individual characteristics in the
regressions (column 4).
The RDD estimate on the female samples suggests a margin of 3.54 percentage
points (or 31.9 per cent) between females born on the first of September and females born
one day earlier, as shown in column (4) in Panel B of Table 4. Once again, the estimate is
found to be strongly robust to the incorporation of different sets of covariates.
As a cautionary measure, we examine the sensitivity of our RDD estimates to any
variations in the bandwidth, from 20 days to 120 days, with the results being illustrated in
Figure 7. The dark curve in the figure shows the RDD estimates for males, which is quite
stagnant over the entire range of bandwidths. The robustness of the RDD estimates remains
strong for females (the light curve), though the curve exhibits a growth from around 0.032
with the bandwidth of 36 to around 0.042 with the bandwidth of 63.
Finally, the results on public university attendance are reported in columns (5) to (8)
of Table 4. The respective RDD estimates for males and females, at 0.94 and 0.60 percentage
points, are both significant. Also, they are analogous to the corresponding FE estimates
shown in Panels A and B of Table 2.

5.3. Why does not family background matter?

The main empirical results of our study suggest that the failure to control for family
background variables in the OLS estimations does not result in any serious omitted variables
bias (OVB) in the estimates of the MOB effect on the likelihood of university attendance at
the age of 18 years. Basic econometrics theory provides two possible reconciliations for this
outcome: (i) family background (the omitted variable) does not predict educational attainment
(the outcome variable); or (ii) the family background variables are uncorrelated with MOB
(the X variables of interest). When any of the two conditions holds, OVB is not a concern. In
this section we focus on examinations on the second condition, since the first is unlikely to be
authentic.
A straightforward way of exploring the correlation between MOB and the family
background variables is to examine whether births to mothers with different socioeconomic

17

status (SES) levels exhibit different patterns of seasonality. Monthly newborns to mothers
completing high school or higher education (hereafter referred to as HS mothers), as
compared to those born to mothers with lower education levels (hereafter referred to as nonHS mothers), are illustrated in Figure 8.22
Here, we use education as an indicator of SES, with each point in the curve
representing a standardized value, which is obtained by taking the total number of births in
a month and subtracting the average monthly births over the year, and then dividing by the
average.23 We find that for both males, in graph (A), and females, in graph (B), the solid
curve (HS mothers) and the bar curve (non-HS mothers) are almost synchronized throughout
all months, thereby indicating strongly similar patterns of seasonality for the two groups of
mothers.
Our finding provides support for the second condition outlined at the beginning of this
sub-section, since such similarity implies that MOB is practically uncorrelated with the
educational level of the mothers. We can formally test this similarity by running a regression
with a dummy variable for HS mothers on a full set of MOB dummies (August omitted). The
results are reported in Table 5. The first column of the table, which presents the results for
the female siblings, shows that all of the MOB estimates are negligible and insignificant. For
the males, while the coefficient estimates for December, March, and April are statistically
significant, the magnitudes of these three estimates (between 0.0079 and 0.0088) remain
minimal. Since these regression results corroborate the findings based on the illustration in
Figure 8, they indicate only a limited difference in the seasonal pattern of births between HS
and non-HS mothers.
Our findings in the present study are clearly at odds with the findings reported on a
US sample by Buckles and Hungerman (2013), since they revealed noticeable differences in
the seasonal pattern of births between high- and low-SES women. 24 The Buckles and
Hungerman (2013) study shows that children born in the winter months were
disproportionally born to low-SES mothers and that, as compared to those born in other
22

Women graduating from either an academic or vocational high school are considered to have completed their
high school education. In our samples, the proportion of HS mothers (educated to high school level or higher) is
found to be around 25 per cent.
23
Doing so eliminates the year effects as well as the mean difference in the number of births between the two
groups of mothers, thereby making the two curves comparable.
24
Buckles and Hungerman (2013) used marital status as a proxy for socio-economic status.

18

months throughout the year, Meanwhile, winter-born individuals tend to end up with lower
education and earnings. The two correlations together constitute a typical OVB problem in
a regression of education or earnings on QOB variables when no controls are put in place
for the family background variables.
This is exactly why Buckles and Hungerman (2013) found that the omission of family
characteristics as controls within such a regression led to the overstatement of the QOB
effects, and as such, they concluded that the use of QOB as an instrumental variable was
inherently problematic. In the case of Taiwan, however, we find only a trivial difference in
the seasonal pattern of births between HS mothers and non-HS mothers, which effectively
breaks the necessary link causing such OVB. This offers some reconciliation of the similarity
found in this study between the OLS estimates and FE estimates obtained in Section 5.1.

5.4. Robustness examinations

Regarding early starters
As noted earlier in Section 2.1, between 1993 and 2000, the proportion of early starters was
around 6.6 per cent of the entire cohort, whilst the proportion of late starters (including those
who never started school) was, at the very most, 2.8 per cent. Furthermore, the early starters
are highly concentrated in September, with the overall proportion being up to 16 per cent in
that particular month, and falling to only 3 per cent from October to December, with a further
decline to less than 1 per cent in later months. In contrast, late starters are evenly distributed
across all months. Thus, late starters appear to pose a negligible threat to our estimations,
which are mainly reliant on a comparison between children born in August and those born
in September and other months.25 We therefore go on to evaluate the impact of the inclusion
of early starters in our estimates of the MOB effects, hypothesizing a two-fold effect from
their inclusion.
Firstly, since early starters will be the youngest students in the class, they are
therefore subject to adverse impacts in educational achievement, either through the relative
age effect or the absolute age effect. As early starters are clustered in September, this
disadvantage will cause a downward bias in our RDD estimate. Secondly, early starters may

25

The almost uniform distribution of late starters across all months implies that redshirting is rare, since the
occurrences of redshirting, if present, should be concentrated on those children born in August.

19

have a second chance to take the CET by the time they reach the age of 18, thereby enhancing
their chances of being admitted into a university at the age of 18. This causes an upward bias
in our major estimates.
We consider the existence of early starters as a minor concern, for the following
reasons. Firstly, since the two impacts of early starters are in opposite directions, they may
well cancel out each other. Secondly, the proportion of early starters is fairly low for
November and the later months of the school year; however, both our FE and OLS estimates
indicate a significant MOB effect for November, with the effect declining monotonically in
later months. By extrapolating this pattern, we can reasonably infer that the MOB effects for
September and October should also be significant and that they likely be larger than those
for November. Indeed, our empirical results confirm this extrapolation. Finally, and perhaps
most importantly, the potential bias caused by early starters applies to both our FE and OLS
estimates. Under the assumption that the two estimates are biased uniformly in terms of
magnitude, the FE-OLS disparity remains unchanged; thus, the main conclusions of our
study remain intact.

Sibling samples versus non-sibling samples
We assess the representativeness of our sibling samples by comparing our OLS estimates to
those obtained from the non-sibling samples. The results are summarized in Table 6, with
columns (1) and (2) reporting the respective estimates of the MOB effects on the male sibling
and non-sibling samples.
The p-values from the SURE tests shown in column (3) of Table 6 reveal an
insignificant difference between the sibling and non-sibling estimates for the same month,
with the only exception of February. The comparisons of the female samples, in the righthand panel, also point to the same conclusion. Whilst these test results confirm that the
estimates based on the two different samples are comparable, the similarity only holds with
regard to the magnitude of the estimates, and not with regard to the percent change.
The figures in columns (1) and (2) in the top row of Table 6 show that in the nonsibling sample, the probability of university attendance for males born in August, at 13.0 per
cent, is higher than the probability in the sibling sample for males born in August, at 10.7

20

per cent. Therefore, in terms of the percentage change, the MOB effects are generally smaller
for the non-sibling samples than for the sibling samples.

Simulation test
In this section, we design a simulation which enables us to investigate whether parents have
preferences for certain months or seasons for the timing of their births, which could lead to
the centralization of dates of birth for all siblings.
In this simulation, we select individuals with at least one sibling (sister or brother).
We calibrate the gap between the dates of birth of each pair of siblings, which is measured
by the absolute value of the calendar gap (in days) between the two dates of birth, regardless
of their birth years. If the gap, denoted by d, is higher than 182 days, we replace it with 365d. Based upon this measure, we find that the average gap between the dates of birth of the
siblings is approximately 86.8 days (S.D. = 53.5 days). These dates of birth are then
scrambled and randomly distributed (without replacement) back to all individuals, without
altering mother, child or sibling relationships. From this simulated distribution of dates of
birth, although the seasonal pattern of births remains, any parental preference for birth
timings is eliminated. If parents really do have timing preferences for the birth season or
birth month of their children, the average gap between the dates of birth of the siblings based
on the simulated data should be larger than the gap based on their actual dates of birth.
Our simulated average gap is around 91.2 days (S.D. = 52.6 days), which is
somewhat larger than the actual average gap, although the two figures do not significantly
differ according to the results of a formal t test on the equivalence of the two means. Thus,
our simulation results suggest that there is no indication of parental selection of the birth
month or birth season of children based on parental preferences.

6. Conclusions
We examine the potential endogeneity of the month of birth (MOB) using a sample of
approximately one million siblings in Taiwan, with both our FE and RDD results suggesting
only a limited role of family background characteristics in determining the MOB effects on
the likelihood of university attendance at the age of 18. Our findings are at odds with the US

21

evidence provided by Buckles and Hungerman (2013), who found that controlling for family
background characteristics eliminated about half of the correlation between the birth season
and educational achievement (and earnings). This therefore raises the question as to why
family characteristics seem to matter in the US, but not in Taiwan.
Buckles and Hungerman (2013) argued that the role played by family characteristics
was attributable, at least in some part, to high-SES women disproportionately planning births
away from the winter months. As a result, births to high- and low-SES mothers exhibit
different seasonal patterns, with high-SES mothers having fewer births in the winter and
more births in the spring. This is not, however, the case in Taiwan, since our empirical results
suggest strongly similar seasonal patterns for high- and low-SES mothers.
We can only speculate that weather may provide an explanation for the different
scenarios between the US and Taiwan. Unlike the US, where the winter can be very cold
(indeed, particularly harsh in the northern states), the temperature during a Taiwanese winter
is generally mild, ranging from 55° to 70° Fahrenheit. Thus, giving birth during the winter
may not constitute a serious concern for Taiwanese mothers contemplating birth plans,
regardless of their SES backgrounds. Further evidence is, however, required in order to
confirm our supposition.

22

References
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger (1991), “Does Compulsory School Attendance
Affect Schooling and Earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4): 979-1014.
_______ (1992), “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational Attainment: An
Application on Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples,” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, 87: 328-336.
Arkes, Jeremy (2010), “Using Unemployment Rates as Instruments to Estimate Returns to
Schooling,” Southern Economic Journal, 76(3): 711-722.
Barua, Rashmi and Kevin Lang (2010), “School Entry, Educational Attainment and Quarter
of Birth: A Cautionary Tale of LATE,” Working Papers Series WP2010-019, Boston
University - Department of Economics.
Bedard, Kelly and Elizabeth Dhuey (2012), “School-Entry Policies and Skill Accumulation
across Directly and Indirectly Affected Individuals,” Journal of Human Resources,
47(3): 643-683.
_______ (2006), “The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity: International Evidence of
Long- Run Age Effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(4): 1437-1472.
Bound, John and David A. Jaeger (2000), “Do Compulsory School Attendance Laws Alone
Explain the Association Between Quarter of Birth and Earnings?” Worker WellBeing, 19: 83-108.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker (1995), “Problems with Instrumental
Variables Estimation When the Correlation between the Instruments and the
Endogenous Explanatory Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90: 443-450.
Buckles, Kasey S. and Daniel M. Hungerman (2013), “Season of Birth and Later Outcomes:
Old Questions, New Answers,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(3): 711-724.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Christian Hansen (2006), “Instrumental Quantile Regression
Inference for Structural and Treatment Effect Models,” Journal of Econometrics,
132(2): 491-525.
Costa, Dora L. and Joanna N. Lahey (2005) “Predicting Older Age Mortality Trends,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 3(2-3): 287-293.
Crawford, Claire, Lorraine Dearden and Costas Meghir (2010), “When You Are Born
Matters: the Impact of Date of Birth on Educational Outcomes in England,” IFS
Working Papers W10/06, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Dobkin, Carlos and Fernando Ferreira (2010), “Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational
Attainment and Labor Market Outcomes?” Economics of Education Review, 29(1):
40-54.
Heckman, James, Junjian Yi and Junsen Zhang (2013), “Early Health Shocks,
Intrahousehold Resource Allocation, and Child Human Capital,” manuscript.

23

Imbens, Guido and Karthik Kalyanaraman (2012), “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the
Regression Discontinuity Estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3): 933959.
Lam, David A. and Jeffery A. Miron (1991), “Seasonality of Births in Human Populations,”
Biodemography and Social Biology, 38(1-2): 51-78.
Lee, Chanyoung, and Peter Orazem (2010), ‘‘High School Employment, School
Performance, and College Entry,’’ Economics of Education Review, 29(1): 29-39.
Lee, David S. and David Card (2008), “Regression Discontinuity Inference with
Specification Error,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 655-674.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux (2010), “Regression Discontinuity Designs in
Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2): 281-355.
Lefgren, Lars and Frank McIntyre (2006), “The Relationship between Women’s Education
and Marriage Outcomes,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(4): 787-830.
Lemieux, Thomas and Kevin Milligan (2008), “Incentive Effects of Social Assistance: A
Regression Discontinuity Approach,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 807-828.
Leigh, Andrew and Chris Ryan (2008), “Estimating the Returns to Education Using
Different Natural Experiment Techniques,” Economics of Education Review, 27(2):
149-160.
Lokshin, Michael and Sergiy Radyakin (2012), “Month of Birth and Children’s Health in
India,” Journal of Human Resources, 47(1): 174-203.
Maurin, Eric and Julie Moschion (2009), “The Social Multiplier and Labor Market
Participation of Mothers,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(1),
251-272.
McCrary, Justin (2008), “Manipulation of the Running Variable in the Regression
Discontinuity Design: A Density Test,” Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 698-714.
Puhani, Patrick A. and Andrea M. Weber (2007), “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm?
Instrumental Variable Estimates of Early Educational Effects of Age of School Entry
in Germany,” Empirical Economics, 32: 359-386.
Robertson, Erin (2011), “The Effects of Quarter of Birth on Academic Outcomes at the
Elementary School Level,” Economics of Education Review, 30(2): 300-311.
van Hanswijck de Jonge, Laurence, Glenn Waller, and Nicolas Stettler (2003), “Ethnicity
Modifies Seasonal Variation in Birth Weight and Weight Gain of Infants,” Journal
of Nutrition, 133(5): 1415-1418.
Weber, Gerhard W., Hermann Prossinger, and Horst Seidler (1998), “Height Depends on
Month of Birth,” Nature, 391: 754-755.

24

Table 1: Summary statistics
Males

% univ. attending
% pub. univ. attending
Brith weight (kg)
Mother's age at birth
Father's age at birth
Number of siblings
Father's education
College and above
Vocational college
High school
Vocational high school
Junior high school
Primary school and below
Unknown
Mother's education
College and above
Vocational college
High school
Vocational high school
Junior high school
Primary school and below
Unknown
School year cohort
1978.9‐1979.8
1979.9‐1980.8
1980.9‐1981.8
1981.9‐1982.8
1982.9‐1983.8
1983.9‐1984.8
Observatons

Females
Standard
Mean
deviation

Mean

Standard
deviation

0.13
0.05
3.29
24.66
27.95
2.84

0.33
0.21
0.48
3.49
4.29
0.81

0.14
0.05
3.20
24.72
28.04
3.36

0.35
0.22
0.46
3.54
4.43
0.95

0.05
0.02
0.07
0.21
0.22
0.42
0.01

0.21
0.13
0.26
0.41
0.42
0.49
0.08

0.04
0.02
0.07
0.21
0.22
0.43
0.01

0.20
0.13
0.26
0.41
0.42
0.49
0.09

0.02
0.01
0.04
0.18
0.24
0.50
0.00

0.14
0.10
0.21
0.38
0.43
0.50
0.03

0.02
0.01
0.04
0.17
0.24
0.51
0.00

0.14
0.10
0.21
0.38
0.43
0.50
0.03

0.14
0.16
0.17
0.17
0.14
0.12

0.34
0.37
0.38
0.37
0.34
0.32

0.13
0.16
0.17
0.17
0.14
0.13

0.34
0.37
0.38
0.37
0.35
0.33

451,755

25

424,133

Table 2A: OLS and fixed‐effects results for male siblings
Any university attendance
mean(Y|August)

(benchmark: August)
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Apirl
May
June
July
All MOB coefficients
Constant

Public university attendance

0.107

(1)

(2)

OLS

FE

0.0344***
(0.0023)
0.0309***
(0.0023)
0.0303***
(0.0023)
0.0260***
(0.0023)
0.0210***
(0.0023)
0.0165***
(0.0024)
0.0188***
(0.0024)
0.0155***
(0.0024)
0.0040*
(0.0023)
0.0073***
(0.0023)
0.0012
(0.0022)

0.0368***
(0.0028)
0.0307***
(0.0027)
0.0302***
(0.0028)
0.0277***
(0.0028)
0.0224***
(0.0028)
0.0162***
(0.0029)
0.0163***
(0.0029)
0.0123***
(0.0029)
0.0062**
(0.0029)
0.0067**
(0.0029)
‐0.0003
(0.0028)

0.042

(3)
p‐value for
testing on
(1)=(2)
0.2942
0.9554
0.9464
0.4818
0.5540
0.8996
0.2968
0.1988
0.3648
0.8248
0.5249

(4)

(5)

OLS

FE

0.0091***
(0.0015)
0.0086***
(0.0015)
0.0098***
(0.0015)
0.0086***
(0.0015)
0.0077***
(0.0015)
0.0060***
(0.0015)
0.0067***
(0.0015)
0.0058***
(0.0015)
0.0018
(0.0015)
0.0027*
(0.0015)
0.0015
(0.0014)

0.0107***
(0.0019)
0.0085***
(0.0019)
0.0099***
(0.0019)
0.0104***
(0.0019)
0.0092***
(0.0019)
0.0056***
(0.0020)
0.0059***
(0.0020)
0.0044**
(0.0020)
0.0026
(0.0020)
0.0020
(0.0019)
0.0017
(0.0019)

0.4171
0.0364***
(0.0039)
yes
yes

Birth year cohorts
Birth weight
Number of individuals: 451,755
Number of family: 216,765

0.0371***
(0.0056)
yes
yes

(6)
p‐value for
testing on
(1)=(2)
0.2794
0.9097
0.9485
0.2429
0.3200
0.8068
0.6287
0.3802
0.5788
0.6939
0.8842
0.6171

451755
0.0008
yes
yes

451755
0.0008
yes
yes

Note: (1) Observations are children born during 1978/01/01 and 1984/12/31. (2) The male (female)
sample are children who have at least one male (female) sibling; (3) Parental education controls
include a full set of indicators for education levels; (4) Robust standard errors in parentheses for OLS
estimations, which are clustered at the family level; (5)*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

26

Table 2B: OLS and fixed‐effects results for female siblings
Any university attendance
mean(Y|August)

0.119
(1)

(benchmark: August)
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Apirl
May
June
July
All MOB coefficients
Constant

Public university attendance
0.046

(2)

(3)

OLS

FE

p‐value for
test on
(1)=(2)

0.0285***
(0.0025)
0.0349***
(0.0024)
0.0369***
(0.0025)
0.0319***
(0.0025)
0.0263***
(0.0025)
0.0233***
(0.0026)
0.0224***
(0.0026)
0.0182***
(0.0026)
0.0164***
(0.0025)
0.0096***
(0.0025)
0.0033
(0.0024)

0.0301***
(0.0029)
0.0313***
(0.0029)
0.0317***
(0.0029)
0.0301***
(0.0030)
0.0213***
(0.0030)
0.0202***
(0.0031)
0.0182***
(0.0030)
0.0134***
(0.0031)
0.0078**
(0.0031)
0.0067**
(0.0030)
0.0027
(0.0029)

0.5115
0.1310
0.0325
0.4734
0.0467
0.2397
0.1014
0.0645
0.0008
0.2479
0.7824

(4)

(5)

(3)

OLS

FE

p‐value for
test on
(4)=(5)

0.0063***
(0.0016)
0.0086***
(0.0016)
0.0120***
(0.0016)
0.0070***
(0.0016)
0.0094***
(0.0016)
0.0072***
(0.0017)
0.0072***
(0.0016)
0.0059***
(0.0017)
0.0054***
(0.0016)
0.0024
(0.0016)
‐0.0002
(0.0015)

0.0053***
(0.0020)
0.0060***
(0.0019)
0.0089***
(0.0020)
0.0057***
(0.0020)
0.0058***
(0.0020)
0.0063***
(0.0021)
0.0023
(0.0020)
0.0020
(0.0021)
0.0019
(0.0020)
0.0004
(0.0020)
‐0.0021
(0.0020)

0.0104
0.0416***
(0.0043)
yes
yes

Birth year cohorts
Birth weight
Number of individuals: 424,133
Number of family: 196,033

0.0417***
(0.0059)
yes
yes

0.5058
0.0883
0.0463
0.3826
0.0205
0.5734
0.0028
0.0173
0.0321
0.2032
0.2212
0.1099

0.0155***
(0.0027)
yes
yes

0.0143***
(0.0040)
yes
yes

Note: (1) Observations are children born during 1978/01/01 and 1984/12/31. (2) The male (female)
sample are children who have at least one male (female) sibling; (3) Parental education controls
include a full set of indicators for education levels; (4) Robust standard errors in parentheses for OLS
estimations, which are clustered at the family level; (5)*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

27

Table 3: Estimated discontinuities in observable characteristics
Father's yrs of schooling
Males
Females
T (=1 if born on or after Sept. 1st)
F (standardized birthdate)
T*F
Constant
Optimal bandwidth
Observations

0.0215
(0.0376)
0.0014
(0.0012)
‐0.0004
(0.0017)
9.0492***
(0.0238)
40.94
104,514

0.0553
(0.0484)
‐0.0024*
(0.0014)
0.0028
(0.0019)
8.9616***
(0.0349)
41.54
99,237

Percent first‐born child
Males
Females
T (=1 if born on or after Sept. 1st)
F (standardized birthdate)
T*F
Constant
Optimal bandwidth
Observations

‐0.0023
(0.0065)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0003
(0.0002)
0.4027***
(0.0040)
48.11
125,431

0.0088**
(0.0039)
0.0001**
(0.0000)
‐0.0003***
(0.0001)
0.3957***
(0.0029)
109.62
254,176

Mother's yrs of schooling
Males
Females
‐0.0382
(0.0425)
0.0022
(0.0016)
0.0012
(0.0021)
8.1497***
(0.0280)
38.3
99,597

0.0472
(0.0402)
‐0.0017
(0.0011)
0.0032**
(0.0015)
8.0676***
(0.0314)
44.03
106,653

Birth weigh (kg)
Males
Females
‐0.0012
(0.0058)
0.0001
(0.0002)
‐0.0000
(0.0002)
3.2692***
(0.0046)
48.19
125,431

‐0.0033
(0.0049)
‐0.0002***
(0.0001)
0.0006***
(0.0001)
3.1725***
(0.0036)
80.95
192,002

Father's age
Males
Females
‐0.0088
(0.0663)
‐0.0041
(0.0026)
0.0036
(0.0040)
27.7062***
(0.0488)
30.14
79,068

‐0.0176
(0.0768)
‐0.0007
(0.0030)
‐0.0003
(0.0040)
27.8184***
(0.0568)
31.32
75,935

No. of siblings
Males
Females
0.0079
(0.0081)
0.0002
(0.0003)
‐0.0008**
(0.0004)
2.8381***
(0.0051)
38.82
99,647

‐0.0060
(0.0119)
‐0.0002
(0.0002)
0.0001
‐0.0003
3.3580***
(0.0078)
62.7
150,169

Mother's age
Males
Females
‐0.0483
(0.0550)
0.0003
(0.0018)
‐0.0005
(0.0029)
24.4481***
(0.0355)
30.05
79,068

‐0.0584
(0.0511)
0.0009
(0.0023)
0.0005
(0.0028)
24.4957***
(0.0401)
30.87
73,491

Percent urban
Males
Females
‐0.0048
(0.0049)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0002)
0.3139***
(0.0035)
54.88
140,734

0.0072
(0.0059)
‐0.0002*
(0.0001)
0.0003
(0.0002)
0.3055***
(0.0046)
56.41
135,683

Note: (1) Optimal bandwidths are determined using the precedure proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012); (2) Robust standard errors in
parentheses, which are clustered at the day level; (3) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,* p<0.1.

28

Table 4: Results from regression discontinuity design
Any university attendance

Dependant variable:
Group level
(1)

Public university attendance

Individual level
(2)

(3)

(4)

Group level
(5)

Individual level
(6)

(7)

(8)

Panel A: male siblings
mean(Y|August)
Optimal bandwidth
T (=1 if born on or after Sept. 1st)
F (standardized birthdate)
T*F
County of birth and birth cohorts
Family and ind. characteristics
Observations

0.101
39.2
0.0329***
(0.0036)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0002
(0.0002)
‐‐
‐‐
79

0.0329***
(0.0035)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0002
(0.0002)
No
No
102,330

0.040
45.2
0.0330***
(0.0036)
0.0002
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0002)
Yes
No
102,330

0.0351***
(0.0031)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0002)
Yes
Yes
102,330

0.0094***
(0.0019)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0001
(0.0001)
‐‐
‐‐

0.0094***
(0.0019)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0001
(0.0001)
No
No

0.0094***
(0.0019)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0001
(0.0001)
Yes
No

0.0101***
(0.0018)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes

91

117,724

117,724

117,724

Panel B: female siblings
mean(Y|August)
Optimal bandwidth
T (=1 if born on or after Sept. 1st)
F (standardized birthdate)
T*F
County of birth and birth cohorts
Family and ind. characteristics
Observations

0.111
37.7

0.045
45.3

0.0354***
(0.0054)
‐0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0003
(0.0002)
‐‐
‐‐

0.0354***
(0.0053)
‐0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0003
(0.0002)
Yes
No

0.0356***
(0.0051)
‐0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0003
(0.0002)
No
No

0.0351***
(0.0046)
‐0.0001
(0.0002)
0.0002
(0.0002)
Yes
Yes

0.0060**
(0.0025)
‐0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
‐‐
‐‐

0.0060**
(0.0024)
‐0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
No
No

0.0060**
(0.0024)
‐0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
Yes
No

0.0057**
(0.0023)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0001)
Yes
Yes

75

90,091

90,091

90,091

91

109,089

109,089

109,089

Note: (1) Optimal bandwidths are determined using the precedure proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012); (2) Robust standard errors in parentheses, which
are clustered at the day level; (3) *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,* p<0.1.

29

Table 5: Exploring the seasonality of mother's education
mean(Y|August)
(benchmark: August)
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Apirl
May
June
July
Constant
Birth year cohorts
Birth weight
county of residence
sibling size
Observations

(1) females

(2) males

0.246

0.252

0.0045
(0.0031)
‐0.0010
(0.0032)
0.0023
(0.0032)
0.0013
(0.0032)
0.0018
(0.0032)
0.0001
(0.0031)
‐0.0029
(0.0030)
‐0.0046
(0.0030)
0.0009
(0.0030)
0.0024
(0.0030)
0.0000
(0.0031)
0.7142***
(0.0073)
yes
yes
yes
yes
424,133

0.0027
(0.0030)
0.0020
(0.0031)
0.0085***
(0.0031)
0.0079**
(0.0032)
0.0029
(0.0031)
0.0013
(0.0031)
‐0.0008
(0.0030)
‐0.0023
(0.0030)
0.0019
(0.0029)
0.0038
(0.0030)
0.0079***
(0.0030)
0.7366***
(0.0070)
yes
yes
yes
yes
451,755

Note: (1) Observations are children born during 1978/01/01 and 1984/12/31. (2)
The male (female) sample are children who have at least one male (female)
sibling; (3) Robust standard errors in parentheses, which are clustered at the
family level. (5)*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

30

Table 6: Comparing the MOB effects on university attendance
using sibling and non‐sibling samples
males
mean(Y|August)

0.107
(1)

Sibling
sample
(benchmark: August)
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Apirl
May
June
July
All MOB coefficients
Constant
Birth year cohorts
Birth weight
Observations

0.0344***
(0.0023)
0.0309***
(0.0023)
0.0303***
(0.0023)
0.0260***
(0.0023)
0.0210***
(0.0023)
0.0165***
(0.0024)
0.0188***
(0.0024)
0.0155***
(0.0024)
0.0040*
(0.0023)
0.0073***
(0.0023)
0.0012
(0.0022)

0.138
(2)

females
(3)

p‐value for
Non‐sibling
testing on
sample
(1)=(2)
0.0350***
(0.0023)
0.0360***
(0.0023)
0.0329***
(0.0023)
0.0288***
(0.0023)
0.0244***
(0.0023)
0.0237***
(0.0024)
0.0191***
(0.0023)
0.0168***
(0.0024)
0.0084***
(0.0023)
0.0046**
(0.0023)
0.0053**
(0.0022)

0.8633
0.1098
0.4402
0.3922
0.2967
0.0352
0.9405
0.6982
0.1761
0.4072
0.1966

0.119
(4)

Sibling
sample
0.0285***
(0.0025)
0.0349***
(0.0024)
0.0369***
(0.0025)
0.0319***
(0.0025)
0.0263***
(0.0025)
0.0233***
(0.0026)
0.0224***
(0.0026)
0.0182***
(0.0026)
0.0164***
(0.0025)
0.0096***
(0.0025)
0.0033
(0.0024)

0.161
(5)

0.0297***
(0.0025)
0.0362***
(0.0025)
0.0338***
(0.0025)
0.0346***
(0.0026)
0.0276***
(0.0026)
0.0277***
(0.0026)
0.0214***
(0.0026)
0.0205***
(0.0026)
0.0130***
(0.0026)
0.0046*
(0.0025)
0.0005
(0.0024)

0.2798
0.0364***
(0.0039)
yes
yes
451,755

0.0386***
(0.0040)
yes
yes
535,583

(6)

p‐value for
Non‐sibling
testing on
sample
(1)=(2)
0.7274
0.7108
0.3863
0.4564
0.7195
0.2359
0.7774
0.5255
0.3512
0.1564
0.4087
0.3232

0.0416***
(0.0043)
yes
yes
424,133

0.0604***
(0.0044)
yes
yes
499,582

Note: (1) Observations are children born during 1978/01/01 and 1984/12/31. (2) The male (female)
sample are children who have at least one male (female) sibling; (3) Parental education controls include
a full set of indicators for education levels; (4) Robust standard errors in parentheses for OLS
estimations, which are clustered at the family level; (5)*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

31

Figure 1: Seasonality of number of births and maternal characteristics
(A)

Oct

Oct

Oct

Oct

10000

Oct

Apr

Apr

Apr

Oct
Apr

Apr

Oct

Apr

Apr

0

5000

Number of births

15000

20000

Number of births

1978m1 1979m1 1980m1 1981m1 1982m1 1983m1 1984m1 1985m1
month

(B)

28

30

Percent mothers completing high school

Apr
Oct

26

Apr

Oct

Apr

24

%

Oct
Apr

Oct

Oct

Apr
Oct

Apr

20

22

Apr

Oct

1978m1 1979m1 1980m1 1981m1 1982m1 1983m1 1984m1 1985m1
month

32

(C)

1.8

2

Percent unmarried mothers

Dec

1.6

Dec

May

Dec

1.4

%

Dec

May

Dec May

May
Dec

May

May
Dec

1

1.2

May

1978m1

1979m1

1980m1

1981m1 1982m1
month

1983m1

1984m1

(D)

5

Percent low birthweight

4.5

Aug
Aug

4

Aug

Aug

Feb
Feb

3.5

Feb
Feb
Feb
Feb

Feb

3

%

Aug

Aug

Aug

1978m1

1979m1

1980m1

1981m1 1982m1
month

33

1983m1

1984m1

Figure 2: Comparing the FE and OLS estimates
(A) MOB effects on males
Any university attainment
FE

OLS

FE

0

0

1

.5

2

%

%

3

1

4

5

1.5

OLS

(B) MOB effects on males
Public university attainment

Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Month of Birth

Jul

Aug

Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Month of Birth

(C) MOB effects on females
Any university attainment

Aug

Jul

Aug

(D) MOB effects on females
Public university attainment

FE

OLS

FE

0

0

1

2

.5

%

%

3

1

4

5

1.5

OLS

Jul

Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Month of Birth

Jul

Aug

Sept Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun
Month of Birth

Notes: OLS estimates are obtained from regressions without controlling for family background variables.

34

Figure 3A: Means of the observables, males

Years
8
7
6

7

8

Years
9

9

10

10

Mother's years of schooling

11

Father's years of schooling

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

20

40

20

40

20

40

20

40

26

22.5

27

23.5

Age
28

Age
24.5

29

25.5

30

0
Days from Sept 1st

Mother's age at birth

26.5

Father's age at birth

-20

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

Birth weight

3

.2

3.1

.3

3.2

Kg

Proportion
.4

3.3

.5

3.4

.6

3.5

Percent first-born children

0
Days from Sept 1st

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

Percent urban

.1

2.5

.2

2.7

.3

2.9

.4

.5

3.1

Sibsize

0
Days from Sept 1st

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

35

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

Figure 3B: Means of the observables, females

Years
8
7
6

7

8

Years
9

9

10

10

Mother's years of schooling

11

Father's years of schooling

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

20

40

20

40

26

22.5

27

23.5

Age
28

Age
24.5

29

25.5

30

0
Days from Sept 1st

Mother's age at birth

26.5

Father's age at birth

-20

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

Birth weight

.2

2.9

3

.3

3.1

Kg

Proportion
.4

3.2

.5

3.3

.6

3.4

Percent first-born children

0
Days from Sept 1st

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

20

40

20

40

Percent urban

.1

2.9

.2

3.1

.3

3.3

.4

3.5

.5

3.7

Sibsize

0
Days from Sept 1st

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

36

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

Figure 4: Daily number of births across standardized dates of birth

2000
Frequency
1000
1500
500
0

0

500

Frequency
1000
1500

2000

2500

(B) Females

2500

(A) Males

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

Notes: The X-axis measures the distance in terms of days from the first of September. Grey areas are
confidence belts.

Figure 5: Probability of general university attendance for individuals
born around the first of September

.2
Proportion
.1
.15
.05
0

0

.05

Proportion
.1
.15

.2

.25

(B) Females

.25

(A) Males

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

Notes: The X-axis measures the distance in terms of days from the first of September. Grey areas are
confidence belts.

37

Figure 6: Probability of public university attendance for individuals
born around the first of September

.075
Proportion
.05
.025
0

0

.025

Proportion
.05

.075

.1

Panel B: Females

.1

Panel A: Males

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

-40

-20

0
Days from Sept 1st

20

40

Notes: The X-axis measures the distance in terms of days from the first of September. Grey areas are
confidence belts.

38

.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
0

Local linear regression estimates

.07

Figure 7: Local linear regression results using different bandwidths

20

40

60

80

100

120

bandwidth
Males

Females

Notes: Estimates are carried out by estimating local linear regressions without
controlling for covariates. The darker curve and the lighter curve represent the optimal
bandwidths for the male (39.2) and female (37.7) samples, respectively, and both are
determined using the procedure proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012).

39

Figure 8: Seasonality of firstborn births for mothers
with and without high school education

( A) males

.15
.05
-.05
-.15
-.25

Mean deviation / mean

.25

Birth month distribution by mother's education

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
month

Mother with hs degree

8

9

10

11

12

Mother without hs degree

(B) females

.15
.05
-.05
-.15
-.25

Mean deviation / mean

.25

Birth month distribution by mother's education

1

2

3

4

5

6
7
month

Mother with hs degree

8

9

10

11

12

Mother without hs degree

Each point in the curves represents a standardized value, which is
obtained by having the total number of births in the month subtracted by
the average monthly births of the relevant year, and divided by the
average.

40

Appendix
Exploring the role of intra-family resource allocation

One potential threat to our FE model arises from intra-family resources reallocation: parents,
as discussed in Section 3.1, may allocate investment across children to reinforce or
compensate the gap among children’s endowments. The resulting FE estimates of the MOB
effects are therefore potentially biased, so our FE-OLS comparisons would fail to reflect the
true influences from family background. To evaluate this potential bias, we examine whether
the incident of university attendance of the firstborn child is affected by the quarter of birth
(QOB) for the second child, given the first child’s QOB. Specifically, we select families with
two children, despite the genders, and categorize each sibling into the following four quarters
of birth based on the school year (not calendar year) as:
(1) Quarter 1 (denoted by QOB1 ) from September to November;
(2) Quarter 2 (denoted by QOB2 ) from December to February;
(3) Quarter 3 (denoted by QOB3 ) from March to May;
(4) Quarter 4 (denoted by QOB4 ) from June to August.
and estimate the following regression for the firstborn children born in each of the four
quarters of birth in turn:
4

4

k 2

k 2

Unii1   0   ( k  QOBk2 )   0  sex 2   k ( sex 2  QOBk2 )  X i    i

(6)

Where Unii1 is a dummy indicating university attendance at age 18 for the first-born child
( Unii1 =1); QOBk2 is a dummy variable indicating the second child being born in quarter k
(k = 2, 3, or 4), leaving the first quarter as the omitted group; sex 2 refers to the gender of
the second child ( sex 2 =1 for males; =0 for females); and X i are controls. In equation (6),

 k captures the effect of the second child being born in quarter k relative to a second child
being born in the first (omitted) quarter. With the interaction terms of the second child’s
QOB and gender, the specification of equation (6) allows  k to differ for the second child
being a boy or a girl, and  k captures this additional effect of  k for boys relative to girls.
If intra-family resource allocation is independent of children’s QOBs, all the estimates of

 k and  k are expected to be zero.
The estimates from estimating equation (6) are presented in Table A1. Column (1)
shows the coefficient estimates for  k and  k for the firstborn females who are born in
Q1. The fact that none of the coefficients is significant suggests that neither the QOB nor the

41

gender of the second child matters for the likelihood of the older sister attending university
at age 18. This conclusion holds for firstborn females born in all other three quarters, as
shown by columns (2) to (4). These results apparently suggest that the intra-family resource
allocation does not constitute a major concern for the validity of our FE estimates of the
MOB effects.
The estimates for the males, however, presents a somewhat different story. While all
coefficients but one of  k and  k remains as zero in columns (5), (6), and (8), all the
estimates of  k are significantly positive and the estimates for  k are significantly
negative in column (7). These imply that, for a firstborn male born in Q3, having a sister
born in either Q2, Q3, or Q4 will increase his odd to attend a university, and the effects
appear to be smaller if the second child is a boy. These patterns, however, are not consistent
with either the reinforcement or compensation hypothesis. Other than this exception, we find
very little evidence about an active role of intra-family resource allocation in determining
MOB effects between siblings.

42

Table A1: Examining the effects of second child
Firstborn males
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Fall Born (Sept Winter Born
Spring Born Summer born
to Nov)
(Dec to Feb) (Mar to May) (Jun to Aug)
Q2
Q3
Q4
brother
Q2*brother
Q3*brother
Q4*brother
Observations

0.0077
(0.0057)
0.0205***
(0.0060)
0.0050
(0.0057)
0.0003
(0.0053)
‐0.0033
(0.0078)
‐0.0079
(0.0081)
‐0.0002
(0.0078)
65,613

0.0045
(0.0065)
0.0024
(0.0065)
0.0007
(0.0065)
‐0.0022
(0.0066)
‐0.0082
(0.0089)
‐0.0015
(0.0089)
‐0.0018
(0.0089)
55,490

0.0142**
(0.0070)
0.0137**
(0.0066)
0.0194***
(0.0065)
0.0173**
(0.0067)
‐0.0150
(0.0098)
‐0.0267***
(0.0091)
‐0.0191**
(0.0090)
45,498

0.0049
(0.0062)
0.0076
(0.0063)
‐0.0004
(0.0057)
‐0.0010
(0.0057)
‐0.0032
(0.0085)
0.0044
(0.0087)
0.0050
(0.0077)
50,757

Firstborn females
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Fall Born (Sept Winter Born
Spring Born Summer born
to Nov)
(Dec to Feb) (Mar to May) (Jun to Aug)
0.0019
(0.0066)
0.0086
(0.0068)
0.0005
(0.0066)
‐0.0086
(0.0061)
0.0055
(0.0088)
‐0.0014
(0.0091)
0.0078
(0.0088)
56,801

‐0.0005
(0.0074)
0.0043
(0.0074)
‐0.0010
(0.0074)
‐0.0037
(0.0074)
‐0.0043
(0.0099)
0.0003
(0.0099)
0.0016
(0.0099)
48,988

‐0.0076
(0.0083)
0.0047
(0.0079)
0.0095
(0.0078)
‐0.0036
(0.0079)
‐0.0044
(0.0111)
‐0.0126
(0.0105)
‐0.0126
(0.0103)
40,133

0.0042
(0.0072)
0.0093
(0.0073)
‐0.0029
(0.0065)
0.0032
(0.0067)
‐0.0095
(0.0097)
‐0.0109
(0.0098)
0.0002
(0.0087)
44,810

Note: (1) Control variables are parental education levels, parental ages, total number of siblings, birth order, and birthweight; (2) Robust standard
errors in parentheses for OLS estimations, which are clustered at the family level; (3)*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

43

